A alphago s victory isn t a defeat for humans it s an opportunity a loss for humanity ! man succumbs to machine ! if you heard about alphago s latest exploits last week crushing the world s best go player and confirming that artificial intelligence had mastered the ancient chinese board game you may have heard the news delivered in doomsday terms . there was a certain melancholy to ke jie s capitulation , to be sure . the year old chinese prodigy declared he would never lose to an ai following alphago s earthshaking victory over lee se dol last year . to see him onstage last week , nearly bent double over the go board and fidgeting with his hair , was to see a man comprehensively put in his place . but focusing on that would miss the point . deepmind , the google owned company that developed alphago , isn t attempting to crush humanity after all , the company is made up of humans itself . alphago represents a major human achievement and the takeaway shouldn t be that ai is surpassing our abilities , but instead that ai will enhance our abilities . demis hassabis , deepmind co founder and ceo . when speaking to deepmind and google developers at the future of go summit in wuzhen , china last week , i didn t hear much about the four games alphago won over lee se dol last year . instead , i heard a lot about the one that it lost . we were interested to see if we could fix the problems , the knowledge gaps as we call them , that lee se dol brilliantly exposed in game four with his incredible win , showing that there was a weakness in alphago s knowledge , deepmind co founder and ceo demis hassabis said on the first day of the event . we worked hard to see if we could fix that knowledge gap and actually teach , or have alphago learn itself , how to deal with those kinds of positions . we re confident now that alphago is better in those situations , but again we don t know for sure until we play against an amazing master like ke jie . alphago master has become its own teacher . as it happened , alphago steamrolled ke into a defeat , suggesting that those knowledge gaps have been closed . it s worth noting , however , that deepmind had to learn from alphago s past mistakes to reach this level . if the ai had stood still for the past year , it s entirely possible that ke would have won he s a far stronger player than lee . but alphago did not stand still . the version of alphago that played ke has been completely rearchitected deepmind calls it alphago master . the main innovation in alphago master is that it s become its own teacher , says dave silver , deepmind s lead researcher on alphago . so now alphago actually learns from its own searches to improve its neural networks , both the policy network and the value network , and this makes it learn in a much more general way . one of the things we re most excited about is not just that it can play go better but we hope that this ll actually lead to technologies that are more generally applicable to other challenging domains . alphago is comprised of two networks a policy network that selects the next move to play , and a value network that analyzes the probability of winning . the policy network was initially based on millions of historical moves from actual games played by go professionals . but alphago master goes much further by searching through the possible moves that could occur if a particular move is played , increasing its understanding of the potential fallout . the original system played against itself millions of times , but it didn t have this component of using the search , hassabis tells the verge . alphago master is using its own strength to improve its own predictions . so whereas in the previous version it was mostly about generating data , in this version it s actually using the power of its own search function and its own abilities to improve one part of itself , the policy net . essentially , alphago is now better at assessing why a particular move would be the strongest possible option . the whole idea is to reduce your reliance on that human bootstrapping step . i asked hassabis whether he thought this system could work without the initial dataset taken from historical games of go . we re running those tests at the moment and we re pretty confident , actually , he said . the initial results have been that it s looking pretty good . that ll be part of this future paper that we re going to publish , so we re not talking about that at the moment , but it s looking promising . the whole idea is to reduce your reliance on that human bootstrapping step . but in order to defeat ke , deepmind needed to fix the weaknesses in the original alphago that lee exposed . although the ai gets ever stronger by playing against itself , deepmind couldn t rely on that baseline training to cover the knowledge gaps nor could it hand code a solution . it s not like a traditional program where you just fix a bug , says hassabis , who believes that similar knowledge gaps are likely to be a problem faced by all kinds of learning systems in the future . you have to kind of coax it to learn new knowledge or explore that new area of the domain , and there are various strategies to do that . you can use adversarial opponents that push you into exploring those spaces , and you can keep different varieties of the alphago versions to play each other so there s more variety in the player pool . another thing we did is when we assessed what kinds of positions we thought alphago had a problem with , we looked at the self play games and we identified games algorithmically we wrote another algorithm to look at all those games and identify places where alphago seemed to have this kind of problem . so we have a library of those sorts of positions , and we can test our new systems not only against each other in the self play but against this database of known problematic positions , so then we could quantify the improvement against that . dave silver , deepmind s lead researcher on alphago . none of this increase in performance has required an increase in power . in fact , alphago master uses much less power than the version of alphago that beat lee se dol it runs on a single second gen tensor processing unit machine in the google cloud , whereas the previous version used tpus at once . you shouldn t think of this as running on compute power that s beyond the access of normal people , says silver . the special thing about it is the algorithm that s being used as opposed to the amount of compute . alphago learned from humans , and humans are learning from alphagoalphago is learning from humans , then , even if it may not need to in the future . and in turn , humans have learned from alphago . the simplest demonstration of this came in ke jie s first match against the ai , where he used a point as part of his opening strategy . that s a move that fell out of favor over the past several decades , but it s seen a resurgence in popularity after alphago employed it to some success . and ke pushed alphago to its limits in the second game the ai determined that his first moves were perfect , and his first were better than anyone had ever played against the master version . although the go community might not necessarily understand why a given alphago move works in the moment , the ai provides a whole new way to approach the game . go has been around for thousands of years , and alphago has sparked one of the most profound shifts yet in how the game is played and studied . but if you re reading this in the west , you probably don t play go . what can alphago do for you ? andrew jackson and lee ha jin discuss alphago s first game against ke jie . say you re a data center architect working at google . it s your job to make sure everything runs efficiently and coolly . to date , you ve achieved that by designing the system so that you re running as few pieces of cooling equipment at once as possible you turn on the second piece only after the first is maxed out , and so on . this makes sense , right ? well , a variant of alphago named dr . data disagreed . what dr . data decided to do was actually turn on as many units as possible and run them at a very low level , hassabis says . because of the switching and the pumps and the other things , that turned out to be better and i think they re now taking that into new data center designs , potentially . they re taking some of those ideas and reincorporating them into the new designs , which obviously the ai system can t do . so the human designers are looking at what the alphago variant was doing , and then that s informing their next decisions . dr . data is at work right now in google s data centers , saving the company percent in electricity required for cooling and resulting in percent overall less energy usage . deepmind believes that the same principle will apply to science and health care , with deep learning techniques helping to improve the accuracy and efficiency of everything from protein folding to radiography . perhaps less ambitiously but no less importantly , it may also lead to more sensible workflows . you can imagine across a hospital or many hospitals you might be able to figure out that there s this process one hospital s using , or one nurse is using , that s super effective over time , says hassabis . maybe they re doing something slightly different to this other hospital , and perhaps the other hospital can learn from that . i think at the moment you d never know that was happening , but you can imagine that an ai system might be able to pick up on that and share that knowledge effectively between different doctors and hospitals so they all end up with the best practice . these are areas particularly fraught with roadblocks and worries for many , of course . and it s natural for people to be suspicious of ai i experienced it myself somewhat last week . my hotel was part of the same compound as the future of go summit , and access to certain areas was gated by baidu s machine learning powered facial recognition tech . it worked instantly , every time , often without me even knowing where the camera was i d just go through the gate and see my verge profile photo flash up on a screen . i never saw it fail for the thousands of other people at the event , either . and all of this worked based on nothing more than a picture of me taken on an ipad at check in . i know that facebook and google and probably tons of other companies also know what i look like . but the weird feeling i got from seeing my face flawlessly recognized multiple times a day for a week shows that companies ought to be sensitive about the way they roll out ai technologies . it also , to some extent , probably explains why so many people seem unsettled by alphago s success . but again , that success is a success built by humans . alphago is already demonstrating the power of what can happen not only when ai learns from us , but when we learn from ai . at this stage , it s technology worth being optimistic about . photography by sam byford the verge	 the conspiracy theory around murdered democratic national committee staffer seth rich isn t weird so much as sad it drags a man s fairly recent death into the spotlight in order to promote the idea of a deep state plot , based on evidence that s either speculative or factually wrong . but it s brought together a strange coalition of well known subscribers including the internet entrepreneur kim dotcom . dotcom , founder of defunct cloud storage site megaupload , isn t just a high profile proponent of the seth rich cover up story . last week , he claimed to be at the center of it . but in promising to blow the lid off the conspiracy , he mostly succeeded in proving how much traditional political divides have shifted , and how easily you can bend political paranoia toward mundane publicity stunts . who is kim dotcom ? kim dotcom born kim schmitz is primarily known as the creator of megaupload , a cyberlocker site particularly popular with and arguably catering to pirates . in , the department of justice shut down megaupload and charged dotcom with criminal copyright infringement . this kicked off a remarkably intense extradition battle , including a police raid on dotcom s new zealand mansion , and the case remains open more than five years later . during that time , dotcom has launched another cloud storage site , released a poorly reviewed edm album , and founded the recently revived new zealand internet party . he s a reliably colorful and belligerent figure in debates over copyright , surveillance , and other tech policy issues . the platonic ideal of kim dotcom may be this video for his song mr . president , with its combination of internet friendly politics , hyper processed aesthetics , and shameless self mythologizing . what does he have to do with seth rich ? according to dotcom , lots . the central seth rich conspiracy theory posits that rich , not russian hackers , leaked last year s trove of dnc emails to wikileaks leading someone like the clinton campaign to kill him in retaliation . wikileaks founder julian assange has coyly hinted that rich was a source , and dotcom tweeted last week that he could give written testimony with evidence that proved it . this wouldn t explain the later cache of emails from clinton s campaign , or prove rich s death was related to the leak , but it would greatly contradict our current understanding of the election hacks . if congress includes sethrich case into their russia probe i ll give written testimony with evidence that seth rich was wikileaks source . kim dotcom kimdotcom may , dotcom later elaborated in a statement on his website . in late a person contacted me about helping me to start a branch of the internet party in the united states . he called himself panda . i now know that panda was seth rich , he wrote . according to dotcom , rich provided the information that dotcom mentioned in a interview with bloomberg , where he said assange would be clinton s worst nightmare during the election because he has access to information . can he prove any of this ? who knows ? dotcom says he s waiting to give his full statement to authorities , provided he s given safe passage to the us and back in other words , as long as nobody tries to hold him for a megaupload trial . he s been tweeting about clinton s downfall since , and he was hinting about wikileaks election plans before they became public . but given that he s coordinated with wikileaks in the past , he could have simply gotten information from assange . and as the outline points out , he s tweeted other bombshells that never went off . dotcom also responded to a clarification request from pundit sean hannity by gleefully declaring i m the evidence ! , which is not how most people would describe having actual evidence . what are dotcom s own stakes here ? dotcom has likened the megaupload case to obama s aggressive prosecution of whistleblowers , and hillary clinton was secretary of state when dotcom s charges were filed dotcom has repeatedly tweeted about how she signed his extradition order . democrats destroyed my business , attacked my family , stole my assets in a pay play strike for the mpaa , he tweeted last week . counterstrike trump presidency . like assange , this makes dotcom part of the coalition of people who aren t traditionally conservative , but were embittered by the obama administration and the clinton campaign . seanhannity sean this is still an ad for kim s album my guy kev kept simple may , but dotcom is also a savvy and enthusiastic self promoter , and he s getting a lot of free advertising out of this . his announcement about seth rich ostensibly a massive revelation about a political murder is buried beneath full screen ads for his album , his music videos , and a video of the police raid . do people believe him ? well , there s seth rich super investigator sean hannity , who tweeted dotcom s claims and invited him onto his show . zero hedge seemed to take the veracity of dotcom s tweets more or less for granted , and anticipation was high in the days before his statement . but the tone of discussion on places like r the donald s discord channel remains at least somewhat skeptical , with speculation that dotcom is either looking for attention , or making a play for legal immunity . what does seth rich s family think of this ? they re unsurprisingly upset . the burden of proof is on mr . dotcom to either prove he has evidence or face the consequences of damaging seth s good name and creating more emotional hardship on a grieving family , a spokesperson said . the family is not going to entertain his ridiculous , manipulative and completely non credible statements . the family is not going to entertain his ridiculous , manipulative and completely non credible statements . in a washington post story , the family also said they worried dotcom had been attempting to hack rich s email account , based on an account creation email from the mega cloud storage site that dotcom founded , but no longer runs . dotcom took issue with this claim in an open letter to the family , threatening to sue them for defamation . would suing a grieving family that s upset you ve used their dead son as conspiracy theory fodder be incredibly cruel and tacky ? yes . does he have a point , though ? sort of . as dotcom pointed out in his letter , anybody could go to mega and create an account using rich s email address , prompting the service to auto send an email to verify it . conspiracy investigators have been randomly punching information about rich into all kinds of sites and services , hoping to find new clues , so there s no reason to think dotcom is involved . but if anyone s to blame , it s the post for not pointing this out . does any of this even matter ? it is hypothetically possible that someone will open a major legal investigation into seth rich s death , in which case it is hypothetically possible that dotcom could be called to testify , and hypothetically possible that he will provide credible proof . dotcom is trying to speed the process by tweeting a link to a white house petition , despite the fact that trump has seemingly abandoned the petition site . i will spend the next hour to follow everyone who signs this sethrich petition https t . co saumuujcijtweet your screenshot ampamp sethrich pic . twitter . com qgwrtlnhem kim dotcom kimdotcom may , it s more likely , of course , that dotcom s allegations won t reach beyond his website and twitter feed but that they will cause more pain to rich s family , and polarize internet politics even further . even if we assume that dotcom was working in good faith , it s hard to argue that releasing unsubstantiated claims into an already murky investigation was going to benefit anyone except himself and other people profiting off the conspiracy . and the sad thing is that next week , most people may have forgotten he said anything at all . 	 imagine a future where you tap an app on your smartphone to summon a self driving car . heard this one already ? okay , what about when your robot car drives into an airless tube hundreds of miles long and careens across country at close to the speed of sound ? now are you impressed ? this completely outrageous vision of the future comes courtesy of hyperloop one , the occasionally troubled los angeles based startup working on elon musk s vision of an ultrafast transportation system . the company is currently gearing up for its big kitty hawk moment later this year , when it will conduct a full system test in the desert north of las vegas . but while we re still a long way off from seeing a fully functional hyperloop in operation , hyperloop one s top executives are already thinking ahead to a future where lightning quick travel is as commonplace as automated vehicles , and vice versa . some of the startup s top brass were at ces in las vegas earlier this month meeting with companies that are working on driverless technology to discuss possible mergers in their respective missions . josh giegel in between meetings , i sat down with hyperloop one co founder and president of engineering josh giegel and nick earle , senior vice president in charge of global field operations , to talk about the company s progress and when the world could see a working , passenger ready hyperloop . both met recently with representatives from two computer chip makers , intel and nvidia , to talk about their respective efforts to expand into the automated driving space , as well as with supercar company mclaren . but it wasn t just about gushing over each other s futuristic pipe dreams , earle said . rather it was about a realistic effort to find a way to link self driving cars to the ambitious and costly transportation system . we want any autonomous vehicle to go into our system . the idea is you have a transmitter in your car , earle said . as you approach the hyperloop , it would be like a fast pass on the freeway . so you actually get the ability to open the air lock and drive into the tube . in talking to these companies , earle says he describes hyperloop one as the wan , or wide area network , of transportation that should be able to interface with all the local area networks , or lans . we want any autonomous vehicle to go into our system , he said . this is the type of starry eyed thinking that gets the hyperloop routinely dismissed as a great but ultimately outlandish idea . critics say the costs alone hyperloop one s own estimates put it at around . million per mile of tube make it largely unrealistic . but hyperloop one is barreling ahead , bolstered by million in seed funding , green lights from countries like the united arab emirates and finland , and faith that it is the company best positioned to make the dream of mph , tube based travel a reality . it maintains that it will perform its first full system test sometime within the first three months of . in preparation , a team of around engineers and contractors are busy building a test track at a site in north las vegas , near where the company conducted its first public test in may . the test will feature a magnetically levitating pod using electromagnetic propulsion to travel a distance of meters , or less than a mile , through an airless tube at a speed of over mph . it should be more exciting than hyperloop one s first public test last may , which featured a foot long sled flying down a short train track and then crashing into a pile of sand . perhaps ironically , giegel stressed the need to move slowly and iteratively as it develops its ultrafast technology . it s a drawing on a piece of paper until somebody proves it . it s a drawing on a piece of paper until somebody proves it , he said . and right now , we have the team capable of doing it . and we are doing it . if it works , the hyperloop could vastly simplify intercity travel and freight , reduce congestion and pollution , and potentially revolutionize transportation worldwide . when he first introduced the idea back in , musk called it a fifth mode of transportation . the other four being cars , trains , airplanes , and boats . there s no question the hyperloop could be transformative . . . in a perfect world , that is . in the meantime , hyperloop one needs to raise sufficient amount of capital to fuel its high velocity dreams . last week , the company promoted brent callinicos from senior advisor to chief operating officer and chief financial officer . callinicos was brought on board last october from uber , where he helped build the ride hailing startup into the world s most valuable tech company . earlier this month , hyperloop one announced the winners in a global challenge it launched to find additional possible routes across the world . over , submissions were whittled down to semifinalists from countries . one route suggests a triangular hyperloop linking austin , dallas , and houston . another would build a hyperloop between mumbai and delhi . the company will host three events over the next few months to showcase the winners february th in new delhi , april th in washington , dc , and april th in london . the next round of finalists will be announced in may . not every one of these will become a hyperloop route , but they provide a snapshot of the level of international enthusiasm that exists . indeed , while the first test will be conducted in the us , the first operational hyperloop is most likely to be built between dubai and abu dhabi , thanks to the full throated support from the dubai roads and transport authority . earle stressed that without a government buy in , its doubtful the costly system could obtain the land rights and right of way permissions necessary to achieve its promised speeds . the startup also has feasibility studies underway in finland and sweden , the netherlands , switzerland , moscow , the port of los angeles , and the uk . the company s recent flurry of activity is meant to convey the message that hyperloop one is a serious business working on a serious transportation project with global implications . millions of people take airplanes every day and their faces don t peel off . but it also appears to be an attempt to shift the conversation away from the embarrassing and reputation damaging lawsuit filed last year by hyperloop one s former chief technology officer . the company countersued and eventually both lawsuits were settled in november . no doubt , was a bit of a roller coaster for hyperloop one . this year could be even rockier , depending on the company s ability to demonstrate its viability to its investors , its government partners , and the public , especially those who aren t convinced that humans were meant to travel at mph on the ground . i get this all the time , people say to me , oh , your face will peel off and you ll turn to mush , earle said . but it s basically like an airplane feet off the ground . millions of people take airplanes every day and their faces don t peel off . hyperloop competition in texas last year	 now that donald trump is officially the president of the united states , he is in complete control of america s nuclear arsenal . should he decide to start a nuclear war , there are no legal safeguards to stop him . instead , a much less tangible web of norms , taboos , and fears has reined in us presidents since world war ii . but as north korea escalates its nuclear weapons tests , russia promises to strengthen its nuclear forces , and the new president of the united states has openly tweeted that the us must strengthen and expand its nuclear capability , experts worry that this fragile web could start to tear . let s be very clear the president alone controls the nukestrump s position on nukes has been murky , at best . in the last few weeks , he jumped from advocating for an arms race , to implying that the us and russia might work together to reduce nuclear proliferation . in fact , during his campaign , he called nuclear proliferation the biggest problem in the world . but then he also said that japan and south korea might want to get nukes of their own . he wouldn t take nuking isis , or even europe , off the table . but he s also characterized himself as highly , highly , highly , highly unlikely to ever use nuclear weapons . this calculated ambiguity isn t unusual for america s presidents . presidents bill clinton and george w . bush left nuclear first strikes on the table , too . but for a us president to talk so openly and frequently about using nuclear force is a clear break with history , says frank sauer , an international security researcher at the bundeswehr university munich and author of the book atomic anxiety deterrence , taboo and the non use of u . s . nuclear weapons . and it could be potently destabilizing in a world where nations nuclear doctrines are shaped more by posture than by policy . the united states must greatly strengthen and expand its nuclear capability until such time as the world comes to its senses regarding nukes donald j . trump realdonaldtrump december , despite a few close calls , nuclear warheads haven t been used in armed conflict for more than years . but there s controversy over the reason why . robert mcnamara , the us secretary of defense during the cuban missile crisis , put it down to pure luck . but nina tannenwald , director of international relations at brown university , argues that a taboo gradually emerged from the nuclear devastation of hiroshima and nagasaki . this taboo created the shared expectation that using nuclear weapons again would be deeply , morally wrong . international relations professor and author of the tradition of non use of nuclear weapons , t . v . paul disagrees , arguing that it s not a taboo but a tradition that s driven by social and political pressures . and underlying both of these explanations is humankind s deep seated fear of going extinct , sauer says . while mutually assured destruction the notion that any country launching nukes would likely also be destroyed by nukes gets the most ink in terms of deterrence , these cultural and psychological deterrents play powerful roles . u . s . army the plume of smoke from the fires that tore through hiroshima after the us dropped the atomic bomb . let s be very clear the president alone controls the nukes . there aren t more checks and balances because our nuclear chain of command was built to speedily deliver mutually assured destruction . in fact , the only real check on the president s nuclear authority is the election , writes nuclear history professor alex wellerstein in a recent blog post . d on t elect people you don t trust with the unilateral authority to use nuclear weapons . that s because if the us is attacked , time is precious early warning teams only have three minutes to determine whether warnings of a missile attack are real . if it looks legitimate enough to take to the president , the president then has less than minutes to open the nuclear briefcase or football , review his tactical options , and authorize a nuclear strike . or at least , minutes is how long the white house has if a submarine deployed in the western atlantic were to fire on dc if russia were to launch a nuke from within its borders , there s maybe additional minutes to react . if the president hesitates , a nuke could hit the white house before the us has a chance to launch a counterstrike . still , many experts agree that mutually assured destruction can t fully explain why no one is using their nukes . after all , the us didn t use nuclear weapons against iraq in the gulf war , even though iraq didn t have any nuclear weapons to retaliate with . national archives identifier ampnbsp this woman received radiation burns in the same pattern as the darker patches on her kimono . international law isn t a great deterrent , either . true , the united nations charter does ban military force except in self defense , and using nukes could possibly constitute a war crime . the nuclear non proliferation treaty of implicitly bans the five so called nuclear weapon states the us , the uk , russia , france , and china from attacking a non nuclear party to the treaty . but even so , in , the un s judicial branch ruled that it s not illegal to use nukes to ward off an existential threat . it s just not really legal , either . other nations do a better job at checking their leaders nuclear strength . china and india both pledged to not use nuclear weapons in a first strike . india changed their policy in to let them retaliate with nukes against a chemical or biological weapons attack . russia walked back their own no first use policy in the s , and the us doesn t have one . mutually assured destruction can t fully explain why no one is using their nukesthat s where the nuclear taboo comes in . it lumps nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons into a category of weapons of mass destruction that are unusable precisely because they re so powerful and hard to control , says tannenwald , author of the nuclear taboo the united states and the non use of nuclear weapons since . the taboo stems from the wreckage of the atomic bombs the us dropped on japan during world war ii . we still don t know how many people were killed by the first blasts , probably between , and , in total . the death toll continued to rise over the next five years to nearly , people , with many dying of cancers from the radioactive fallout . taken by ralph alfaro , a crewmember on the uss oklahoma via defense . gov a us sailor took this photo of hiroshima after the bomb . during his recent visit to japan , president obama called hiroshima the start of our own moral awakening . that moral awakening has kept nations like the us from using nukes even as they stockpiled them , tannenwald argues . the taboo casts nuclear weapons as untouchable , stigmatized tools that only a barbarian would use shaping public opinion as well as world leaders personal conviction . after the bombing of nagasaki , president harry truman reportedly called off any more nuclear attacks , saying , the thought of wiping out another , people was too horrible . taboo is too strong a word to describe how we feel about using nuclear weapons , argues t . v . paul . taboos prohibit things like cannibalism , he says . cannibalism is so unthinkable that most people would never even consider it , let alone plan for how and when they d do it . but the us government does have a plan to launch its nuclear weapons . that makes it more of a tradition , paul says , possibly along the lines of avoiding mass killings of civilians during war . and traditions are easier to break , even though doing so would damage the country s international reputation . as soon as you think nuclear weapon , you re thinking armageddon . regardless of whether it s mutually assured destruction , taboo , or tradition each of these deterrents stems from the same underlying anxiety about using nuclear weapons , sauer argues . in terms of fiction , we ve destroyed ourselves with nuclear war times over , he says . we re sort of obsessed with this . try it in your head as soon as you think nuclear weapon , you re thinking armageddon . the prospect of mad harnesses and amplifies that anxiety . but the taboo is a way to avoid the anxiety , sauer says like , i don t even want to touch these things . still , cultural norms and individual psychology are flimsy barriers to using world destroying weapons , writes victor gilinsky , a physicist and former head of the us nuclear regulatory commission . and they could grow weaker as memories of nuclear blasts fade . it was a much more tangible thing years ago , says gilinsky , who recalls diving under his desk during bomb drills at school . when you say you ll explode a bomb here , explode a bomb there it s not a game of checkers . and anything that depends so much one person s judgement is also vulnerable to that person s ego . at some level , gilinsky argues , anyone who s worked on or with nuclear weapons wants to see the effort pay off . when the atomic bomb exploded on hiroshima , the los alamos scientists cheered , gilinsky recounted in a speech . not because of the fatalities , but because their work was a success . you ve got these people who are constantly training , he told the verge . they want it to be important . and for it to be important , the possibility of nuclear war has to be important . that ego doesn t just show up as professional pride , either , gilinsky writes in a recent article . a cult of toughness at the top levels of the us government could also tip the balance towards using nuclear weapons when it s necessary in order to save face . this kind of saber rattling could drive more nations to arm themselvesthis doesn t mean that president donald trump will suddenly launch a nuclear warhead and unleash nuclear armageddon . after all , a us president is unlikely to violate a long standing taboo that the us so clearly benefits from , wellerstein told the verge . densely populated cities , easy to locate military targets , and vulnerable infrastructure makes the us an especially exposed nuclear target if nukes suddenly became acceptable weapons to use . but the thing about trump s tough nuclear talk is that even if he s bluffing , this kind of saber rattling could drive more nations to arm themselves with nuclear weapons . even in germany , people were unsettled when trump talked about withdrawing military support from nato countries . the editor of the conservative german newspaper frankfurter allgemeine zeitung wrote an op ed speculating that germany should build its own nuclear arsenal . if the president wants to ensure a stable and secure europe and asia , he ll need to dial back the off the cuff nuclear remarks . the traditions , the taboos , the deterrences . . . are all about constantly reiterating and saying we re not doing that , this is wrong , this is right , sauer says . if you undercut all of this , in a couple of not very carefully thought through moves , you ll do quite a lot of damage that will take awhile to repair . updated january , updated to reflect president donald trump s inauguration , and to include his most recent statements about nuclear weapons . updated december , updated to include president elect donald trump s and russian president vladimir putin s recent statements about nuclear weapons . first published december , . 	 technology startups are fleeting and prone to failure , cropping up and disappearing as fast as our screen addled attention spans . but rarely does one stick out quite like adoptly , an apparently earnest attempt at making a tinder like mobile app for child adoption . the four person operation , which quietly launched a kickstarter campaign last week , says it wants to connect prospective parents with adoptable children . in a concept video , adults swipe right or left to accept or reject kids looking for a family . it s a dark vision , marrying the superficial nature of modern dating with the important work of finding homes for orphaned children . but is it the real deal , or a scheme designed to highlight the shallow and tone deaf stereotype of silicon valley ? swiping left or right on children is a dark , twisted conceptadoptly co founder alex nawrocki insists the company is authentic . we re not trying to gamify or make fun of this experience , he said in a phone interview this week . the adoption industry at large is a little bit underserved by the tech industry . we saw this unique opportunity to disrupt it , particularly when you re talking about online adoption . still , it sounds like something out of hbo s silicon valley . the art mockups , website , and kickstarter campaign page for adoptly are so basic and benign as to be suspicious . they re the kinds of press assets anyone with a background in marketing and moderate design skills could throw together in no time at all . there is no adoptly twitter account , and nawrocki and his business partners have no public profiles on social media sites . there is no clear indication the company , if it does exist , has partnered with any adoption organizations , foster care specialists , or state agencies of any sort . the introduction video posted on kickstarter also veers into satirical territory , using the tackiest staples of the format . co founder josh weber is shown on camera talking viewers through adoptly , which he describes as something that could bring families together at the speed of modern life . designer ankush desai describes the app with the clich turns of phrases fit for a snl bit . he calls adoptly a seamless , app based platform that connects prospective parents with adoptable children nearby , as if proximity is the biggest factor in deciding to become the legal guardian of a human being . in a jarring example of the app at work , a woman shows a smiling child s profile to her partner , who disapproves and swipes left on the boy s face . the video then runs through a series of safety reassurances . children are legally pre approved through licensed government agencies , while parents must go through state mandated background checks . the video ends on the high note of a well crafted slogan parenthood is now just a swipe away . all the while , aspirational royalty free music swirls in the background , as in so many other hopeful kickstarter videos before it . in one sense , what s interesting about adoptly isn t that it s suspicious . rather , it s that adoptly , in many ways , is indistinguishable from so many other misguided startups with self righteous claims and cookie cutter marketing material . the app could be a hoax , sure . but even if it were real , what would be the difference ? somebody out there thinks tinder for child adoption is an okay idea in its first week , backers have pledged , toward the campaign . admittedly , adoptly still seems likely to fall short of its , goal . somebody out there thinks tinder for child adoption is an okay ideastrangely , the only member of the four person adoptly team not shown on camera in the kickstarter video is nawrocki . that leaves open the possibility the other employees in the video were actors , while nawrocki itself could be a fake last name . the voicemail i reached when initially contacting him was barebones , advising callers that they ve reached an alex . nawrocki told me he s a brand strategist and planner for a marketing agency , but would not tell me where he works . despite this lack of information , nawrocki was earnest and articulate about adoptly s purpose . he stressed that the app is not designed to replace adoption services , nor is it even supposed to make money . he says adoptly chose not to seek venture capital funding for that reason . instead , it s supposed to act as a free network to get conversations started and help parents more easily begin the first steps toward adoption . as for the swiping mechanic , nawrocki says the app is modeled after how people connect nowadays . our target demographic is millennials who are beginning to reach the age of parenthood , he said . our thinking is that it s important to take technologies that keep tempo with them , and the swipe is something that group is particularly familiar with . adoptly i encountered some additional red flags in my conversation and follow up emails with nawrocki . he said he and the other members featured on kickstarter met at the sxsw festival in austin back in , and then stayed in touch through a facebook group . he would not disclose to me the name of the facebook group . he also said that his facebook profile was nonexistent because he had been disengaging from social lately . neither him nor weber , desai , or marketing head laura schipper have facebook , linkedin , or twitter profiles i could locate . no member of adoptly has a public facebook , linkedin , or twitter profile nawrocki did offer an elaborate backstory for weber . he said his co founder studied economics at tufts university and afterward worked in energy markets consulting out of houston . weber then moved to the bay area , where he s been active in the alternative energy startup scene . when i asked if i could speak to weber directly , nawrocki said he was on his honeymoon and unavailable . when i asked whether i could see some proof of his colleagues online presence , nawrocki said the entire team has made their profiles private due to a backlash from adoptly s critics . as a result of this unforeseen feedback , which really surprised us , we ve been taking our marketing approach into consideration , nawrocki said over email . it appears that some of our comms strategy hasn t quite effectively illustrated the details of how truly positive and helpful this technology will actually be for people . so adoptly and its likely unsuccessful kickstarter campaign would appear to be one of two things an elaborate satire not worth further debunking , or a bad idea not worth further exploring . if it s a satire , perhaps the targets are both journalists too lazy to fact check and the silicon valley startup community so eager to disrupt that it forgoes its humanity . and in the age of donald trump and the dilution of the term of fake news , it s hard not to be suspect of possible attempts to hoodwink the media . in the age of trump and fake news , it s hard not to be suspectso far , at least two other news outlets have written up adoptly , albeit with caveats that it s not a stellar idea and does in fact seem as if it could be fake . as for kickstarter , it doesn t appear to care too much about potential hoaxes or parodies so long as the campaign is not an outright fraud . the company referred me to its trust and safety guidelines , and a representative said its integrity team s algorithms scan for violations by relying in part on community reports . kickstarter may not feel the need to investigate adoptly unless it meets its unrealistic fundraising goal . still , i was and remain struck by nawrocki s pitch and the language that , in pretty much any other context , syncs up with standard , lofty bay area jargon . regardless of who is really behind the company , it illustrates how outlandish startup ideas can seem while still retaining an air of legitimacy . so many smart and well meaning engineers and programmers in the bay area have stood up on stages at tech incubators like y combinator and professed to have disrupted laundry or wedding planning or some other mundane staple of modern life . some of these founders dream of scooping up millions of dollars to build business out of ideas like turbo tax for immigration or getaround for india or buzzfeed for africa all of which are meaningful ideas , framed somewhat questionably . you could say the same about adoptly , which means maybe it s really not that far fetched after all . 	 the european union is currently considering the need to redefine the legal status of robots , with a draft report last week suggesting that autonomous bots might , in the future , be granted the status of electronic persons a legal definition that confers certain rights and obligations . it sounds like science fiction and that s because it is any engineer will tell you we re a long way from seeing robot marches for civil rights . so what s going on here ? for a start , this is only a draft report . it s not actual legislation , and is only a series of recommendations for the eu s law making body they could always ignore it completely . and although parts of the report are a bit odd frankenstein s monster , the greek myth of pygmalion , and the golem of prague are all referenced in the first paragraph alone , at its core it s interested in the rights of people , not the rights of robots . the question it s asking is this if something goes wrong with an autonomous system , who do we blame ? and how are they held accountable under current legal systems ? it turns out that making robots into electronic persons might actually help with some of these problems . what does the report actually say ? the first section of the report lays out some familiar background . robots in various forms are becoming more and more sophisticated . they re popping up in diverse industries from health care to transportation to the military . and they re also becoming more autonomous , able to take decisions and implement them in the outside world without external input . as autonomy increases , robots feel less and less like simple tools . but if they re not tools , what are they ? as a society , the report notes , we ve yet to decide what they are instead . not legally , anyway . to deal with the challenges posed by autonomous robots , the report makes a number of suggestions . these include the following legally define what smart autonomous robots are so everyone knows what we re talking aboutcreate a central register of these bots , so members of the public can work out who controls and who owns particular robotswrite a code of ethics for robot manufacturers and researchers that reflects the eu s charter of fundamental human rights i . e . , respect human dignity , the right to privacy , be anti discrimination , and so onfund a new eu agency for ai and robotics researchcreate a new legal status for robots electronic persons that would bring them into the existing system of civil liabilitywhy personhood ? it s this last point that has sparked sensationalist coverage , with many outlets hinting or just stating outright that the eu wants to give robots something akin to human rights . robots are not humans and will never be humans . mady delvaux , the luxembourgian mep responsible for present the report to the public , says this is absolutely not the report s intention . robots are not humans and will never be humans , delvaux tells the verge . she explains that when discussing this idea of personhood , the committee that drafted the report considered the matter to be similar to corporate personhood that is to say making something an electronic person is a legal fiction rather than a philosophical statement . but burkhard schafer , a professor of computational legal theory at the university of edinburgh , says using the phrase was a mistake to begin with . people read about electronic personhood and what they think is robots deserve recognition like it s a human rights argument , he tells the verge . that s not how lawyers think about legal personality . it s a tool of convenience . we don t give companies legal personality because they deserve it it just makes certain things easier . the same might be true of robots . sam byford the robear is a service robot developed in japan for use in the care industry . imagine , says schafer , that you re disabled and rely on a home robot to help you around the house . one of the things this robot does is monitor your diet and make sure you get enough of the right food . one day it notices you re low on vegetables and orders you some more . at this point we want to make sure that there s a valid contract in place between the robot and the shop , says schafer . we don t want the grocer to say i negotiated with a machine so the contract s not valid . it makes it easier then to give the robot a legal personality in a purely technical sense . he notes that similar plans were debated in the s regarding bits of computer software known as intelligent agents that were used to handle legal contracts . the plans were dropped though as overkill , says schafer . but there are certain things at the moment that , by default , only humans can do , which in the future we might allow machines to do as well . establishing liability is tough enough at any rate , electronic personhood is more of a sideshow than a serious consideration at this point it s legal liability for autonomous systems that s the most important concern of the report . as a baseline , the report s authors suggest that the eu draft legislation that makes it clear that people only have to establish a causal link between the harmful behavior of the robot and the damage suffered by the injured party to be able to claim compensation from a company . this is intended to stop companies from shifting blame onto the autonomous systems themselves . so , for example , the makers of a self driving car can t claim they re not responsible if it crashes just because it was driving itself at the time . delvaux suggests this won t be much of a problem in the short term as the current generation of robots simply aren t complex enough to make establishing causation difficult . but when you have the next generation of robots which are self learning , that is another question , she says . schafer says the concern they are having is that robots as autonomous agents might become so unpredictable they interrupt the chain of causal attribution . and the company says that was not foreseeable for us and we couldn t know our self learning system would make the car start chasing pedestrians off the street . google self driving cars like this prototype from google could provide some of the first test cases for robot liability . this is where things get murky . the report suggests creating a legal system where robot liability is proportionate with autonomy i . e . , the more self directed any system is , the more it assumes responsibility as opposed to its human operator . but that just raises more questions , like how do you measure autonomy in the first place ? and what if the self learning system is learning from its environment ? if a self driving car is taught bad driving habits by its owner and crashes , is that still the manufacturer s fault ? one way to side step these problems , suggests the report , might be to create a mandatory insurance scheme for autonomous robots . if you make a robot or the software that controls it , you pay into the scheme . if an accident happens , the hurt party then receives compensation from the fund . that way there s less incentive for companies to try and dodge responsibility they ve already paid out the money they ll give away . what next ? it should be stressed that the report s contents are only suggestions . it s still in draft status and has yet to be passed on to the european commission the part of the eu that actually makes laws . when that happens , sometime in the next couple of months , the commission can take notice of the recommendations which sources say is most likely and then start thinking up possible legislation . but this would be a long process , taking a year at least , with no way of saying if the report s recommendations or wording would be heeded . for the moment , though , we re not in dire need of new legislation . olaf cramme , a tech and policy specialist at management consultancy inline policy , says the current system can cope with liability claims involving autonomous systems just about . current legislation will cope but we need change sooner rather than later the tort system is very developed and there are a variety of laws that could apply in these cases , cramme tells the verge . but there are some fundamental problems . accidents caused by self driving vehicles , for example , will increase the complexity of any case . cramme says it s probably better to draft new legislation for these scenarios , rather than clogging up the courts by forcing lawyers to follow ever more complex lines of liability . insurance companies are open to this he says . they re excited because it should open new insurance models and new products which they can sell . it s a great commercial opportunity . so new laws are going to be needed , but we re not sure what yet , and the concept of electronic personhood might be too freighted with meaning to be politically useful . change is going to come though , one way or another . robots are not science fiction , says delvaux . these are not extraordinary beings attacking our world . it is technology that should serve us , and we need a realistic view of what is possible . 	 in march , philippe reines , a former aide to hillary clinton at the us state department , reached out to an old colleague about his consulting firm s client . reines contacted capricia marshall , a consultant who had been the us chief of protocol , a top state department officer who acts as a liaison with foreign diplomats . reines wanted marshall to arrange meetings with foreign embassies for dataminr a company that has come under scrutiny from privacy experts for its service analyzing twitter data . this piece was published in partnership with maplight , a nonprofit organization that reveals the influence of money in politics . . partnership blurb text align centerpadding top pxmargin bottom pxborder top px solid rgb , , border bottom px solid rgb , , . partnership blurb img width px . partnership blurb p font size . pxfont weight if you could pull this off , would be a great way to get you a solid ongoing retainer , reines wrote in an email . marshall responded talking to azerbaijan . may then ask saudi ? azerbaijan would be awesome . i think saudi is in its own category because they aren t sure what the saudis would do with it , reines wrote back . referring to azerbaijan , a former soviet republic accused of jailing journalists and online activists , reines suggested using its territorial dispute with armenia as leverage pull out all the stops ! tell them if they don t we ll sell to the armenians ! reines firm , beacon global strategies , met with diplomats from azerbaijan s embassy , and quickly hired marshall . a maplight review of leaked emails found that marshall arranged conversations between dataminr and at least five embassies over three months . the leaked emails shed light on the largely unregulated world of international lobbying in washington , where strategic advisors , consultants , and lawyers use their us government experience to benefit clients and themselves , while avoiding public scrutiny both at home and overseas . beacon isn t registered to lobby in washington . the firm reportedly works for defense contractors and cybersecurity companies , but it hasn t made its client list public , citing non disclosure agreements . beacon s relationship with dataminr has not been previously reported . emails show that beacon offered dataminr s service to a foreign government in ways that suggest it could have been used for surveillance . a spokesperson for dataminr told maplight on tuesday that the company decided not to build or deploy the product capabilities described by beacon . beacon offered dataminr s service to a foreign government in ways that suggest it could have been used for surveillancemarshall s emails were posted on dcleaks . com in october . the us government says russian military intelligence used the website to distribute emails stolen from american citizens to help donald trump win the presidency . reached for comment by maplight on tuesday , marshall referred all questions to beacon . the consulting firm did not respond to repeated requests for comment . dataminr s spokesperson told maplight that the company had a single introductory meeting two years ago with mid level officials from azerbaijan , but did not respond to questions about whether it has worked with beacon or about its meetings with other countries . the companies do share a public link david shedd , a former acting director of the defense intelligence agency and member of a beacon advisory panel , sits on dataminr s government advisory board . secret and arguably unlawful surveillance philippe reines left the state department in and launched beacon with several former top us national security officials . reines colleague , andrew shapiro , had led the state department s bureau of political military affairs , where he helped oversee us arms exports . jeremy bash , another founder , had been a chief of staff at the pentagon and the cia . more than half the people on beacon s nine member advisory board are ex military and intelligence officials , and two former cia chiefs leon panetta and mike morell are senior counselors to the firm . by spring , beacon was working with dataminr , a startup founded in by three yale alumni . the company has received funding from the cia s venture capital arm , in q tel , according to the intercept . the fbi and the pentagon have both agreed to deals with dataminr in recent months . twitter owns a percent stake in dataminr , and grants the company exclusive access to its firehose , or its full feed of users public posts . more than half of beacon s nine member advisory board members are ex military and intelligence officialsdataminr publicly says its service transforms the twitter stream and other public datasets into actionable alerts , providing must know information in real time for clients in the public and private sectors . the company s website advertises breaking news alerts and updates about events like shootings , terror attacks , and natural disasters . however , one beacon marketing document about dataminr from july specifically offered governments the ability to explore an individual s past digital activity on social media and discover an individual s interconnectivity and interactions with others on social media . beacon prepared the memo in advance of a meeting between the firm , dataminr , and the embassy of denmark . a clause in twitter s current developer agreement specifically forbids third parties from using its data to investigate , track or surveil twitter s users . twitter s policy at the time of the emails had more ambiguity than it does now , but it still banned developers from helping government agencies or other organizations to conduct surveillance on content . twitter has said in the past that it has never authorized dataminr or any third party to sell data to a government or intelligence agency for surveillance purposes . privacy experts who reviewed the beacon memo said the firm appeared to be offering governments the ability to drill down into an individual twitter users activities . as described , that service appears to allow governments to conduct secret and arguably unlawful surveillance of individuals , and i would hope that twitter and other social media companies would not be complicit in that surveillance , said jennifer lynch , a senior staff attorney at the electronic frontier foundation . matt cagle , a lawyer for the american civil liberties union of northern california , said that twitter must take additional oversight steps to ensure government actors cannot abuse the dataminr tool to spy on protesters , map political affiliations , conduct secretive surveillance or track law abiding twitter users . dataminr s spokesperson said on tuesday the company didn t move forward with the service outlined in beacon s memo , and instead focused our government product only on our core competency breaking news alerts for emergency response . a twitter spokesperson did not directly answer questions about whether dataminr has complied with twitter s developer agreement . the emails released by dc leaks suggest dataminr sought to work with at least one foreign intelligence agencythe aclu and eff have expressed concern as law enforcement agencies have started buying tools that sift through social media user posts and profile information , warning the services can be used to target activists or minority groups . last year , twitter cut off data access to a company that had helped police monitor protesters and activists in baltimore and ferguson , missouri . in december , twitter announced that dataminr would no longer let public sector clients access its geospatial analysis application , which had allowed intelligence centers to identify individual tweets and users linked to events and keywords . the emails released by dc leaks suggest dataminr sought to work with at least one foreign intelligence agency , with beacon s help . in june , beacon managing director michael allen requested marshall connect the firm with the british embassy before dataminr s visit to the united kingdom . a few days later , marshall emailed james kariuki , a counselor at the embassy , noting that dataminr would soon be meeting mi , the british foreign intelligence agency . it was wonderful to see you again at the ambassador s residence for a wonderful afternoon bbq , my son s favorite dc event , marshall wrote . as i discussed with you , the beacon global strategies would like to connect with you on a few issues . in particular , about a client they are introducing to people at downing and mi . i d be more than happy to pick this up and make sure beacon are talking to the right people in the embassy , kariuki replied . recipe for corruption under the us lobbying disclosure act , a company must register and publicly disclose its clients if its employees are paid to contact federal policymakers , though there are loopholes that firms can use to avoid registering . for example , an individual doesn t need to register as a lobbyist unless more than percent of the work for a client consists of lobbying a firm isn t required to register unless it employs a lobbyist . beacon did not respond to questions from maplight about whether the firm was involved in arranging any of dataminr s deals with us agencies . dataminr doesn t employ any federal lobbying firms , records show . experts say the meetings beacon arranged with foreign governments fall under the purview of regulators in other countries , not anyone in the us . most countries don t have lobbying laws , and few mandate meaningful disclosures . as a result , the company s efforts to sell dataminr abroad happened in the dark . the company s efforts to sell dataminr abroad happened in the darkcanada has fairly strict rules , and one meeting marshall arranged may have required her to register to lobby there . in canada , consultant lobbyists , or anyone hired by a company to lobby or arrange meetings with federal public officials , must report contacts to the office of the commissioner of lobbying in ottawa . the law carries potential criminal penalties , although prosecutions are rare . according to one canadian lobbying expert , marshall should have registered and disclosed a july meeting she arranged between beacon , dataminr , and canada s then ambassador to the us . a beacon employee later told marshall that dataminr was looking forward to scheduling a follow up meeting with canada . canadian filings do not contain any record of marshall s lobbying contacts . she s not an employee . she s on contract . therefore , by definition , she s a consultant lobbyist , said duff conacher , who co founded the canadian watchdog group democracy watch . as for why compliance with the law matters , conacher said secret lobbying is a recipe for corruption , waste and other abuses . when maplight informed marshall that canada s lobbying rule could apply to the meeting she arranged for dataminr , she said she couldn t respond , before adding i didn t have a meeting with the ambassador . a canadian embassy spokesperson said she could not confirm the former ambassador s schedule because the embassy s staff had changed . emails show marshall also arranged meetings for dataminr with the embassies of japan , denmark , and portugal . a spokesperson at the japanese embassy said she could not confirm whether the meeting took place . portugal and denmark did not respond to requests for comment . dataminr wasn t marshall s only client through beacon . she also assisted with beacon s work for apr energy , a mobile electricity provider . in june , marshall helped at least two apr employees obtain tickets to a luncheon hosted by vice president joe biden to honor then brazilian president dilma rousseff . the event was held at the state department , and emails show that the tickets were distributed by the office of the chief of protocol , the office marshall previously led . we engaged beacon for a short period of time a couple of years ago , but no longer have an agreement with them , an apr spokesperson told maplight . beacon also asked marshall to help the consulting firm plan out its strategy for the united nations general assembly session a forum where representatives from all countries in the un vote on policy . we re meeting with apr tomorrow on their unga strategy and that should be helpful in getting us on track , michael allen , beacon s managing director , wrote . but we were talking the other day and wanted to get your help on an unga strategy for beacon ! like are there events that we should go to to see foreign government officials ? according to axios , morell and bash were both in line for top jobs in a clinton administrationmarshall s agreement with beacon ended in october . beacon paid her consulting company nearly , that year , emails show . many of beacon s employees went all in for clinton during the presidential campaign . co founder jeremy bash , the former cia and pentagon chief of staff , advised her campaign on foreign policy . and former acting cia director and beacon senior counselor mike morell wrote a column endorsing clinton and helped organize a letter from national security experts criticizing republican donald trump . according to axios , morell and bash were both in line for top jobs in a clinton administration . morell was one of two remaining names under consideration for cia director bash , the former cia and pentagon staffer , was set to be clinton s counterterrorism adviser . philippe reines would have been a white house counselor . marshall was going to chair clinton s inaugural committee . morell , bash , and former cia director panetta have continued to denounce trump since the election , primarily for his refusal to accept us intelligence agencies conclusion that russia sought to meddle in the presidential election . morell has called the alleged russian hacking campaign the political equivalent of , while bash and other beacon staffers have warned journalists against writing stories based on the leaks . still , at least one beacon associate will likely be in trump s cabinet trump selected retired marine general john kelly , a beacon advisor , to lead the department of homeland security which has a , contract to access dataminr s software . another beacon member might wind up in the trump administration . beacon vice president bryan smith was recently named to trump s transition team for the office of the director of national intelligence . 	 facebook faced withering criticism in the us for allowing fake news to spread during the presidential election . now , the social network has come under similar scrutiny in germany , amid concerns that widespread disinformation campaigns could impact upcoming elections . false and misleading news articles have spread rapidly across europe in recent months , prompting calls for new legislation and tougher regulations on social media companies . the reaction has been particularly aggressive in germany , where authorities recently opened an investigation into the matter . the german government , which has traditionally taken a firmer hand than the us in regulating tech companies , is also considering measures that would impose fines on facebook for publishing fake news . yet some fear that government intervention could backfire in germany , where memories of totalitarian rule and propaganda are still fresh , while others have downplayed the effect that fake news could have on the political landscape . under mounting pressure from lawmakers , facebook announced this week that it will begin filtering fake news for users in germany , marking the first expansion of an initiative that launched in the us in december . in a german language post announcing the expansion , facebook said it will wok with correctiv , a berlin based nonprofit media organization , to fact check articles reported as dubious , and that it aims to bring other media groups onboard . fighting fake news is essential for our society . we think fighting fake news is essential for our society , david schraven , correctiv s publisher , said in an email . people should make their decision on the basis of true information . but details on the partnership remain unclear . schraven said that the facebook project is still in a planning phase , and that correctiv is unsure of how many people will be needed to work on it . he added that facebook is not paying correctiv during this phase , and that the organization will determine how to pay for it after we know what needs to be done . facebook will not be paying fact checkers , according to a person familiar with the matter . it was previously reported that the company would not pay fact checking organizations in the us , either . the scope of germany s fake news problem was detailed in a report from buzzfeed news this week , which found that many fabricated and misleading news articles have targeted chancellor angela merkel and her open door policy toward refugees . sites such as anonymousnews . ru , rapefugees . net , and noch . info regularly publish incendiary stories about refugees and islam , as well as pro russia propaganda . photo by johannes simon getty images many fake news articles in germany aim to stir anti muslim sentiment . there is some evidence that such articles are gaining traction . an article falsely claiming that merkel took a selfie with one of the terrorists involved in an attack on brussels garnered more than , engagements on facebook , according to buzzfeed s analysis . a factual account of the photograph , which was taken with a refugee , generated less than , engagements , the website reported . the syrian refugee who took the photo has also filed a lawsuit against facebook for allowing the rumor to spread . merkel has warned of the effect that fake news could have on upcoming elections , suggesting that russia may be seeking to interfere with elections in germany as it is believed to have done in the us . merkel is seeking re election later this year . justice minister heiko maas has also suggested that facebook should be treated as a media company , which would make it liable for fake news or hate speech published to its site , while german lawmakers are considering a law that would fine social networks that publish fake news . reuters reported this week that facebook executives have been working to dissuade german politicians from adopting stricter regulations . the issue of fake news is , to most of us , very troublesome and worrisome , says christian schemer , professor of communications at the university of mainz . it has reached a quality that keeps officials busy . false and exaggerated news stories in germany have so far not led to violence , in the way the pizzagate conspiracy did in the us . but there have been real world consequences . police in the city of dortmund were recently forced to debunk a false report , published by breitbart , which claimed that a , man mob chanting allahu akbar set fire to a church on new year s eve . last year , reports of a russian german girl being kidnapped and raped by migrants led to far right protests in germany , prompting russia s foreign minister to criticize german authorities . the girl later admitted to making up the story , but not before it had been widely circulated in russian media and right leaning websites . i fear that this will only increase the distrust in media . german far right leaders haven t appropriated the term fake news in the way that donald trump uses it to belittle mainstream media in the us something that has fueled calls to retire the term . but the far right party alternative for germany afd regularly describes mainstream newspapers as the pinocchio press , while the anti immigrant pegida movement has revived the term lying press , which was used by the nazis . some activists in germany have taken it upon themselves to debunk false reports . a site called hoaxmap , which launched in february of last year , maps instances of false reporting on alleged crimes committed by refugees across germany , and includes police statements or other news reports that disprove them . to date , the site has documented false reports on asylum seekers , many of which contained allegations of rape and violence . another watchdog organization , called schmalbart , was created to keep tabs on breitbart , which plans to launch in both germany and france this year . karolin schwarz , one of hoaxmap s co founders , says she s seen a steady stream of online hoaxes since the summer of , when germany saw an influx of asylum seekers . from march through december , hoaxmap actually saw a decrease in refugee related hoaxes , but schwarz says they ve increased since the attack on a christmas market in berlin late last year . she also casts doubt on facebook s filtering initiative , saying that it may prompt allegations of censorship and further undermine confidence in the mainstream media . trust in media is weak in germany , so i fear that this will only increase the distrust in media , since people are framing this as an attempt of censorship , schwarz said in an email , adding that facebook has not been in touch with hoaxmap about a partnership . maybe this could work , but we sure need other ways to deal with this . i take this as a sign of a healthy system that can correct itself . some doubt that fake news will have much of an impact on upcoming elections in germany , where propaganda and disinformation campaigns were widespread throughout the th century . according to wolfgang m hl benninghaus , professor of media studies at humboldt university , recent history has made germans more wary of misleading news reports . we had a lot of fake news during the weimar republic , we had fake news in the third reich , m hl benninghaus says . we have an understanding of our history . there are also concerns over government interference in the media in the run up to german elections , which will be held in september . the government has reportedly considered setting up a press bureau to track and combat fake news , but there is reluctance among those who fear the institution being seen as a ministry of truth . leaders in the czech republic created their own anti fake news unit this year to counteract propaganda campaigns allegedly carried out by russia . schemer acknowledges that germany s recent history may make media consumers more alert to propaganda and disinformation , though he says there is still a small subculture that continues to spread radical ideas . social media has also made it easier for them to reach large audiences , he says , while making it more difficult for fact checkers and law enforcement to identify them . still , schemer says he s reassured by the speed with which many hoaxes have been debunked by the media and law enforcement . i take this as a sign of a healthy system that can correct itself , he says , adding so to this extent i m optimistic . but maybe we can talk after september this year . maybe this impression will have changed . 	 can you trick your brain into not feeling pain without medication ? we ve used electricity to do that for centuries , but this method is newly popular again . transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation , or tens , has become far more accessible since it was approved as an over the counter treatment by the us food and drug administration about two years ago . now , with the country in the midst of an opioid epidemic , doctors and patients and medical device manufacturers are paying more attention to this form of natural pain management . think of the machines as using electricity to rub away pain , says mark johnson , a professor of analgesia at leeds beckett university in the united kingdom . tens devices are portable machines with electrodes . you put the electrodes wherever you have muscle pain , turn on the device , and feel a tingling sensation . the machine sends electrical pulses through your skin and nerves . the electrical pulses do two things first , it distracts the brain to prevent the pain signals from reaching the brain . second , it encourages your body to produce more of its own natural painkillers . some see tens as a possible alternative to opioidsthe verge s natt garun tried several tens devices made by accurelief at this year s consumer electronics show , as did i , separately . i used mine on my forearm and found the tingling feeling rather uncomfortable . natt s device , placed on her shoulders , went to at the setting , she was bouncing around and finding it difficult to type properly . that said , neither of us have severe muscle pain , so it s difficult for us to evaluate the effectiveness . also , the highest setting is usually reserved for people with serious chronic pain . higher settings are also important because tolerance for the electrical signals does build . using electricity to manage pain has a long history , says kathleen sluka , a professor of physical therapy at the university of iowa . ancient egyptians used electric eels for this very purpose and , in the s , doctors helped their patients by using a device with a crank that created electrical output . physical therapist have used tens devices for years in clinical settings for both chronic pain and acute pain , and they can also be helpful for routine soreness from exercise . tens is easy and safe and it s been around for a long time , says sluka . most of what you re seeing now is people finally bringing it to the community . despite the long history , the basic technology hasn t changed much in the past few decades , says johnson . researchers have long tried to find the magic bullet a particular pulse or pattern of electricity that will make it suddenly much more effective but there haven t been many breakthroughs . but , since fda approval , there are plenty of inexpensive tens devices available at drugstores like walgreens and rite aid . these new devices come in a lot of different shapes and sizes and many are wireless , which is convenient for patients who wear them anywhere from minutes a day to all day . accurelief , for example , recently debuted a few new tens models that can be controlled using an app instead of with a traditional remote . one of these , called theramed , is a device for athletes that will launch later this year . people with anxiety and depression might not find tens as effectivethe market for tens is small , but growing very quickly , says jeff swains , vice president of marketing for accurelief parent company compass health brands . doctors and pharmacists are starting to get pressure from government bodies around cutting back opioid prescriptions , he says . we have customers that are healthcare organizations and they recognize the cost associated with opioids , so they re invested in actually trying to give away devices to the people on their plans because it s less expensive than opioids and there s no chance of being addicted . it s unlikely that a device from the drugstore is just as effective as a powerful opioid , and there has been some debate on the effectiveness of the devices . one cochrane review concludes that the effectiveness is mixed , but because the device is so cheap and safe , there s no real harm in trying . johnson , from leeds beckett university , disagrees with reviews that say tens is not effective because there isn t enough good quality evidence . a lot of the current studies are done on small sample sizes , he says . plus , the studies cite the average result , even when the feedback skew on extreme ends of the spectrum . dana dailey , a professor of physical therapy at the university of iowa , is currently running a study looking at both the long term use of tens , since previous studies look at it for only a few days . sluka agrees that tens isn t for everyone . some people absolutely love them and some people can t stay in the study because they can t handle it , says sluka . is it as effective as opioids ? maybe not , she says . but it s usually at least as effective as ibuprofen , if not more . the devices can be useful when part of a broader treatment program , are alternative to ingesting drugs , and don t have dangerous side effects . more recently , some similar devices are using electrical signals to try to fix mental stress , too . right now , we don t know a lot about who will benefit most from the devices . we know more about who shouldn t use it , notably people with implanted pacemakers . other research has suggested that people who have more anxiety and depression tend to not do as well , according to dailey . it tends to be more physically uncomfortable to them , and they re more likely to find it painful , she says . in terms of effectiveness , people who sweat a lot or have a lot of oil in their skin might have more trouble getting the electrodes to stick . if you re interested in testing tens , there are a few things to keep in mind . you need to turn up the intensity as high as you can take it , according to sluka . it s not enough to just get a little tingling sensation like i did . that s not very effective . and though tolerance build up is a risk , having the device on too low a setting defeats the purpose to begin with . when choosing a device , take a close look at the size and length of the electrodes . the biggest expense for this unit will be replacing those electrodes , which could happen as often as every few weeks . make sure the electrodes aren t too expensive to replace , and also that they will fit on whatever part of your body you will be using the device on . the neck , for instance , is probably one of the hardest places to put a tens unit on since there s less surface area and people do use their necks a lot . for those itching to try this for themselves , they re easily available and usually range from about to . unless you re very sensitive to sensation , it basically can t hurt to try . 	 car companies want to sell as many cars as possible . this is an indisputable fact . but lately they ve been trying to speak the language of a post ownership future . they see uber and lyft and the trend of more people moving to cities and abandoning their cars , and they re anxious . they know there is a problem with too many cars on the road and too much traffic and pollution . so they decided to lean into the mobility trend and see where it takes them . ford spun off its own llc . general motors launched a car sharing company . nearly everyone started overusing terms like transportation as a service and smart cities without really explaining what they meant or how this is a sustainable business . at both ces in las vegas and the north american international auto show in detroit this year , this trend was on full display . in detroit , ford eschewed the traditional new car reveal in favor of a ted style talk about smart cities and the future of transportation . walter isaacson of the steve jobs biography fame moderated a totally scripted panel discussion with ford chairman bill ford and ceo mark fields , in which they discussed the company s new business ethos of reducing commuting times and producing zero waste . how do i know it was scripted ? i was sitting right by the teleprompter . these were totally bizarre topics to hear at a car showit s strange watching car companies try to rebrand their mission . during the presentation , ford showed off just three vehicles , the revamped f pickup truck still built ford tough , and announced the return of the bronco and ranger . but the two vehicles that received the most attention were not the kind you d see on a showroom floor a transit van for the ride sharing service chariot which was recently acquired by the automaker , and a hybrid yellow taxi . ford also screened a utopian vision of what it sees as the city of tomorrow , in which pedestrians and smart cars straight out of science fiction mingled in harmony in an urban environment that was more hanging gardens of babylon than blade runner . it s not just ford that s out there making big claims about mobility . cadillac recently started a subscription service . bmw is expanding its car sharing program to new cities . honda unveiled a new concept car designed specifically for ride and car sharing . with americans putting more miles on the road than ever before , and traffic fatalities showing no signs of reversing their upward trend , the . trillion auto industry is suddenly interested in solving the problem it helped create too many cars on the road . from the auto industry s perspective , this is a pretty obvious move . car sales are continuing to grow , but at a much slower pace than in years past . analysts say this drop in sales can be attributed to the rise of mobility services like car sharing and ride hailing . investments in companies like uber and lyft topped billion in , according to mckinsey . that s a lot of money , and the car companies want a slice of the pie . total mobility services could theoretically be as large as our core automotive business . but how serious are these companies about embracing mobility ? according to raj nair , ford s chief technology officer and executive vice president of product development , quite serious . the total mobility services could theoretically be as large as our core automotive business , he told me in detroit . so it s not an insignificant opportunity for us . nair ticked off the per mile costs of various forms of transportation to back up his claim taxis cost on average per mile , while mass transit falls between . . per mile , depending on the city . ride hail services cost around . per mile , depending on surge pricing . and personal ownership tends to cost around . per mile , nair said . photo by ethan miller getty images raj nair and with the advent of self driving cars , the economics underpinning mobility services become even more attractive , with the cost slashed to around per mile . now you have a solution that s actually cheaper than personal ownership , that s actually extremely convenient as well , he said . it s not you have to go to the bus station or the subway station . it s on your schedule , maybe it s shared , but it could be a personal ride as well . and it s cheaper than owning a car . of course nair s vision for a high yielding autonomous mobility service depends entirely on a future where robot cars roam the streets , endlessly picking up and dropping passengers , never parking , never taking bathroom breaks . it s a future that depends heavily on both the advancement of self driving technology and our ability as a society to accept this technology both of which may take decades , or in fact never converge . it s an age of experimentation . of course , mobility service startups are still struggling to squeeze out a profit . both uber and lyft are losing hundreds of millions of dollars a year in their effort to undercut each other and the traditional taxi industry . lyft generated million in revenue last year but lost about million , according to leaked financial documents . uber appears on track to lose around billion in , mostly thanks to its costly price war in china , which it eventually was forced to concede . if automakers are serious about mobility , they will need to shift focus from vehicle production to fleet management , which is not guaranteed to be a smooth transition . somebody has to own these robot cars that we re using and sharing , but who ? back in the day , the car companies dabbled in fleet management with the emergence of the rental car business , but eventually most were spun off into their own ventures . the auto companies expanding into service are lured by the potential of a higher margin business in service that also could insulate them from potential changes in ownership models of vehicles , said mike ramsey , a research director at gartner . it s an age of experimentation but long term the companies will have to decide whether operating fleets and all of the energy and cost associated with that , really is fulfilling its stated purpose . gm maven but confidence that mobility services will eventually bolster a car company s the bottom line is something you hear from a lot of auto execs these days . while in detroit , julia steyn , ceo of gm s car sharing service maven , told me this new venture is of tremendous value to gm s core business . and she defended gm s ability to maintain a large fleet of vehicles as part of the company s core competency . you end up not selling a vehicle , you end up owning a vehicle , steyn said . she argued that gm s after market division , its network of dealerships , and experience with the insurance industry all build upon these things that we have done well for years . most car companies probably see this trend as a temporary blipthese mobility services are better viewed as a hedge against the trend of more young people moving to cities and ditching car ownership . gm wouldn t be letting millennials share its cars if it didn t think that by doing so it stood a better chance to sell them a chevy volt or better yet an escalade when they start having kids and moving to the suburbs . and its safe to assume that most car companies probably see this trend as a temporary blip a momentary pit stop on the road of life , and not detrimental to their core mission of selling cars . the tech startups doing the disrupting appear unconcerned about the auto industry s incursions into the mobility space especially those startups with a vested interest in the industry s success . over a year ago , gm invested million in lyft with the stated goal of collaborating with the san francisco based ride hailing service on a fleet of self driving taxis . in the meantime , lyft drivers can get special deals on gm car rentals . lyft ceo logan green told me recently that automakers commitment to mobility is sincere . i think we should take them seriously , green said . it s a very genuine move . if these mobility offerings don t make money , they can be discounted as an experiment . we won t get a good idea of how successful all these mobility services are until they are large enough where their profitability or lack thereof can be scrutinized . until then , they can grow and contract as the market demands and often with little impact on car companies or their bottom line . if these mobility offerings don t make money , they can be discounted as an experiment when they are small , ramsey said . when they grow and their operations have a noticeable cost , they have to show a path toward profits at least , particularly if the auto market slows . but even with its gm partnership , lyft in on the record that the age of personal car ownership for people who live in cities will end in . that can t be something that gm or any of its competitors will be happy to hear . how long these alliances will last , or what carmakers would do in a world of radically decreased ownership , is a road we have yet to travel . 	 putting monkeys on a diet delays the health problems of old age , new science says . but whether it makes them live longer is still open for debate . these findings in our close evolutionary relatives could help us better understand our own aging process and how to slow it down . what s more , these latest conclusions begin to resolve a scientific debate that has been unfolding amicably , the scientists say over the past three decades . well , great scott ! we have to resolve this ! the two research teams that jointly published today s study in the journal nature communications have been publishing contradictory results for nearly the last decade . calorie restriction is one of the surest ways to stave off aging related diseases and boost longevity in creatures with short lifespans , like mice , yeast , and worms . but it s harder to figure out whether the same is true in longer lived mammals like us . that s partly because humans are notoriously difficult to study . still , one clinical study of over people with healthy weights found cutting a person s calories by about percent for two years reduced their inflammation and risk factors for heart and metabolic disease by the end of the study . but they also had much lower bone density , which worried the researchers . and the clinical study couldn t answer any questions about longevity , because investigating how calorie restriction affects the human lifespan would be a very long , very expensive project . that s why , in the late s , one team of researchers at the university of wisconsin and another from the national institutes on aging turned to rhesus macaques . their lifespans are about a third the length of ours , but they develop and age very similarly . they get gray hair , their skin sags , and they get sick with the same diseases that aging humans do , like cancer , diabetes , and dementia . the studies agree that restricting calories can improve health and delay age related diseasesin , the team at the university of wisconsin published their first findings years into the multi decade study they d found that restricting the monkeys calories by percent reduced their rates of diabetes , cancer , heart disease , and death . the problem was , three years later the national institutes on aging nia scientists published the opposite results in their study , caloric restriction didn t affect survival , although it did improve the monkeys health . the wisconsin team published a rebuttal soon after , arguing that the nia s control monkeys weren t eating enough to be good comparisons for the calorie restricted monkeys . they had looked at some published data and took snippets , and by that data one would suggest that the nia control monkeys were eating less than the wisconsin control monkeys , says julie mattison , the lead author on the nia s study and on today s joint publication . but , mattison added , when she looked at years of data , it was clear that the nia s control monkeys were eating as much as they wanted . it was like , well , great scott ! we have to resolve this ! says rozalyn anderson , the senior investigator on the latest studies coming out of wisconsin and a co author on today s paper . so , years and nearly monkeys on a diet after they started , the two different research groups directly compared their data . it puts emphasis now on the idea of aging itself being a druggable target . combined , the studies agree that restricting calories can improve health and delay age related diseases . the point of contention remains whether caloric restriction can improve survival . the calorie restricted wisconsin monkeys survived about years , which is longer than the average of years , and longer than the controls . but caloric restriction didn t seem to have much of a specific effect on the nia monkeys lifespans both the dieting and the control monkeys at nia survived an extraordinarily long time more than years , in some cases . so , what accounted for the differences ? probably diet , at least , in part . the monkeys in both studies were mostly fed pellets made up of about percent carbohydrates . but the nia monkeys pellets were made from natural food sources and the carbohydrates only included about percent table sugar . at wisconsin the pellets were much more processed and artificial , and the carbs were nearly percent sugar . consequently , the wisconsin control monkeys were chubbier and less fit than the nia s control monkeys which were closer in body mass to the wisconsin calorie restricted monkeys . these studies probably answer very different questions . if you feed monkeys a more westernized diet and put them on calorie restriction , you ll see survival effects , and health benefits , nia s mattison says . if you feed the animals a healthier diet that s lower in sugar , you still see health benefits . but there s no evidence that we re going to see survival effects . i ve seen the data , and i know how cool this all looks . but i m not doing it . that s why the differences are to be expected , says steve austad , who studies the biology of aging at the university of alabama . they diverged a little bit , and they came up with some different results , he says . they did everybody a real service by putting their results right next to each other . he adds that if he could turn back time , he would have been interested to see if feeding the nia monkeys the wisconsin chow made the nia monkeys chunkier . but , moving forward , austad thinks that studying humans will teach us the most about human aging . in the meantime , there s still a lot more work to do to figure out how calorie restriction improved health for these monkeys , and how diet factored in . both teams collected decades of blood samples , tissue samples , and body measurements that have yet to be analyzed . life might seem longer , but it wouldn t necessarily be longer . despite the new consensus that caloric restriction is beneficial in primates , none of these researchers are inclined to go on a similar diet themselves . i ve seen the data , and i know how cool this all looks . but i m not doing it , anderson says . life is too short , and i love to eat . instead , she sees caloric restriction as a tool to uncover the biology of aging . this shows that we can actually modulate aging in primate species , and it puts emphasis now on the idea of aging itself being a druggable target , anderson says . if we can figure out how caloric restriction works , that would provide a whole new perspective on all these age associated diseases . austad agrees that he s not convinced it s time to start recommending caloric restriction to healthy people . i m not at all certain that people who are a healthy body weight should restrict to some emaciation level , he says . life might seem longer , but it wouldn t necessarily be longer . 	 the verge in celebration of our th anniversary , this month we re publishing a series of interviews with innovative leaders about what the next five years hold . to read more about this series , read our editor nilay patel s introduction here . in the years since trayvon martin s shooting death in , thousands of people and , particularly , people of color have turned out in the streets and online to cry out against police violence , and demanded accountability . the collective resistance of those protests coalesced early on into what is now known as the black lives matter movement . blm , further fueled by the deaths of eric garner , sandra bland , tamir rice , and countless others , has become one of the most vibrant political forces of our time . it has also called into question what it means to protest in and how facebook , twitter , snapchat , and other social platforms can be used to effectively shine light on injustice , and spark change . one of the black lives matter movement s most prominent voices is year old deray mckesson . with his now iconic blue vest , mckesson , now the interim chief of human capital for baltimore city public schools , has balanced using his platform online and off in order to draw attention to matters such as public safety and law enforcement reform . he has protested against police violence in places like ferguson , missouri baton rouge , louisiana and charleston , south carolina . through campaign zero , he and other blm activists designed a policy plan calling for police reform . he even ran for baltimore mayor this year , and though he lost , he drew widespread attention to his effort to bring blm to the halls of government , where real change happens . last month , we sat down with deray in new york city to discuss black lives matter and the future of activism , both in the streets and on the internet . the interviewover the last two years , you ve become an activist , organizer , and even mayoral candidate . where do you think you ll be in ? the movement has created a critical mass of people who understand that there s a crisis . two years ago , there were people who thought that there was a problem in ferguson , but they did not yet accept that there was a problem across the country . we won that battle . the next part of the work is to create a critical mass of people who know what the solutions are and have the skills to implement them . in five years , i m hopeful that i d be in a place , as an organizer , where we created that critical mass . i ll probably still be doing work around education and kids because that has been so much of my career . i m also hopeful that we ll be celebrating some of the accomplishments around criminal justice reform , and we will have figured out how to use technology to build community differently . subscribe to our newsletter so you don t miss the rest of the verge interviews . terms apply . subscribeas an activist , you use instagram and twitter . how are activists using these tools , and how do you see that changing ? i love twitter . i think about twitter as the friend that s always awake . it s why i tweet so much . i m interested to see which of the platforms will be the first one that allows people to build skills . right now , mostly , it s about information sharing . we haven t seen a platform really be about skill building , so i m hoping that ll come next . it s been interesting to see snapchat grow and change , and i think that in the coming years we ll see that . i m not one of the people who is a twitter doomsday person . i think that we ll see the golden days of twitter ahead . we aren t born woke , something wakes us up , and for so many people , what woke them up was a tweet or a facebook post . i think that we have to be open to new ways of organizing and new ways of building community . i m mindful that we aren t born woke , something wakes us up , and for so many people , what woke them up was a tweet or a facebook post , an instagram post , a picture . i never criticize people who others deem to be twitter activists , or hashtag activists , because i know that telling the truth is often a tough act , no matter where you tell that truth . i think that s important . i think that we ll continue to see the platforms push and redefine the way we organize . in terms of the new organizing , you think about how you can use people on slack and mobilize them , you think about how we can spread messages on twitter . i think that we re just at the beginning of seeing the power of technology to really push in the social justice and the equity space . i think that moving forward in terms of what the solutions look like , i think we ll see platforms like twilio be really important . i think we ll see these sort of quieter , seemingly , platforms take a primary role . is it on silicon valley companies to address issues of social injustice , institutional racism , et cetera ? or should that be more the task of the government ? i think the reality is that there s a role for everybody to play in the work of social justice and that we have to organize everybody . that means that silicon valley has to be organized , the fashion industry has to be organized , the formerly incarcerated have to be organized , the teachers . we have to figure out how to build a critical mass that is different from the critical masses we ve tried to build before and leveraging people s skills and talents as we think about issues of equity injustice . i think that silicon valley and technology can play a huge role in redefining what community looks like and how people come together and what authentic relationships look like , but that is not only their burden . we also have to be as organized on the inside as we are on the outside . how will institutions like local government and congress use these tools to engage with people on the ground ? if you get killed by a police officer in america and a newspaper does not write about it , you are not in the data set . that is wild . i think that one of the things that we ve learned is that there s no one solution . body cameras can be implemented effectively as a part of a comprehensive set of solutions , but alone they are not the win . the white house is actually doing some interesting research around body cameras , about how we can use the audio from body cameras to detect aggression in officers before the trauma happens . right now , we think about body cameras in terms of post trauma . something bad happens , we look at the video . but could we use the audio ? i think that s fascinating . i think we ll see many more things like that start to come to the fore around how we can use technology to hold people accountable . the other thing is about data . i know there are a lot of incredible coders and people in the tech space who are trying to help us think about some big data questions . if you ve heard any number about police violence at all , ever , it is all from local media reports . that means that if you get killed by a police officer in america and a newspaper does not write about it , you are not in the data set . that is wild . there are some towns that don t have newspapers . if the police kill somebody in that town , they just aren t in the data set . i also think there are a lot of data questions about bail , about sentencing . most people don t realize that the homicide rate in cities actually includes the people that the police kill . in places like albuquerque , one in three people killed in albuquerque is actually killed by the police . but if you just look at the homicide rate you don t know that . i m most interested in how we think about big data surfacing some of these things that have just not come to the forum because the government does not have the resources to bring them forward . is there something you would create yourself to remedy some of these situations in the next five years ? if i could create one thing in the next five years around remedying the data issues , it would be a massive crowdsourced big data project that got volunteers from across the world to sift through some of these issues . right now , we re working on creating a public database of all the public information for all the elected officials in the country . we re working on it . we ll do it . you should be able to look up in any town and city who the elected officials are . you can t look up what the bail amounts are and how bail is set . there are some big data questions . i would make a big data initiative around social justice that was also crowdsourced . in your mind , is there a black lives matter in ? is it a social movement ? a political movement ? something grassroots versus something happening in washington ? is it economic ? or is it all of the above ? i think that in five years , the movement will be a comprehensive space . i m mindful that the movement is young . when people talk about what we now call the civil rights movement , that was a decade . we are two years into this . i think there s so much more work to be done . i think that in five years we ll see some really focused economic organizing , that we ll continue to see people pressing in the criminal justice space , and that we ll be able to reflect on some key wins and talk about some legislative successes as well . i think it ll be interesting to see in five years what the next president has done , and what the commitment to criminal justice reform in safety and communities looks like . speaking of safety and space being open to conversations with a multitude of people , how do you ensure that the people who are part of the movement are safe on these online communities ? the issue of abuse online is close to me . i get death threats . there was a movie theater that got evacuated because somebody tweeted that they were going to shoot me . i blocked , people on twitter alone . most of my life s information is public . i got a text one day from a hacker who texted me all of my credit card information . it s close to me . i think that the online space is in so many ways trying to figure out what is abuse and what isn t abuse . i blocked , people on twitter alone . twitter has made some important inroads but has a long way to go . facebook , the same thing . in five years , we will see a more nuanced and a more consistent vision of what safety should look like in online communities . if i disagree vehemently , is that abuse ? if i call you a curse word , is that abuse ? is there some in between ? it is murky right now . the only people having the abuse conversations are people who are impacted by it . the people who are developing the spaces aren t engaging in public dialogue about it . they are just sort of doing things with their platforms . that is not helpful or productive . how would you have companies like facebook resolve that problem ? i think that engaging in public conversation or a broader group discussion about what safety looks like online would be really important . i ve talked to the folks at twitter about safety on the twitter platform . i know that they re actually working quietly behind the scenes on making some changes . i do think there s a benefit to hearing from people who use the platform often about what it would look like . facebook , it s not always clear why they suspend some posts and why they deactivate some accounts . on twitter , there s a fine line between what is actually the thing that gets your account suspended versus the thing that s going to get your account deleted . moving forward , we will actually see much more nuance and much more consistency around how these things are applied . do you envision people generally becoming more aware of the fights against institutional inequality in the years to come ? in five years , the definition of what it means to be active and aware will be different . we ve already started to push the space and say that a protester s not only somebody who goes into the street . a protester is not only somebody who disrupts a board meeting . an organizer is not only somebody who sits in the basement of a church every wednesday . we have pushed the boundaries . when i think about what it means to protest , a protester is somebody who tells the truth in public and there are many ways to do that . technology has opened up a new frontier in that space . i do think that more people will be woke . more people will be aware , but how we measure that will be different . we ll see authentic relationships continue to build and blossom in digital spaces . they won t replace offline work , offline organizing , or offline relationships , but enhance them and allow for more connection , a deeper connection , and more sustained connection . what worries you as you look forward ? i worry sometimes that we have forgotten how to imagine what is possible . you think about things like slavery . it took a lot of imagination , some real mental leaps to be like , these people are worthless , these people are worth more . we re going to put them in chains . in concocting the problems , people were really imaginative in the worst ways . we re in these moments where we re like , okay , the problems are bad . let s figure out how to undo them . people are all of a sudden unimaginative . you say something like , give every kid born in a city in poverty a library , and people are like , we could never do that ! we could never afford it ! that is just so mind blowing to me , that people just lost their imagination . in concocting the problems , people were really imaginative in the worst ways . i also think that something that happens in the social justice spaces is this idea that if you don t organize with or like me , then you re not an organizer . we have to continue to create spaces for people to open up new spaces . that there is no one way to do this work . there s no one way to be someone who cares about justice or equity . there s no one way to use tech platforms . if we had used twitter the way that all the articles say that you use twitter , we wouldn t be here . we use it in a different way . we use vine in a different way . you think about the beginning of the protests . it was before periscope . it was before you could upload videos on twitter . we were really patchworking platforms to make them work for us . i ve met so many young people who feel like there s only one entrance to the work now . that if they don t do it this way , then it s not real . i worry that we might be missing out on some amazingly radical ways of organizing that we haven t thought about . you still sound very optimistic . are you ? i believe that our tomorrows can be better than our todays . my sense of hope is rooted so much in my time as a teacher . i taught sixth grade math in east area brooklyn . i think every day about fighting for building a world that is worthy of the kids that i taught . that is real to me . the other piece is that i grew up in baltimore . both my parents were drug addicts . my father raised us . my mother left when i was three . i say that because i grew up in so many ways in the community of recovery . i saw people put their lives back together in ways that they did not think they could . i saw people come back from what they thought was their most broken to be whole in a different way and to be sound and to be loving and to be caring in ways that they had not yet imagined at the time . those two things give me the sense of hope . it helped me believe and understand that some of this work is the slow painful work but it pays off in the end . the last thing is that in protests i met incredible people . i met so many people across the country who did not understand their own power , who did not believe the sound of their own voice and they found it over the last two years . every time i meet another person like that , it reminds me that the people are there . we just have to figure out how to organize . the people exist , the passion exists , and we can do this . this interview has been edited and condensed for clarity . 	 audiences associate the word horror with scary movies or terrifying novels . but over the past half decade , live theater and haunted house exhibits have merged , bringing new life to the genre with interactive , real world experiences that let audiences step through the screen and into their own personal tales of terror . in the future of fear , we re talking to the creators of some of the most striking , immersive horror experiences to see how they re taking the genre in directions it s never gone before . over the past month i ve been indoctrinated into a cult , had my wife kidnapped by vampires , and been choked to the ground by a mad king while searching for a mystical land called conscientia . and i did it all within a four mile radius in los angeles . for a city that s rightly considered more of a home to film and television , los angeles has been making strides over the past five years , establishing itself as a fertile playground for artists interested in exploring the worlds of immersive horror and interactive theater . fueled by southern california s active haunted house scene , they re pushing storytelling in daring new directions and are on the brink of bringing immersive entertainment mainstream . imagery from screenshot productions the rope . it s a tradition that actually dates back to the s in la , long before punchdrunk s sleep no more began its iconic new york run . that s when john krizanc s play tamara took up shop at hollywood s american legion hall for a multi year residency . starring anjelica huston , tamara was a groundbreaker , inviting audiences to move freely through a recreated italian villa while the characters walked , talked , and interacted around them . despite that head start , however , the immersive theater scene in los angeles stalled out , and it wasn t until jon braver s interactive horror play delusion opened in and the extreme haunted house blackout came to town a year later that the community began to develop newfound momentum . the scene was fairly anemic , says noah nelson , creator of ampnbspno proscenium , a newsletter and podcast devoted to chronicling immersive theater productions across the country . there were a couple of companies here and there . there were people experimenting with the form , some of whom have walked away , but it s not cheap to put these things on . in local upstarts like the speakeasy society began experimenting with small , personal shows staged in private homes , but for most audiences their first taste of immersive theater came from an entirely different avenue haunted houses . the new wave are full immersive experiences , not jump scare paradessouthern california s scare scene has been anchored for years by attractions like knott s scary farm and universal studio s halloween horror nights , but shows like delusion and blackout incorporated real actors and a sense of narrative they were interactive experiences , not just a parade past a series of expertly timed jump scares . i attended blackout the very first year that it was here in los angeles , says russell eaton , one half of ampnbspmy haunt life , a podcast that tracks southern california haunts and immersive theater . i m a film and tv editor by trade , and it was such a unique form of storytelling . it was non linear , it was a live event , and yet it didn t tell a traditional story . you had to gain a lot from it through your own interpretation . you had to participate . eaton wasn t alone in his fascination , as both fans and other creatives saw the introduction of live theater elements as the logical evolution of the horror scene . the line is getting so blurred , because haunts are becoming more interactive , says eaton s co host , mike fontaine . you have things like the tension experience . you have things like blackout , and delusion , where you become a part of the story . you can actually interact , and that s the biggest thing that has been happening , year after year . one of the people that saw that early blackout show was nicholas sherwin , jr . , who felt so impacted by the experience that he ended up working for the company behind the productions as a stage manager and production manager . in a trend of pay it forward inspiration that seems to repeat throughout the la community , sherwin eventually started his own immersive theater company , screenshot productions , which has been garnering attention for its unique shows that combine existential themes that expand well beyond sherwin s roots in immersive horror . this medium is a great conduit for imparting emotional knowledge to other people , sherwin tells me from the art gallery that serves as the stage of screenshot s latest production , the rope . the company s previous shows have encouraged audience members to re experience their own birth parturition and death bardo thodol , but the rope uses a quest based gaming dynamic to help players explore an immersive , tolkien esque fantasy world while trying to reach a magical land . it s a unique experience with a breathtaking visual pay off at the end that left me utterly breathless , and an example of how richly varied the work in los angeles has become . that s been enabled by a number of environmental factors . just from a pure talent side , the number of actors and would be creators that move to los angeles , only to find themselves without work from traditional hollywood sources , are legion . what this form calls for is for a kind of acting that is neither theater nor film , but somewhere in the middle , explains nelson , because you need the intimacy with the camera that a film actor has , but you also need the physical presence that a stage actor has . but these are also productions that take place inside actual physical spaces that must be transformed and explored , and la s notorious sprawl provides a unique canvas of opportunity . legions of unemployed actors and urban sprawl become a benefit in the first year , it was just like , oh this is going to be a panacea ! says nelson . this is going to be better than new york , because there s so much space . things are cheaper than the san francisco bay area , they re cheaper than new york , and there s all these actors ! and while that s been true , los angeles is still a city with a mindset built around film production , and the expectations both of landlords looking to lease properties and the city s permitting offices are not accustomed to theater shows that want to take over a space for months to put on an immersive horror or theater piece . it s part of the reason why the scene , burgeoning though it is , has up until recently remained so seasonal centered around the halloween haunted houses that have helped give it life . the strain is felt even by relative newcomers , like creator justin fix s creep la . only in its second year , creep has already set itself apart by merging the more traditional , walk through vibe of a haunted house with theatrical scene work and interactions , and while fix acknowledges that things work well at the moment this business can be a really lucrative business , he admits to truly expand to the kind of year round installations that new york audiences enjoy with shows like sleep no more and third rail projects then she fell is a different challenge . we would love to keep on pursuing this and really get some money behind us , so we can really be a company and a group of artists based on stability , he says , with shows in the fall and spring that would allow his troupe to expand beyond just horror . but it s a way of thinking that the city of los angeles still hasn t quite come around to . for what we re trying to do now , these short term , nine week , week runs , the city of los angeles calls them ghost tours . it s a mischaracterization that reveals just how behind the curve the city s thinking can be , and would be outright hilarious if it weren t standing in the way of more ambitious productions . my trip to creep la was totally normal and nothing strange happened . that situation is slowly starting to change , however , as the mainstream visibility for immersive horror and theater shows becomes increasingly high . darren lynn bousman s the tension experience was a game changer this year , not just because of its ambition and multi platform narrative , but because the combination of a brand name horror filmmaker working so effortlessly in immersive theater was able to bring a new level of attention to the medium and the la scene itself . and when tension closes on november th , bousman and his team will shoot a movie on its sets something that will undoubtedly bring even more attention before the immersive theater show returns next year with a new theme . it s a virtuous cycle a creator like bousman being inspired by a show like then she fell , and then making his own show that will go on to inspire others . how many people are going to be creating things after going through the tension experience ? asks fontaine . countless haunts in la have been inspired by going through blackout their first and second year . all of these things it s just one big circle . could be a race to la s first year round immersive showand tension isn t the only show with big ambitions on the horizon . sherwin tells me that screenshot productions is planning a new , large scale show called how should we then live for , that will ideally be a year round production . and when i spoke with delusion creator jon braver earlier this month , he said that his intent was to move into a permanent , fixed location for his shows moving forward as well something that would provide even more stability and opportunity to expand . it s an inflection point waiting to hit , right alongside the emergence of a broader cultural awareness of immersive experiences that includes everything from virtual reality and augmented reality , to immersive theme parks like the upcoming avatar and star wars lands . it s worth noting that walt disney imagineering , which engineers the company s various theme park attractions , is also located in southern california . and each of these art forms informs the other , creating an ecosystem of immersive entertainment where agency , presence , game mechanics , and storytelling meld to impact audiences in ways that passive mediums like film and television never can . when this stuff is working right , it s a matter of co creation , explains nelson . it s the performer and the participant creating a moment . even though it s a make believe moment , it still happened . it s an actual memory . and for the time being , when we re still far short of the westworld esque future where a bot can successfully replicate the sense of interacting with a human in real time , the best way to create those magic memories may just simply be in immersive theater . the performer is not an algorithm . you don t know what they re going to do , he says . that s the magic of theater . the rope runs through november th . creep la runs through october st . read the rest of our adventures in the world of immersive horror in ampnbspthe future of fear . 	 the thing about vine becoming the internet s premiere tool for making short form videos is that it happened almost completely by accident . its founders had envisioned their tool for making second clips as a way to help people capture casual moments in their lives and share them with friends . it was part of their pitch to twitter , which bought the company for a reported million in october , seeing it as a near perfect video analog to its flagship app s short form text posts . and yet even before the app launched , users had taken the second constraint as a creative challenge . something about that loop the way a vine endlessly rewound itself after completing , like a gif with audio encouraged people to put the app to strange uses . it was surprising , said dom hofmann , who founded vine with rus yusupov and colin kroll four months before twitter bought it . our original beta had something like or people on it , and even with that small group we started to see experimentation pretty early on . within weeks , it appeared that vine probably would never become the everyday video sharing tool its founders had envisioned . instead it became something wilder and much more culturally interesting . it became pretty clear as soon after we launched , hofmann said . watching the community and the tool push on each other was exciting and unreal , and almost immediately it became clear that vine s culture was going to shift towards creativity and experimentation . it immediately became clear that vine s culture was going to shift towards creativity . on thursday , the experimentation came to an end . with its own future increasingly uncertain , twitter said it would shut down vine s mobile app some time in the next few months . and while existing vines will remain on the web , a media format that had become beloved for its versatility now appears headed the way of betamax . interviews with seven former executives reveal a portrait of a company whose cultural impact far outstripped its strategic benefits to twitter . working a continent apart from their parent company , vine s small , new york based team struggled to grow its user base or find ways to make money . while vine once boasted a commanding lead over other social video apps , it failed to keep pace as competitors added features something that ultimately drove its biggest stars away . the app generated more beloved memes and cultural moments than most apps with twice as many users but twitter s mounting core business problems this year all but ensured it would eventually be sold off or shuttered . ian padgham saw the potential in vine both creative and monetary before almost anyone . as a member of twitter s marketing team in , he was responsible for making videos that explained how the service worked . his early film about working at twitter is likely one of the most watched recruiting videos ever made . after twitter bought vine , he sat in on meetings with the marketing team and began to explore its potential as a creative tool . padgham s first vine was a simple time lapse video of the view from his window at twitter . he loved the second limit , which forced him to think differently about storytelling . it s kind of like drawing in microsoft paint , he said . it used to be the worst app ever , but you couldn t get distracted by the bells and whistles . you couldn t get distracted by the bells and whistles . padgham began making vines every day before he left for work , and they soon grew both in popularity and in ambition . he cut out photo prints and spent three hours painstakingly turning them into a tribute to eadweard muybridge , a photographer who did pioneering work in motion pictures . he stood underneath big ben and recorded a time lapse of himself appearing to move the hands of the clock with his fingers , a loop that was viewed more than million times . soon brands like sony and airbnb were contacting padgham asking him to make vines on their behalf , and six months after vine launched he quit twitter to do it full time . in , vine began allowing users to record clips with their phones front facing cameras , and usage exploded . an ecosystem of young stars sprung up around the service , which evolved into a kind of live action cartoon network . there was zach king , whose eye popping magic tricks earned him million followers and more than . billion views . or amanda cerny , whose physical comedy earned more than . billion views . logan paul , whose vines looped more than billion times , parlayed his following into a series of acting roles while earning , to create a single vine for a brand , according to a recent minutes report . in a look at how video platforms were creating the next generation of celebrities , the new yorker put vine at the center . a vine s blink quick transience , combined with its endless looping , simultaneously squeezes time and stretches it , tad friend wrote . the app generated countless memes , and grew increasingly self referential over time , so that a single second clip might reference a dozen previous hit vines . and yet in retrospect it seems clear that was when vine peaked . research firm park data says . percent of all android users opened vine in august today that number has fallen to . percent . twitter never said how many people used vine , but once claimed it had an audience of million people on the web . former executives say that a major competitive challenged emerged in the form of instagram , which introduced second video clips in june . instagram video was the beginning of the end , one former executive told me . vine didn t move fast enough to differentiate . instagram courted celebrities with longer videos , eventually bumping the limit to a more flexible seconds . vines didn t break the second barrier until earlier this year , and its extended videos never caught on . instagram also began promoting celebrity accounts in its popular explore tab , bringing them attention that vine found difficult to match . marketers began shifting their money away from vine , and stars followed . vine didn t move fast enough to differentiate . meanwhile snapchat , which allowed users to send each other second video clips and later broadcast them publicly , ultimately became the casual mass market lifecasting app that vine s founders had once pitched their product to twitter as . when other platforms surged ahead , some vine stars began negotiating to be paid to post on the service . but the talks stalled , and by may the washington post found that vine users with large followings were sharing new videos much less frequently . at the management level , vine was rarely stable for long . hofmann quit in to pursue a new startup . kroll followed him out the door later that year . twitter laid off yusupov , who was vine s creative director , as part of last year s mass layoffs . don t sell your company ! , he tweeted on thursday . jason toff took over vine in and led it for two years before quitting this year to work on virtual reality projects at google . hannah donovan became general manager in march after working at a series of music startups . her lack of previous experience running a company led some employees i spoke with to question whether her hiring might be the beginning of the end . years of executive churn likely contributed to vine s failure to make money . for a while , brands were happy to pay vine stars directly to make ads and share them to their millions of followers . but after snapchat and instagram grew into hundreds of millions of daily users , marketers interest in vine dropped significantly . they had once longed for ways to grow their own followings on the app through paid placement offerings similar to twitter s promoted tweets and promoted accounts . but vine never came through with any options , in part because the founders resisted monetization from the start , sources said . it never took a cut of stars deals with brands , although twitter bought a social media talent agency last year in hopes it could begin to do so indirectly . by this year , twitter executives were discussing ways to bring twitter s various video offerings together somehow , sources said . in june , the company held discussions about absorbing vine into twitter s flagship app . to vine employees , those discussions served as evidence that twitter never valued vine as a standalone property the way its audience did . but no vine integration ever materialized , and this summer top vine executives began heading for the exits . twitter explored selling the app , according to the new york times , but it never found a buyer . vine didn t ship anything of consequence for a year . a couple of things plagued vine , and it all stems from the same thing , which is a lack of unity and leadership on a vision , said ankur thakkar , who was vine s head of editorial from until may of this year . he told me he was proud of the work the app did to highlight rising stars , including ruth b , who earned a record deal after his team gave her a coveted editor s pick award . but by the end the company was rudderless , he said . that trickled down into all of the project teams and the things they were working on , he said . vine didn t ship anything of consequence for a year . the stars who grew famous on vine continue posting their work on other platforms . but they re no longer pushing the surprisingly elastic boundaries of the second medium . the most important of part of vine has always been the people that are on it , dom hofmann told me . it s also the only part that can t be replicated . so i m going to miss them . even though i can and do follow some people from vine on instagram or snapchat or twitter or wherever they ve decided to go , it just doesn t feel the same . it s like the band is breaking up and everyone s going solo . 	 lots of pharmaceutical companies want to make drugs targeting women who have low sex drives or trouble becoming aroused . and now , the food and drug administration has new guidelines these companies should follow . the new draft guidelines come a year after the administration approved the so called female viagra a drug called addyi that promised to make women want sex more . the decision was controversial , and many opponents said that side effects like dizziness and nausea outweighed the benefits . women had to take the drug every day and couldn t drink while taking it and after all that , only percent at most experienced the benefit of . more sexually satisfying events a month . fda spokesperson andrea fischer said that the administration s decision on addyi has not changed and that it still believes that addyi s benefits outweigh its risks . future drugmakers targeting female desire now know what the fda wants in the trials , and what results in the last of three phases of testing are likely to get their drug approved . these guidelines replace earlier ones that used now outdated diagnostic information and didn t include comments from a meeting the administration held two years ago about female sexual issues . sexual problems can t be because of relationship issuesfemale sexual dysfunction is a complicated topic because it s caused by a combination of physical , psychological , and social issues from stress to guilt about sex to hormonal imbalance . it s very hard to say that dysfunction is caused only by one of these factors , says kyle stephenson , a psychologist who runs the sexuality and relationships lab at willamette university . so treating the dysfunction is more complicated than just taking a pill for it . you can intervene in different ways with a pill , in therapy , couples counseling and many of those can eventually affect all of the factors , he adds . if you intervene with couples therapy , that should affect biology . if you intervene with a pill , that should affect psychology . it s all interconnected . the new guidelines specify that subjects in clinical trials can t present sexual problems caused by another medical condition , medicines taken for another condition , or problems within the relationship . this last point is one that many activists and scholars that study this issue find important . they argue that it s perfectly reasonable to believe that women might have a low sex drive not because there s something wrong with them , but because they re in a bad relationship and so it s important to make sure we re not using drugs to fix an interpersonal problem . measuring sex drive is very complicatedsome people are very wary of using drugs because a low sex drive can possibly be fixed with things like counseling . mamta mamik , a professor of gynecology at mount sinai hospital , disagrees . if you just medicate and don t treat the other problems , it ll be back to square one , but i disagree that medication should just be put under the rug , she says . we can t say it s always just a psychological problem , it could be a real problem with a real solution and feel those women deserve chance to get treatment . the discussion is similar to that around depression , she adds . depression is another problem that many people think should be treated only with counseling and not anti depressants . right now , one of the most common ways to measure sexual dysfunction is the female sexual function index fsfi . it s a survey that asks questions , including how often did you feel sexual desire ? and how would you rate your level of sexual desire ? though both stephenson and mamik say that the fsfi is probably the best scale we have , the fda has doubts about whether it should be used by pharma companies . first , the fda is worried that some questions can lead to misleading scores . if someone taking a drug reports that they have more sexual fantasies than before , but don t actually want more sex , their score will improve . but it probably won t solve the problem they came in for . another worry is that the survey will be inaccurate because it asks people to think back over the past month . instead , the fda recommends that women record their symptoms every day . no scale is perfect because measuring sex drive is very complicated . it can be hard to separate subjective experience with physical indicators . one question on the fsfi asks how often a woman becomes lubricated during sex . thing is , women with sexual dysfunction are often not very aware of their bodies , and so their self report might be inaccurately low and lead to a focus on physical problems instead of encouraging women to notice their bodies more , says stephenson . we need to develop a better scale . you need to look at everything , look at childhood events , individual factors , anything that may have happened in a relationship , physical factors , says mamik at mount sinai . it should include a holistic perspective of a person , it should include all the causes that may cause problems , including guilt or anxiety a lot of women feel guilty about sex and that s a problem in causing arousal . there is already at least one other drug in the works to treat low sex drivewhen it comes to outcomes , the guidelines say that success from a drug is measured by how much more sex , arousal , or sexually satisfying events or how much less distress a woman had compared to before . in the past , a lot of focus has been on the number of sexually satisfying events , but research suggests that it s not a good measure because the frequency of sex can depend on so many external factors that don t have to do with desire or distress , says stephenson . the real question for most of the researchers i m familiar with , and certainly for me , is two primary points level of desire and level of distress , he says . if someone is happy with their subjective experience , even if they re not necessarily feeling more sexual desire , then the job is done . finally , the drug should be tested in at least two trials that show it to be effective . people in the trial should be sexually active women over the age of , including menopausal women , who are in a stable relationship . the last factor makes it less likely that any improvement is because of the relationship itself improving , or because of a better partner . whether there s an actual market for these drugs remains mostly conjecture . very few people bought addyi , which is made by valeant , but other pharmaceutical companies remain interested in developing drugs that fix women s sex drives . the fda won t comment on drugs until they are approved , but there is already at least one other drug in the works , called palatin . the public is welcome to comment on the new guidelines until december . rachel becker contributed to this report . 	 today s big tech news might be the fancy looking surface studio pc , but microsoft also decided to make a major virtual reality announcement during its windows event a whole new line of vr headsets with built in tracking sensors , starting at the surprisingly low price of . manufactured by microsoft partners like asus , acer , lenovo , hp , and dell , the headsets were shown briefly , and in little detail . but we saw just enough to raise a lot of questions about how they ll actually work and what they ll mean for virtual reality . we re partnering with top pc makers to build a range of innovative vr headsets starting at . coming in . microsoftevent pic . twitter . com pmnfbjfze windows windows october , what is inside out , six degree of freedom tracking , and why is it a big deal ? the major selling point of microsoft s new line of devices is what s known as inside out , six degree of freedom tracking and if they pull it off , it could mark a legitimate breakthrough for virtual reality . six degrees of freedom refers to motion tracking that can tell when you re moving through space , not just turning your head . right now , it s the key difference between a high end headset like the oculus rift , and a mid range or cheap one like the gear vr or google cardboard . but in order to enable dof , systems like the rift require an external tracking system that makes the whole setup more complicated and less portable . this is where inside out tracking comes in . instead of having an external camera read the position of leds on your head which is how the rift works , sensors built directly into the headset will detect how the wearer is moving and adjust their in vr position to match . as microsoft executive vp terry myerson puts it , this means people would have zero need for a dedicated vr room they d just put the headset on and start moving around . how is this different from hololens ? hololens is an augmented microsoft prefers mixed reality headset , which inserts holograms into reality . virtual reality headsets totally overwrite your view of the world , using magnifying lenses and a flat screen to project an image around your entire field of vision . you can load the same d objects in both , but a vr headset will display it in a completely virtual environment , while hololens will project it on top of whatever you re already looking at . that said , there are some significant similarities , including the fact that hololens uses inside out tracking to pin its holograms in place and in fact , myerson tells us that the headsets will be leveraging all kinds of hololens technologies . how much will you actually be able to move ? this is a serious , and unsettled , question . the ultimate promise of inside out tracking is that you can pretty much create the holodeck as long as you have physical space to move , the headset will be able to tell where you re going . but that requires hardware and software that can track location accurately over long distances . hololens lets people move around entire rooms , but the consequences for a hologram drifting a little which , in my experience , does happen are a lot less severe than having your entire world slip out of place . in today s demo , nobody moved more than a couple of steps , going from one end of a closet sized room to another . even this would be a marked improvement over non positionally tracked headsets like the gear vr , because being in a world that doesn t react to your motion at all can be jarring or even nauseating . but it s not equivalent to the experience you d get in most high end vr headsets . what kind of computer will this require ? from what we ve seen so far , the headset also isn t self contained like hololens it s wired to a windows computer of some sort . myerson knocked the rift and vive for requiring expensive pcs , and a press image showed the headset alongside what looks like a lenovo yoga laptop , not a supercharged gaming machine . this would make it a more accessible device , although it could also mean its graphical capabilities are limited . on the flip side , it s worth noting that hp and dell are both working on powerful vr backpacks , through their respective omen and alienware gaming brands . right now , they effectively only support the htc vive , but they d also be a perfect fit for the headsets microsoft is describing . how will you interact with the headsets ? controllers are a bigger and bigger part of the virtual reality equation . htc has its trusty remotes , playstation vr uses the aging move controllers , oculus touch controllers are coming out in december , and google designed a simple remote for its newly announced daydream headset . microsoft hasn t shown us a dedicated physical controller , and on stage , people seemed to interact with the headset via voice command , like hololens . if microsoft s partners are using hololens camera tech , we could see them adopt the air tap hand gesture as well . this is far from the most robust interface out there , but it neatly solves the basic problem of interactivity without requiring any new hardware . for more complicated interactions , people could turn to mice , keyboards , gamepads , and other existing systems . where was oculus ? a year ago , microsoft and oculus seemed to have a tight relationship oculus shipped its headset with an xbox one gamepad , and microsoft announced that you d be able to play xbox games on your rift . but that latter promise still hasn t panned out , and neither oculus nor the rift apparently merited a shout out at today s event . in fact , myerson implicitly trashed the headset as less immersive than microsoft s new lineup . you could argue that this is because microsoft is treating inside out vr as a totally separate category from the rift and vive which is also sold through the microsoft store , but wasn t mentioned today . but there s still one odd wrinkle oculus announced its own inside out headset , called the santa cruz prototype , just a few weeks ago . it s not quite the same as what microsoft showed off for one thing , it s totally self contained , not tethered to a laptop . but if there was ever a time for the two companies to work together , this was it and oculus was nowhere to be seen . when will these come out , and how much exactly will they cost ? we still don t know what individual microsoft partners headsets will look like or be named . microsoft says that they ll be coming in , and they re described as part of the windows creators update , a big d focused upgrade to the operating system . if they re released exactly at launch , which is by no means a given , that narrows it down to next spring . microsoft is supposed to be providing more details soon at the winhec conference in shenzhen , china . as for pricing , the headsets start at , compared to the playstation vr , oculus rift , and htc vive . but we don t know the upper price range , or how much the price will vary based on manufacturer and specifications . myerson tells us that some of those headsets being worked on are just fantastic , and won t be at lower price points , but some will be at these low price points . microsoft has promised something that doesn t yet exist in mainstream vr , at a price that s potentially very unusual . almost every major vr headset release so far has slipped by several months at least , and prices have often ended up higher than people expected . so until we have firm launch details , you should consider these headsets next generation products , not just around the corner competitors to the rift or vive . that said , they re certainly an exciting idea and we ll be eagerly awaiting more news from microsoft s partners . microsoft s wednesday event recapped	 at public events like conventions , strapping a virtual reality headset onto your face can feel uncomfortably intimate . face masks can get sweaty and grimy , and lenses can fog up with other people s breath . but earlier this week , an anonymous chat transcript suggested that headsets were spreading something even less savory herpes . ocular herpes is going around vr headsets , ones that are used to share with people , wrote an unnamed developer , according to logs posted by youtube game streamer drift r . redacted game studio told us its sic going around . have to clean headsets regularly . when drift r asked for more details , the developer named someone who had gotten it , according to the studio . the news confirmed people s worst fears about sharing headsets , and it lengthened an already long list of vr health concerns , from the undeniable motion sickness to the fanciful forgetting reality . but if a vr developer did end up with ocular herpes , they probably didn t get it from a headset . and the odds that they ll pass it on that way are just as low . herpes simplex is nothing to take lightly , but it s extremely commonas its name suggests , ocular herpes refers to a range of eye conditions generally caused by the same herpes simplex virus that s behind cold sores . it can appear as a rash on the eyelids , or as lesions directly on the eye , causing symptoms like redness , discomfort , blurry vision , and light sensitivity . mild forms clear up within a couple of weeks and can be easily mistaken for ordinary pink eye , but a less common manifestation stromal keratitis can seriously scar the eye and damage vision . as with cold sores , there s no way to completely eradicate the virus , although antiviral medication can keep symptoms at bay . eye herpes is spreading via vr headsets ! you know those big events where people try vr for the first time ? well this dev got herpes from it ! pic . twitter . com ngnqk qifb drift r drift r october , ocular herpes is nothing to take lightly , and there s a huge stigma around the virus in general , especially since it can take the form of a sexually transmitted disease . but whether or not you ve ever touched a vr headset , there s a good chance you re already exposed to it . as of , over half of to year old americans tested positive for hsv , which is behind the bulk of ocular herpes cases . far fewer people have hsv , which usually results in genital herpes . globally , those numbers climb to over two thirds of the world s population . and as high as the overall infection rate is , vr headsets aren t actually a very good vector . herpes is not typically spread through objects , says sonal tuli , chair of the university of florida s department of ophthalmology . the virus has a difficult time surviving outside the body , so it s usually spread through direct bodily contact with an infected person , through something like a kiss . and most visible cases of herpes , she says , are actually flareups of dormant infections that have been around for years , often since childhood caused by a fever or some other external trigger . the odds would be like the odds of transmitting herpes on toilet seats . it s highly unlikely , but not absolutely impossible , that someone could get ocular herpes through a vr headset , says todd margolis , chair of the washington university school of medicine s department of ophthalmology and visual sciences . the odds would be like the odds of transmitting herpes on toilet seats . it s more probable , he says , that the developer in drift r s anecdote was already infected and had simply experienced a reactivation . it is also more likely that he was kissed by somebody at the meeting who had an active cold sore and was shedding infectious virus . sharing virtual reality headsets can certainly carry health risks . in addition to dirt and sweat , headsets could hypothetically play host to lice or harmful bacteria and viruses including the one behind non herpes conjunctivitis . adenovirus is very infectious and unlike herpes , survives quite well on inanimate surfaces like plastic , says margolis . in order to prevent someone with an active case of pink eye from passing it on , exhibitors would need to wipe the headset down , preferably with soap and water margolis says that alcohol is less effective for adenovirus , although it s very good at killing herpes . many vr developers keep antimicrobial wipes or covers around show booths , although there s no standardized hygiene policy . sony gave developers boxes of playstation branded wet wipes , and valve has used protective paper covers on its vive headsets during conventions . the organizers of major meetup group vrla say they ve put strong language about cleaning headsets in their exhibitor manual , and are unaware of any health scares during their shows , although they told the verge they ll be handing out protection to every exhibitor and attendee at the summer expo . as vr health scares go , this is a pretty mild oneso far , though , it s been difficult to isolate the risk of donning a vr headset at a public event from the risks of shaking hands , passing around controllers , trading business cards , or just breathing fetid convention center air . the most famous case of pink eye , recounted on the games site destructoid , appears to have been merely a burst blood vessel . we reached out to drift r for more information about this unlucky , allegedly herpes plagued developer . but he says they wish to remain as anonymous as possible , and so far , we haven t been able to verify the story . the slight possibility of getting any form of herpes might be enough to scare some people off of vr , although treating the virus as a fate worse than death arguably just makes the stigma against it even worse . and this rumor is a good reminder to observe basic hygiene rules around something you put on your face . but as vr health scares go , this one sounds a lot worse than it actually is . 	 an exploding phone seems like a freak accident , but the same chemical properties that make batteries work also make them likely to catch fire . samsung is learning this the hard way , as it becomes the latest company to recall a device in this case , its new galaxy note phone because the batteries could be dangerous . when batteries explode , it s often the failure of manufacturers to make sure no explosion will happen . exploding batteries can be the consequence of overeager companies pushing technology to the limit . as our screens gets bigger and phones more powerful , they need more energy , but most of us are unwilling to give up battery life or charging speed . we ve already achieved almost percent of the maximum battery life theoretically possible from the lithium ion battery , according to lynden archer , a materials scientist at cornell university , so manufacturers are pushing the limits more and more to eke out only a little bit more energy . there s been a bit of an arms race where every manufacturer of a smartphone wants to get the highest battery life , he says . this trend in the field is producing more and more of a tendency for overcharging so all these models of failure are becoming more commonplace . samsung blames the galaxy note recall on the fact that , in some devices , two parts of the battery that should not have touched came together . but there are many common ways for rechargeable lithium ion batteries to break , and this usually happens because we keep demanding more from the devices . lithium ion batteries are the type used in almost all smartphones and electronics . engineers use lithium because it s light and can hold a lot of energy . as we reported earlier , samsung has stressed that reports of problematic batteries account for less than . percent of the entire volume sold but there s no doubt that this global recall is more than just a minor snafu for the consumer electronics giant . the note launched just a few weeks ago and was met with mostly positive reviews , including our own . more importantly , samsung managed to make waves in the smartphone market weeks before apple launched its highly anticipated new iphone . now , samsung s successful launch has been marred by exploding batteries . to understand what makes a battery safe , it s helpful to know how they work . there are two electrodes , or electrical conductors , on opposite sides . one electrode holds positively charged ions and is called the cathode . the cathode is filled with lithium and that is where the fuel is stored . the opposite electrode holds negatively charged ions and is called the anode . during charging , lithium ions move from the cathode to the anode . when the battery is in use , the lithium moves in the opposite direction . in between are ampnbspchemicals called electrolytes that conduct the current by helping ions move more easily between the two sides . but even though ions need to move from side to side , the anode and the cathode themselves should never touch because they ll redirect energy to the electrolytes . to prevent this from happening , battery makers insert separators in between . batteries can fail when they re charged too much or too fastthat s what went wrong with the galaxy note the separators were flawed and let the two electrodes touch . this is considered the worst possible failure because it will most certainly lead to fire and possibly even an explosion , says archer . when the electrodes come into contact , all the energy being pumped into the battery goes directly to the electrolytes in the middle instead of in the electrodes on the side . electrolytes aren t very stable to begin with and the quick movement they facilitate also leads to instability . when there s a lot of heat whether through the two electrodes touching , or something as simple as it being too hot outside ampnbspit can make the electrolyte react with the other chemicals and create gas in a way that releases even more heat . each time the chemicals react , the gases release more and more heat at a faster and faster rate . this creates an uncontrolled positive feedback loop called thermal runaway , which can end in a fire . this is why many phones shut down automatically when it s hot . but there are other ways that batteries become explosive . they can also fail when they re charged too much , or too fast . overcharging is like filling up a bucket with too much water . it doesn t matter how slowly you go because if you pour in too much , the bucket will overflow . in the case of batteries , overcharging happens when too much lithium goes into the anode . this isn t something you risk from keeping your phone plugged in all night ampnbspmost batteries are designed to automatically prevent overcharging . rather , it s a manufacturer defect that can happen when the circuitry that prevents this from happening is faulty . the battery is like a rubber band , says dan steingart , a materials scientist at princeton university . when you re charging the battery , you re stretching the rubber band when you re using it , you re releasing ampnbspit . just like a rubber band can break if you stretch it too much , putting too much energy into one side will ruin the battery . some scientists are developing a kind of electrolyte that won t burst into flamesthen there s the problem of going too fast . this means trying to drive too much current into the battery , which is a danger for the so called fast charging technology . though they weren t the issue here , samsung does offer fast charging tech . if the charger is incompatible with the battery for any reason , the battery can also short out . this can be avoided by making sure the charger and the battery are meant to work together . charging too much or too fast can lead to a problem called plating . think of the battery like two egg crates . lithium ions need to shuttle between the spaces in the two egg plates to be safely deposited inside , says steingart . if you charge the battery slowly , the lithium has time to find its spot in the egg crate as it goes back and forth . but go too quickly or have too much , and lithium will just deposit itself on the outside of the egg crate and then onto itself . then , each time you recharge , the lithium builds on itself and forms needle like structures called dendrites that can internally short out the battery . the last common source of failure happens when companies try to make batteries store more power by increasing voltage . voltage is a way to measure force . think of voltage like the height of a waterfall , while current is like the amount of water flowing . the higher the voltage , the more power there is in the battery , so manufacturers try to pump this up by adding elements like nickel to the lithium . but again ampnbsp the higher the voltage is , the more likely the electrolytes are to combine in a way that makes them catch fire . some scientists are trying to develop a kind of electrolyte that won t burst into flames as easily . these electrolytes , called ionic liquids , need a lot more heat to form flammable gas , says surya moganty , a chemical engineer who is the chief technology officer of nohms technology . these are often much safer , but there can be challenges with battery life , he says . until we get there though , most of us are stuck with lithium ion batteries . the very fact that these work is an engineering marvel , says steingart , but that doesn t take away from the instability of the devices . anything that can hold this much energy and you can potentially get all the energy out in a couple minutes you should treat like a potential bomb regardless of what it s made out of , he adds . battery tech is continually advancing , but not at the rate of our desire for faster charging and longer battery life and it s up to the manufacturers to remember this , and protect us from what we want . this story was originally published on september , and has been updated to include video . 	 motion sickness has long been the bane of virtual reality . it s associated most strongly with first person shooters and walking games , which create a stark mismatch between your real and virtual body . move too fast in the game , and your stomach won t respond favorably in the real world . yet play a game where the movements of your virtual character match your own , and you might run into a wall or your coffee table . vr game developers know these boundaries all too well , and they re now beginning to move beyond these limitations in unique and fascinating ways . the results were out in full force at last week s annual oculus connect developer conference . oculus is on the brink of releasing its touch motion controllers , which means designers building for its rift headset are dealing with more and more realistic body motion in vr . take , for example , lone echo , a new rift exclusive which uses the physics bending freedom of zero gravity to overcome the hurdles of in game motion . lone echo relies on the physics bending freedom of zero gravitylone echo developer ready at dawn relies on an ingenious method to replicate the feeling of floating in space specifically , in a mining operation within a ring of saturn . instead of asking players to move around a confined physical space , ready at dawn chose to create a system of constant motion . after all , you re never perfectly still in space unless you tether yourself down . in lone echo , players drift endlessly , moving between all manner of levers and bars and other objects . while adrift , you can steer with small bursts of air from your hands , activated by buttons on the touch controller . the sensation is disorienting at first , teetering on the edge of discomfort even with all vr s recent advances in minimizing motion sickness . yet once you ve got your bearings , lone echo s movement system feels natural . you stop worrying about the disconnect between your body and your brain , because the element of zero gravity fills the gap . after a few minutes , the thought of motion sickness begins to fade away . when you just have parity with your head and your hands , moving around is really nauseating , nathan phail liff , ready at dawn s art director , told me at connect last week . it was an inspiration for us looking at how astronauts move around the international space station . so it s a really aggressive movement model , but it s also really comfortable . moving around in virtual reality is not easy . to make it work and make it work well the headset requires quite a few strategically placed cameras . even then , without the right sensors and a large enough space , you can t really walk around inside a virtual environment as you can in the real world unless you re confined to a small , boxy room . this is a problem for vr game developers , many of whom are trying to create complex experiences that let players take a more active role instead of just stand or sit passively as objects and scenes fly at them on screen . and that s before dealing with motion sickness . the dream technology is still miles away in science fiction territorydown the line , we might have advanced wireless vr headsets that let us wander through rooms big and small perhaps even outside . software will also create intricate virtual environments that overlay perfectly on top of the real world , or in some cases mix the realities into one . oculus is working on developing such a headset , announced as a prototype last week codenamed santa cruz . of course , the dream technology is still miles away in science fiction territory a matrix or ready player one style system that would let you move your body in a simulation while laying perfectly still in the real world . so while the hardware marches onward , vr developers are coming up with clever and innovative ways to help us move without forcing us to lift our feet off the ground . lone echo is an exceptional example , because it both solved an integral problem and did so in a way true to virtual reality , by letting players experience the impossible . but other game companies with more traditional first person titles are rethinking the fundamentals of game design to help it accommodate modern vr . one of those fundamental mechanisms is teleportation . teleportation has been a neat special power in video games for decades the upcoming stealth title dishonored lets you magically blink past enemies to avoid them . in vr , though , teleportation becomes more than just a trick . it s a substitute for having to move either a controller s joystick or your physical body . epic games new oculus shooting title robo recall has perhaps the most polished movement system of any recent vr game because it uses such a fluid , freewheeling teleportation system . like other games using teleportation , instead of asking you to move via an analog stick or goofily wander around your living room with a headset on , the game lets you pick any portion of the environment to warp to . this wouldn t be exceptional if it weren t so seamless . many first person vr games nowadays rely on some type of warping method to get players from one spot of the map to another . robo recall s predecessor , a tech demo called bullet train , helped pioneer the system . the stealth game budget cuts , for htc and valve s vive headset , uses a popular mechanism borrowed from the iconic portal series to let you rip oval shaped holes in spacetime . other games , like the vr version of superhot , don t involve locomotion at all , choosing instead to let the action come at you . in robo recall , you re given an unusually polished and complex teleport system . to indicate a location you d like to warp to , press a controller stick and a blue line cascades across the map . not only can you pick where you move , by twisting the stick , you can choose which direction you ll be facing when you get there . it s fast , and with a few minutes of practice , incredibly intuitive . robo recall gives you an unusually polished teleport systemin robo recall , you re given a set of firearms to dispatch armies of rebelling androids who come at you in huge numbers , similar to an old arcade shooter . it sounds rudimentary , but in vr it s an exhilarating experience to fire at enemies with high precision and reload weapons by putting your hands to your hips . the experience is made even better by the ability to move around the map . that way , you can take advantage of the high ground in certain spots and even dispatch slow moving boss enemies by quickly jumping back and forth around them . other rift developers are using similar teleportation tricks , but with their own takes . arktika . , from metro developer a games , is another vr first person shooter with a stronger narrative focus . to keep players on track and to aid them in firefights with enemies , a games allows teleportation only between certain preordained locations . wth free choice , players can potentially put themselves in a bad spot , says jon bloch , a senior producer at a . it s true . in robo recall , a less experienced player could frantically teleport around the map without ensuring they ll be facing a strategic direction . in arktika . s gunfights , you can move closer to the action by teleporting to spots designated by the color yellow . if it s too hectic there , you can retreat to a safer location designated by the color blue . with free choice , players can potentially put themselves in a bad spot . these methods are all ways of circumventing the fact that full body movement in vr is still hard and expensive to achieve . the htc vive s room scale vr still requires a lot of workarounds , and systems that allow infinite walking , like the virtuix omni treadmill or the void s complex redirected walking system , are still incredibly niche . even so , games that get it right let players experience some of the freedom of modern video games in a way that only vr can allow without having to risk their physical body in the real world . 	 it s a wednesday night in north east london and upstairs at the vortex jazz club the machines are calling the shots . the human spectators are jiggling happily in their seats , and the musicians are undeniably flesh and blood , sweating and straining at their instruments . but the music itself is the product of electronic brains trained to soak up the music of great artists and strain out new melodies . this is the first concert consisting almost entirely of music composed by artificial intelligence says professor geraint wiggins of queen mary s university at the beginning of the evening . in about a few minutes we ll be listening to medieval chants , baroque chorales , and jazz and pop all made by artificial intelligence with the help of computer scientists who programmed the evening s composers . as wiggins reads out a list of the contributors there s an excited buzz in the room . the atmosphere is a little like a school recital no surprise given that most of the audience members are the computer scientists themselves , keen to see how their progeny performs as well as assess the competition . the first concert consisting almost entirely of music composed by artificial intelligence to make that judgement easier , says wiggins , the evening s music will be in the style of familiar genres or composers . if we just produce computer computer music , who s to say if it s any good ? he asks as we settle in tight rows of french bistro chairs . we re trying to emulate styles through the ages so you can recognize them and tell us whether they re any good . singers tackle an ai written piece of choral music . image credit james vincent the verge the other , unmentioned , reason for this mimicry is that it best fits the current capabilities of ai . the bulk of the concert s music is the product of deep learning a type of artificial intelligence that tech companies like google and facebook have used to great effect for tasks like speech and facial recognition . deep learning is fantastic at sifting out patterns from large libraries of data , and then either labeling that information saying , for example , that s a cat , this is a human , and so on or creating completely new data that fits what it s previously seen . like a photocopier with an unruly imaginationin the case of tonight s concerts , researchers fed their deep learning systems sheet music from specific composers and time periods . the machines then analyzed recurrent patterns a series of notes , harmonic sequences , and so on and created something similar . you can think of this as a photocopier with an unruly imagination . you feed in your latest report from work and out the other end comes something that looks broadly the same , but is , for some reason , talking about a company that doesn t exist and citing sales figures that don t add up . you can argue that this doesn t really count as composition , and that the computers are just aping humans . but so what , said the scientists at the concert can you really say that any artist is without precedence ? aren t all creative acts simply the sum of their influences ? shut up and let my kid play . at times during the night i could see their point . a jazz combo led by mark d inverno an accomplished pianist and professor of computer science at the university of goldsmiths sounded just like the real thing . i wouldn t go so far as to say that things got heated , but toes were tapping , drinks were knocked over by me , anyway , and there was even a bit of light whooping from the assembled scientists . the first ai written song d inverno played had been distilled from the works of miles davis , using software developed by sony s computer labs in paris . the same software responsible for the ai pop song daddy s car , also performed that evening . the ai s contribution was just a lead sheet a single piece of paper with a melody line and accompanying chords but in the hands of d inverno and his bandmates , it swung . they started off running through the jaunty main theme , before devolving into a series of solos that d inverno later informed me were all human meaning , all improvised . the ai can t handle structure making it perfect for jazzd inverno s successful performance is due in part to the fact that jazz is a genre that s well suited for an ai composer . although deep learning systems are great at pattern recognition , they can be remarkably short sighted , working only in relatively short sequences of notes . they ll happily produce a couple of bars of melody , but can t understand the overarching structure of a piece the way a symphony might return to a central theme , for example , repeating the melody with added tweaks and flourishes so that it moves into new territory . when it comes to jazz , this is less of a problem . people don t expect structure from jazz . during the interval , i spoke to stefan latner , a scientist at the austrian research institute for artificial intelligence , as he stepped outside for a cigarette . he was bullish about the future of ai composers , and said they d soon be generating background music for things like adverts . but he also bemoaned their current inability to grasp musical form . the problem is that these models only learn the statistics of music , said latner . we can give you probability of the next note being a c or an f or an e , but we don t look much beyond that . latner s own contributions to the evening a pair of melodies generated by a deep learning systems trained on mozart s collected piano sonatas demonstrated the challenge of structure perfectly . the first piece , named mozart unchained performed by pianist carlos chac n , was barely recognizable as classical music . it was not discordant , but the melody was all over the place like something written in the mid th century . it was angular and unexpected , taking sharp turns as if trying to shake off the listener s patience and goodwill . the second , named mozart constrained , was much more coherent . you d never mistake it for the genuine article , but there were passages no longer than seconds that sounded familiar . common musical patterns appeared throughout , like an albert bass figure in the left hand a way of playing broken chords as four successive notes that go low high middle high or a type of melodic ornamentation known as a ampnbspmordent . memories of playing mozart sonatas flooded back to me , and my fingers twitched in recognition brought to life by the frankenstein sonata assembled from various parts . the difference between the two pieces , though , is not the computer s intuition it s latner s . the unchained version was made by giving the deep learning system as little guidance as possible , while for the constrained version latner pruned and tightened its parameters , limiting its ability to generate all but the most statistically likely melodies . in some places , it felt to me like the system might even be lifting passages wholesale from mozart , but latner couldn t say for sure if this was happening . latner s pieces raised big questions about ai generated music for me when does human intervention outweigh a machine s skill ? in one way or another , computers are always going to rely on humans for their judgement on what makes good music , and what doesn t we have to program them , after all . a critical , creative accomplice . speaking to d inverno after the concert , he suggested that this was the real future of music written by artificial intelligence a constant collaboration . it s always the human s job to interpret , he told me , leaning on his piano and riffling through the sheet music . in some sense you could write four random chords down and i d try and find a way of making music with that . he points out that although the music sounds like miles davis , it feels like a fake when he plays it . some of the phrases don t quite follow on or they trip up your fingers , he says . this makes sense , as this isn t music written by a human with hands sitting at a keyboard it s the creation of a computer . artificial intelligence can place notes on a stave , but it can t yet imagine their performance . that s up to humans . when computer scientists are talking about ai , they often compare it with envy to our unconscious intelligence . the way we catch a ball without thinking , for example , or pick up a new video game in a matter of minutes . being able to understand and think about music isn t usually mentioned , but it s arguably a more subtle and difficult test of cognition than any of these tasks . you might not think of yourself as particularly musical , but you ll know when a song sounds off . and given a bit of practice , you ll know how to play one , too . mark d inverno after the show . image credit james vincent the verge in d inverno s vision of the future , ai doesn t replace humans , but becomes a sort of musical sparring partner . even if you don t think machines can be creative by themselves , they can potentially be creative friends , he says . you can imagine a situation when you re having a conversation with a machine offering prompts as a critical , creative accomplice . it s a reassuring notion , one that fits into a familiar spectrum of human computer collaboration . this begins with the first computer synthesized notes , and takes in mainstream musical aids like garageband . what s not clear , though , is where that spectrum ends . once an ai is able to offer up respectable musical criticism , isn t it also making judgments independent of humans ? if it s a worthy friend and collaborator , will it one day be able to strike out on its own ? what happens when some future musical ai goes solo ? well , the band might break up , but the music will go on . 	 speaking to attendees at a ampnbspdeep learning conference in london last month , there was one particularly noteworthy recurring theme humility , or at least , the need for it . while companies like google are confidently pronouncing that we live in an ai first age , with machine learning breaking new ground in areas like speech and image recognition , those at the front lines of ai research are keen to point out that there s still a lot of work to be done . just because we have digital assistants that sound like the talking computers in movies doesn t mean we re much closer to creating true artificial intelligence . problems include the need for vast amounts of data to power deep learning systems our inability to create ai that is good at more than one task and the lack of insight we have into how these systems work in the first place . machine learning in is creating brilliant tools , but they can be hard to explain , costly to train , and often mysterious even to their creators . let s take a look at these challenges in more detail first you get the data , then you get the aiwe all know that artificial intelligence needs data to learn about the world , but we often overlook how much data is involved . these systems don t just require more information than humans to understand concepts or recognize features , they require hundreds of thousands times more , ampnbspsays neil lawrence , a professor of machine learning at the university of sheffield and part of amazon s ai team . and if you look at all the applications domains were deep learning is successful you ll see they re domains where we can acquire a lot of data , says lawrence , giving the example of speech and ampnbspimage recognition . here , big tech firms like google and facebook have access to mountains of data for example , your voice searches on android , making it much easier to create useful tools . right now , says lawrence , data is like coal was in the early years of the industrial revolution . he gives the example of thomas newcomen an englishman who , in , invented a primitive version of the steam engine that ran on coal , about years before james watt did . newcomen s invention wasn t very good compared to watt s machine , it was inefficient and costly to run . that meant it was put to work only in coalfields where the fuel was plentiful enough to overcome the machine s handicaps . a screenshot from facebook s open source image recognition tools . lawrence suggests that all around the world there are hundreds of newcomens working on their own machine learning models . they might be revolutionary , but without the data to make them work , we ll never know . big tech firms like google , facebook , and microsoft are today s coal mines . they have abundant data and so can afford to run inefficient machine learning systems , and improve them . smaller startups might have good ideas , but they won t be able to follow through without data . it s considered unethical to force people to become sick to acquire data . the problem is even bigger when you look at areas where data is difficult to get your hands on . take health care , for example , where ai is being used for machine vision tasks like recognizing tumors in x ray scans , but where digitized data can be sparse . as lawrence points out , the tricky bit here is that it s generally considered unethical to force people to become sick to acquire data . that s what makes deals like that struck ampnbspbetween google and the national health service in the uk so significant . the problem , says lawrence , is not really about finding ways to distribute data , but about making our deep learning systems more efficient and able to work with less data . and just like watt s improvements , that might take another years . specialization is for insects ai needs to be able to multitaskthere s another key problem with deep learning the fact that all our current systems are , essentially , idiot savants . once they ve been trained , they can be incredibly efficient at tasks like recognizing cats or playing atari games , says google deepmind research scientist raia hadsell . but there is no neural network in the world , and no method right now that can be trained to identify objects and images , play space invaders , and listen to music . neural networks are the building blocks of deep learning systems . we can t even learn multiple games . the problem is even worse than that , though . when google s deepmind ampnbspannounced in february last year that it d built a system that could beat atari games , it was certainly a massive achievement , but each time it beat a game the system needed to be retrained to beat the next one . as hadsell points out , you can t try to learn all the different games at once , as the rules end up interfering with one another . you can learn them one at a time but you end up forgetting whatever you knew about previous games . to get to artificial general intelligence we need something that can learn multiple tasks , says hadsell . but we can t even learn multiple games . a solution to this might be something called progressive neural networks this means connecting separate deep learning systems together so that they can pass on certain bits of information . in a ampnbsppaper published on this topic in june , hadsell and her team showed how their progressive neural nets were able to adapt to games of pong that varied in small ways in one version the colors were inverted in another the controls were flipped much faster than a normal neural net , which had to learn each game from scratch . the basic layout of a progressive neural network . image credit deepmind raia hadsell it s a promising method , and in more recent experiments it s even been applied to robotic arms speeding up their learning process from a matter of weeks to just a single day . however , there are significant limitations , with hadsell noting that progressive neural networks can t simply keep on adding new tasks to their memory . if you keep chaining systems together , sooner or later you end up with a model that is too large to be tractable , she says . and that s when the different tasks being managed are essentially similar creating a human level intelligence that can write a poem , solve differential equations , and design a chair is something else altogether . it s only real intelligence if you can show your workinganother major challenge is understanding how artificial intelligence reaches its conclusions in the first place . neural networks are usually inscrutable to observers . although we know how they re put together and the information that goes in them , the reasons why they come to certain decisions usually goes unexplained . ai looks for curtains on the floor not on the windowsa good demonstration of this problem comes from an experiment at virginia tech . researchers created what is essentially an ampnbspeye tracking system for a neural network , which records which pixels the computer looks at first . the researchers showed the neural net pictures of a bedroom and asked the ai what is covering the windows ? they found that instead of looking at the windows , the ai looked at the floor . then , if it found a bed , it gave the answer there are curtains covering the windows . this happened to be right , but only because of the limited data the network had been trained on . based on the pictures it had been shown , the neural net had deduced that if it was in a bedroom there would be curtains on the windows . so when it saw a bed , it stopped looking it had , in its eyes , seen curtains . logical , of course , but also daft . a lot of bedrooms don t have curtains ! eye tracking is one way of shining some light on the inner workings , but another might be to build more coherence into deep learning systems from the get go . one way of doing this is revisiting an old , unfashionable strand of artificial intelligence known as symbolic ai or good old fashioned artificial intelligence gofai , says murray shanahan , a professor of cognitive robotics at imperial college london and also the scientific advisor on ex machina . this is based on the hypothesis that what goes on in the mind can be reduced to basic logic , where the world is defined by a complex dictionary of symbols . by combining these symbols which represent actions , events , objects , etc . you can basically synthesize thinking . if creating an ai this way sounds like a monstrous , unthinkable task , just imagine trying it on computers that still run on magnetic tape . shanahan s proposal is that we take the symbolic descriptions of gofai and combine them with deep learning . these would provide the systems with a starting point for understanding the world , rather than just feeding them data and waiting for them to notice patterns . this , he says , might not only solve the transparency problem of ai , but also the problem of transfer learning outlined by hadsell . it s all very well to say that breakout is similar to pong because they ve both got paddles and balls , but human level cognition makes these types of connections on a much more dramatic scale , says shanahan . like the connection between the structure of the atom and the structure of the solar system . shanahan and his team at imperial are working on the new method which they call ampnbspdeep symbolic reinforcement learning and have published some small experiments . it s still in its infancy , and finding out whether it will scale up to larger systems and different types of data will be telling . however , there s every chance it could develop into something more . after all , deep learning itself was an unloved department of ai until researchers began to plug in the cheap data and abundant processing power made available in recent years . maybe it s time for another blast from ai s past to try its skills in a new environment . google s deepmind masters the game of go	 the next time you ponder your poop before you flush , one thing to keep in mind is that your feces passed through a lot of important organs on their way out . and if you don t take a peek , well , congratulations on your moral superiority , i guess ? so it might be possible that your stool can tell you when there s something wrong with the squishy internal rube goldberg machine that converts food into feces . ponder your poop before you flushi have a lot of questions about what this external nugget of evidence says about the inner workings of my body is that the shape it s supposed to be ? when did i eat that corn ? why is it blue ? that only happened once . the quick and dirty version of the digestion process starts as soon as we take a bite . little molecular wrenches called enzymes start dismantling our food in the mouth , then the stomach . in the small intestine , enzymes do even finer work breaking down fats , proteins , and starches into molecules small enough to pass through the intestine s walls and into the bloodstream . that s how you absorb the food s nutrients . muscle contractions called peristalsis push the food now a soupy , messy slop along to the large intestine , where water is sucked back into the body . what you re left with is , usually , is a somewhat solid m lange of indigestible food leftovers , microbes , dead cells , and all sorts of waste products our bodies need to expel . the stool hangs out in the rectum before squeezing out through the anus . once the poop is in the toilet , what can it tell you about your body ? since the porcelain bowl isn t a magic mirror , i quizzed gastroenterologist justin sewell from the university of california , san francisco while he grabbed a quick lunch on the other end of the phone . a photo posted by nabhan al abdullatif nabhan illustrations on feb , at am pst earth tones are healthy but so are lots of other colorspoop can come in a rainbow of colors depending on what you eat . but earth tones like brown , yellow , and green are the most common , sewell says . these muddy hues are the result of mixing digested food with broken down bits of dead red blood cells that get dumped into the small intestine along with bile , an enzyme produced by the liver to digest fats . there s a huge range of normalif your poop falls outside this range of shades like , say , blue , it s not necessarily unhealthy . but if your poop is gray , black , red , or maroon , those colors could be signs of a health problem . pale or gray could mean that something is preventing bile and its accompanying red blood cell waste from reaching the small intestine . that could be from a problem anywhere in the liver , the gallbladder which stores bile , and the connecting ductwork . often , people with gray poops show other signs of liver problems , like jaundice . flickr justin dolske cc by sa . black , red , or maroon hued poop can all be from bleeding . tarry and sticky stools usually suggest bleeding from the stomach or upper small intestine like from an ulcer , for example . dark red or maroon poops could mean bleeding in the upper colon or lower small intestine . red diarrhea could be due to an inflammatory bowel disease like crohn s disease or ulcerative colitis or it could mean that your colon is infected with bacteria like certain strains of e . coli . and bright red blood on the toilet paper could be due to hemorrhoids itchy , swollen veins in the rectum or anus that bleed . that s the much more common , and much less scary option because it could also be from polyps or colon cancer . poop can come in a rainbow of colorsbut remember , poop is food waste so you might just be seeing the results of something you ate . iron supplements or pepto bismol can also make your poop black , and beets can make your poop red . it also turns your pee red . i thought i was dying the first time this happened . there s no ideal poop shapewhen i create a perfect , uninterrupted log i feel victorious like i peeled an apple without breaking the spiral of skin . but sewell tells me that my quest for the perfect poop is misguided there s no such thing . i ve had people bring me pictures of their poop and say this is not right , it s supposed to be a perfect , smooth log shape . and yes , for some people that s normal but for other people , that s just not the way their body works , he says . there s no ideal poop . there s no ideal poop . poop types and shapes can grouped into seven categories in the bristol stool scale , which describes the range of imaginable stools from hard little rabbit pellets type one a sign of constipation to watery diarrhea type seven which could be due to anything from an infection to having just gone for a run . as long as your poop falls into types two through six on the scale , you re probably doing just fine . wikimedia commons cabot health cc by sa . anywhere from formed logs to soft and falling apart is fine and that just depends on individual people s bodies and their diet , sewell says . if it s hard or sticky , however , you might want to add fiber and water to the menu . if it s mushy or watery , drink more water to rehydrate . food bits are fine , but lots of them is weirdsighting food in poop isn t unusual , sewell says . but pay attention to how the food looks . it s totally normal to find pieces of corn kernels , for example , which have indigestible bits made of a plant fiber called cellulose . if you eat a bunch of greens , you re going to see pieces of partially digested plant material come out , sewell says . and the chunks can be bigger or smaller depending on how well you chew . pixabay public domain but if your poop is almost entirely composed of recognizable food bits , it could be signs of a digestion problem . your gut might be squeezing food through too quickly to get properly digested . anything from parasites , to certain types of gastrointestinal infections , to even irritable bowel syndrome and severe celiac disease can get peristalsis moving faster than it should . so if what comes out strongly resembles what went in , maybe you should see a doctor . mucus and fat aren t okayif you see mucus on your poop , that can be a sign of an autoimmune disease or an infection . but what does mucus even look like when it s coming out of an orifice other than your nose ? it s white , semi solid , and stringy , sewell says . like egg drop soup , he adds . seeing that in the toilet bowl suggests inflammation , most likely in the lower gut . the inflammation could be from ulcerative colitis or crohn s disease or from some kind of parasitic , viral , or bacterial infection . a photo posted by nabhan al abdullatif nabhan illustrations on jul , at pm pdt be on lookout for fat in poop as well . a fatty stool usually floats and can leave an oil slick on the surface of the water . after you flush , there might be orange ring of what looks like pizza grease that lingers around the bowl . like when you re cooking something oily , sewell says , and you pour out the water , and there s a rim of fat that sticks to the edge of the container . fatty poop can come from a number of things including diet pills like alli that can make fat leak out your butt . it can also be a sign of pancreatic or liver disease , because it means the enzymes they produce that should be breaking down fat aren t doing their jobs . intestinal disorders like crohn s disease or celiac disease can cause this , as well . so what does your poop say about you ? the main thing to keep in mind is that there s a huge range of normal . that also includes the frequency with which you poop generally , anything less than three times per week is constipation , and anything more than three times a day is too frequent . most people poop one to two times a day , or once every other day , sewell says . variation in urgency is common , too having to go right now isn t unusual , but if that s a constant sensation , you may want to check in with a doctor . pay attention but don t obsess . i think it s healthy for people to look at what they produce , note any major changes , and ask their doctor about it , sewell says . people do obsess over having , they want the perfect shape poop , they want it harder , they want it softer . it s not really much under your control besides eating more or less fiber , or consuming more or less water . so pay attention but don t obsess . because public domain 	 the verge in celebration of our th anniversary , this month we re publishing a series of interviews with innovative leaders about what the next five years hold . to read more about this series , read our editor nilay patel s introduction here . you may have heard of the gene editing technique crispr cas , often simply called crispr . introduced in , crispr works like a pair of scissors to cut dna , inserting or reordering bits of genetic code with remarkable , science fiction like results crispr can help create mosquitoes that don t transmit malaria , or be used to breed unusually muscular beagles , or even create mini pigs . in humans , the technology is being tested to battle cancer by removing patients immune cells , editing them , and reinserting the weaponized cells into the body to hunt cancer . one of the leading scientists who developed the technique is jennifer doudna , a biochemist at the university of california , berkeley . with the help of emmanuelle charpentier , martin jinek , and krzysztof chylinski , doudna adapted the system that bacteria use to defeat viruses to create the much vaunted cell editing technique . we sat down with doudna in october to discuss just what crispr might mean for the future of science , and disease research . while crispr marks a landmark breakthrough , the technology also presents plenty of concerns about genetic modification ampnbspsome ethical , some practical and doudna has made a habit of stepping out from among the ranks of other scientists to discuss those concerns with the public . we talked to doudna about the possibility of using crispr to combat disease , to help preserve threatened species , and how close we are to creating a real life jurassic park . the interviewwhat s the public perception of crispr ? the public perception of crispr is that it s in its early stages . people have heard about it . they ve heard of the acronym often . i ll get into taxis and i ll have a taxi driver say , oh , you work on crispr . yeah , i ve read about that . people are still trying to understand what it s all about and what it means for them , personally , and for the future . crispr has ampnbspalready altered the way scientists do research . it s very hard for people , generally , to appreciate that new technologies always take time to have an impact in a real world sense . what we re seeing with the crispr technology for gene editing is that the field has moved remarkably quickly in the scientific sense . i mean , it s only sort of a four year old technology and it s ampnbspalready altered the way scientists do research . it s altered the commercial landscape lots of companies are using this technology now . but it s really hard for people to appreciate just how long it really takes to do something like create a therapeutic agent . a very common discussion that i have with people outside the scientific community is , how long is it going to be until we have a technology from this , or a real therapeutic agent from this ? an approved treatment , or even a cure ? you know , we re probably still a decade out from that , realistically , because it ll take time to ensure that it s safe and effective . subscribe to our newsletter so you don t miss the rest of the verge interviews . terms apply . subscribemedical research moves very slowly . we re only just starting to see the first human trials of crispr technology . what do you imagine will be happening in ? the next five years will be extremely interesting in this space . by , we will certainly see more clinical trials . right now the trials that are approved are all for cancer . they re doing a particular type of editing that might be impactful in treating cancer namely being able to program a patient s own immune cells to target and destroy their cancer cells . that s an exciting opportunity , but going forward we will see increasing efforts , and i hope clinical trials , to address genetic diseases of the blood , of the eye , of the liver . then probably farther down the road , diseases that affect other tissue . i m thinking duchenne muscular dystrophy is one that people talk about a lot . cystic fibrosis is another that s discussed a lot . you mentioned blood disorders . perhaps you can give me a sense of how that particular area of research is going to progress in the next five years . what sorts of trials could we see for sickle cell anemia , for instance ? the gene editing technology that is available today is already sufficient to cure the defect that causes sickle cell anemia in cells that are cultured in the laboratory . that s been the case already for a couple of years . the challenge is how to take that and deploy it in a way that s going to be effective in patients . to do that , gene editing technology really needs to get a very high level of editing in blood cells . we need to be able to do it in blood stem cells , so that they can actually repopulate a patient s blood system with cells that don t have the sickle cell trait . the exciting thing right now is that there s clearly a big effort in this space in many labs . i think that we ll just continue to see a lot of progress in this area . it s always hard to predict exactly how long it ll take to do something like this , but from talking to my clinical colleagues who really think deeply about this sort of challenge , we re all hopeful that within the next two to three years we will see advances in the technology that will make it possible to initiate clinical trials . whether that happens will depend a lot on how things unfold , really , over the next couple of years . for a disease like cystic fibrosis , for instance , what does the future look like if we decide , okay , we re going to treat this in such a way that genetic mutations we introduce won t be passed on to children ? various labs working on various model systems of cystic fibrosis have had success in the laboratory . they ve been able to use gene editing in lab grown tissue samples that reflect the tissue in patients that have cystic fibrosis . we know the technology has this capability . now we need to , again , bridge the gap between what goes on in the lab and what we d like to be able to do in the clinic , and be able to do it safely . there s clearly a lot of work that needs to be done , but it s an exciting time because you can start to see how the pieces could fall into place to make that possible . there s a way of applying crispr to embryos that we haven t fully explored , in part because of some of the ethical issues and in part because we don t totally know what that s going to do . what might altering embryos mean for diseases like cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy ? there are four countries that have approved human embryo experiments using the crispr gene editing technology . one thing that s very interesting right now is that there are four countries that have approved human embryo experiments using the crispr gene editing technology . we re just talking about using this tool in very early embryos to find out , how effective is it , is it safe , and does it have the desired properties for making changes to the human genome that would be , in principle , effective at curing disease ? depending on how those experiments work out , there will be increasing interest , and probably pressure , for certain kinds of applications of gene editing in embryos to go forward . this is why it s critical that we have an open conversation about this right now , even though we re not there today with this technology . how do we ensure an ethical path forward ? there are no easy answers , but i do feel there may be reasons that , in the future assuming that the technology can be shown to be safe and effective in embryos for certain applications we may come to a time when we say , it might not be ethical to not use it for those uses in certain cases . again , this will really depend on how things unfold with the technology coupled with a responsible discussion about responsible use . is there anything that frightens you about this technology , about the power of it ? when i think about what makes me nervous about this technology , it really comes down to how little we really understand the function of genes , especially the interactions between genes in our own genomes . for humans , but for other organisms , too . one of the big unknowns is if we were to deploy this technology to make a permanent change in the germline of an embryo , would there be unintended consequences of that change that might not really show up for dozens of years ? how do you even think about testing such a thing ? i don t know . could you do it in animals ? maybe , but at some point you have to actually try it in a person if you re going in that direction . just thinking about how to do that , how to do even the research that would be needed to provide the data that would allow us to make an informed decision is a challenging question . do you ever worry that there might be folks with the capability of using this kind of technology unethically ? it does concern me , definitely , but frankly not maybe any more that it concerns me that we have nuclear capabilities . we have other technologies that are clearly very powerful as well , and can also be employed by people that might not have the same ethical concerns that we d like to see in those decisions . yes , it s a concern , but i don t think it s unique to this technology . we ve been talking mostly about humans . when we consider modifying crops or animals , do the challenges change ? are the risks and benefits potentially different ? we can now , if we have enough information , just introduce the desired change to a gene precisely . in terms of the technology , the challenges are similar but the details are different . for example , in plants the excitement is that you can potentially introduce changes to plant dna much more quickly , and certainly much more accurately than has been possible in the past . that means that instead of having to do something like mutagenize seeds with chemicals and then try to select for those that give rise to plants with the desired trait which is frankly what s done currently we can now , if we have enough information , just introduce the desired change to a gene precisely and not have to make or guess about what other changes might be happening elsewhere in the dna of that organism . that s very attractive , but again it comes down to delivery . how do we deliver editing molecules into plants ? very challenging . plants have a cell wall so it makes it even harder to get into plant cells . really what the crispr tool does is introduce a break into dna at a particular place . then the cell takes over and repairs the break . that s where the editing actually occurs . in plants it s not so easy to control that . it s a challenge in animals , too , but in plants we don t know very much about how that actually works . getting a handle on that in the future will be a big effort on the research side . how long do you imagine it would be before we start to introduce things like modified mosquitoes into the environment ? it ll happen in the short term . there s a lot of interest , on the part of foundations especially , that are thinking about , how do we deploy technologies to avoid the spread of disease ? diseases like zika , and dengue , and others that are insect borne have very huge negative impacts on humans . thinking creatively about how to use new technologies to help us mitigate these diseases is really critical . again , it has to be done with an open eyed approach to the potential risks of deploying these organisms and ensuring that appropriate guidelines and regulatory procedures are followed to try to avoid any unintended environmental consequences . this can be tested by mixing populations of mosquitoes in a controlled environment and just watching over time what happens . this is just the law of natural selection , right ? if an organism has a reproductive disadvantage in a population , then it will tend to be out competed by its peers over time . or the other way around , too . if it has a reproductive advantage then it will tend to over populate an environment over time , other things being equal . that s already being seen with these modified mosquitoes . as these experiments are conducted in controlled settings , the hope is that scientists will get more sophisticated about the way they re employing technologies that control properties of mosquitoes that might be beneficial to humans and ensuring that those properties are maintained over the long term in those populations , but without unintended , undesired consequences . are there broader applications ? could we potentially modify animals that exist now and sort of back form a dinosaur , or back form a mammoth ? there s a lot of interest in what s called de extinction the idea that you could bring back an organism that is no longer walking the earth by using gene editing to make modifications to a genome of an existing organism reintroduce genes that have been lost within the extinction process . there are various efforts to do things like bring back the woolly mammoth . it s not quite a dinosaur , but it would be pretty cool if you could do that . i ve also talked a bit to beth shapiro down at university of california , santa cruz . she studies animals like bears , and evolutionary patterns of bears , and also in birds . there are opportunities with those kinds of organisms . we don t really know the dna sequence that would encode a dinosaur . whether you could really bring back a dinosaur , that s a much harder challenge . we don t really know the dna sequence that would encode a dinosaur . in jurassic park , you may remember that the premise of michael crichton s story was that there were insects trapped in resin that contained blood from dinosaurs that had dna still available for sequencing . unfortunately , dna is a chemical that doesn t last million years . i think being able to do that is not so likely , but maybe it s possible to piece together information that we have about amphibians , about birds , it might be possible to start walking in that direction . i don t know how close you could get to a real dinosaur , but certainly we ll learn a lot about the genetic traits that are encoded in dna that give rise to some of the traits that we think dinosaurs had . would you say you re an optimist about the future ? i m an optimist about the future , yes . the thing i like to point out is that a lot of the technologies that have come to the fore over the last few decades , and the crispr gene editing tool is in this category , too , have come about due to fundamental research . rather than a focused effort to invent or discover a technology or an idea or an insight , these kinds of things often come about from scientists who are working in a seemingly different area of science , who through circumstances and just paying attention to their data come across insights that lead to either new technologies or new fundamental understanding of nature . i like to point that out because there s been a real push in the us and elsewhere in the world for scientists to be more applied in their work , to focus on a particular problem let s cure cancer , let s have a brain initiative that allows us to understand consciousness or something like that . it s not that those aren t valuable as well , but i think we don t want to get too far away from the idea that we don t know , really , enough about our natural world to know where the next insights or technologies are coming from . i hope our new administration will support fundamental discovery science that allows scientists and researchers in the us and around the world to positively impact human health . this interview has been edited and condensed for clarity . 	 when the supreme court decided alice v . cls bank in , it marked a new era in software patent law . by ruling that abstract ideas could not be patented simply because they were executed on a computer , the alice decision significantly narrowed down the possible universe of software patents . since then , more and more software patents have been invalidated by the courts particularly in the federal circuit , the appeals court for patent cases , which is still grappling with how exactly to apply alice . intellectual ventures v . symantec is the most recent attempt at applying alice . this last week , symantec and trend micro got handed a big win in the federal circuit , with the appeals court invalidating three patents on antivirus technology owned by intellectual ventures , the biggest patent troll in the world . the lower court already invalidated two of three patents , but in that first phase of the case , symantec lost out on the third patent , resulting in an million judgment against the antivirus company . the third patent didn t affect trend micro . with the new appellate decision , which invalidates all three , symantec is now off the hook . a concurring decision gives patent reform advocates a lot to be excited aboutsymantec is likely very pleased with intellectual ventures v . symantec , but a concurring decision also gives patent reform advocates a lot to be excited about , potentially making patent trolling a first amendment issue . in a post alice world , it s tempting to think that the time of absurd software patents like the patent on internet shopping carts is ending . but just because more are being invalidated , it doesn t mean software patents are over . alice marked a big change , but the federal circuit is still trying to decide how to apply this new supreme court precedent to a vast range of cases . the oversimplistic , but very useful way of thinking about alice is that you can no longer patent thing that already exists but with a computer . for example , you can no longer patent computer bingo , no more than you can patent regular paper bingo . just because a computer gets involved doesn t suddenly make an existing invention patentable . you can no longer patent computer bingoit seems like a sensible approach , but patents very rudely don t do you the favor of naming themselves in understandable ways . it s not like the famous internet shopping cart patent was called shopping carts , but with a computer . the federal circuit is having a hard time figuring out how to apply alice , because , well , it s hard . in intellectual ventures v . symantec , intellectual ventures asserted patents on technology that looks for , identifies , and filters out computer viruses . the court found that the first patent was really just the same as sorting through your own physical mail but with a computer . here , it was long prevalent practice for people receiving paper mail to look at an envelope and discard certain letters , without opening them , from sources from which they did not wish to receive mail based on characteristics of the mail , judge dyk wrote in an opinion for a panel of three judges . doing it with a computer wasn t anything new . the second patent was no better it was a corporate mailroom but with a computer , where the computer , rather than mailroom clerks , would follow rules to release , delete , return , or forward messages . it was a corporate mailroom but with a computerthe important part of the decision comes with the third patent , which isn t just a but with a computer patent . the patent covered a method of antivirus protection in which communications inside a telephone network e . g . , in this era , the internet are routed , viruses are detected , and communications are partially inhibited to prevent the spread of the viruses . but the court ruled that this idea was patent ineligible , because abstract ideas can t be patented . after all , performing virus screening was a long prevalent practice in the field of computers , and , as the patent admits , performed by many computer users . . . by itself , virus screening is well known and constitutes an abstract idea . the reasoning here , however , is just one way of interpreting alice . different panels of different judges have gone different ways , said vera ranieri , a staff attorney at the electronic frontier foundation . ranieri pointed out that cases like bascom and enfish , decided earlier this year , went in completely different directions . it is unclear to me how they can be read to form a consistent body of law , she said . the test applied in intellectual ventures is a technical effect test , said charles duan , director of the patent reform project at public knowledge . in the technical effect test also described here by patent attorney john roglitz a software invention is not patent eligible unless it has a technical effect on the computer system making it faster , more efficient , etc . as opposed to just using the computer system to achieve some other end . it doesn t mean that software patents are overthis test is stricter on software patents . but if this way of interpreting alice wins out , it doesn t mean that software patents are over just that there s fewer of them . we know this , says duan , because the technical effect test is basically what s used in europe and software patents still exist over there . but in a concurring decision , circuit judge mayer made a much more drastic argument , saying that patents that constrain essential channels of online communication are antithetical to free speech . the implication is that for constitutional reasons , patents on common email antivirus software should be invalidated . it s a radical position , one that was advanced by the american civil liberties union in an amicus brief in alice when that case went up to the supreme court . it s only a concurring opinion so far , but ever since alice came down , the federal circuit has been in flux about what the law around software patents actually is . and now the aclu s stance on software patents has entered the fray . mayer s approach potentially tosses out an entire category of software patentsmayer s approach potentially tosses out an entire category of software patents because of their effect on the internet . a less extreme way of interpreting mayer s opinion is he only meant to make a policy argument , pointing out the importance of judging patents harshly . if courts aren t strict with software patents related to the internet , free speech is imperiled . the upshot is that intellectual ventures v . symantec settles very little , but it does show that there s a wide range of possible futures for software patent law futures in which software patents continue to flourish , and futures in which patents get tossed out just for their effect on the internet . which way we end up going , only time will tell . 	 audiences associate the word horror with scary movies or terrifying novels . but over the past half decade , live theater and haunted house exhibits have merged , bringing new life to the genre with interactive , real world experiences that let audiences step through the screen and into their own personal tales of terror . for october , we re introducing the future of fear . we ll talk to the creators of some of the most striking , immersive horror experiences to see how they re inventing a new artistic medium to take the genre in directions it s never gone before . hold on , my agent s about to get naked . i m in the bowels of a dingy warehouse in the boyle heights neighborhood of los angeles , and horror director darren lynn bousman is downright giddy . he s orchestrating a run of the tension experience ascension , his ambitious new immersive horror experience that combines haunted house and escape room elements with interactive theater to put audiences at the center of a story about a creepy , scientology esque organization that might just be a supernatural cult . it s a disturbing , intoxicating piece of entertainment , designed to push your buttons and leave you questioning the divide between fantasy and reality . and as bousman and i watch the show s backstage video surveillance feeds , it turns out that , yes it s also a place where somebody s agent might lose their clothes . the tension experience first kicked off in february as an under the radar alternate reality game dubbed indoctrination . players that found its website slowly learned about an entity called the o . o . a . institute , and as they were pulled into real world meetups , dead drops , and invasive personal interviews , the institute s mythology began to take hold . it was all backstory to the september opening of ascension , with bousman and a cast of actors taking over a , square foot warehouse to create an interactive two hour play , where the direction and storylines are dictated by the way players behave and interact with the other characters . i want to do the game in los angeles . it s a step into a very different world for bousman , who first burst onto the film scene in when he took over the saw franchise . box office success and multiple sequels followed , but the filmmaker became disenchanted as the years wore on . filmmaking became so i don t want to say mundane , but everyone with a camera was making a movie . netflix was over inundated with every fucking thing in the world , and it became hard to make an impact , he says . i wanted to forge my own way . and sleep no more changed me . bousman s introduction to that groundbreaking production , in which audience members walk freely through a re created s hotel and bear witness to a play inspired by macbeth , pushed him in a new creative direction . he took in other immersive productions like the drowned man , delusion , and alone , turning to their creators to understand how the medium worked . four years ago , i did blackout . i met with them , and i was like , i want to make my own . i want to do the game in los angeles . the echoes of that film , in which a banker s world is upended by a real world game that may also be a con to ruin his life , can be seen in tension from the early days of the arg . when i arrived in an abandoned parking lot to experience ascension for myself , i didn t know what to expect , nor did the other nine people in my group . a few hours prior we d all received mysterious emails warning us not to attend , along with a letter from the institute with some basic guidelines for our processing things like wear comfortable , modest undergarments , and clothes we wouldn t mind getting stained or ruined . i ended up happy i paid attention on both counts . was i okay with public nudity including my own ? moments later , i was in a van with a black hood over my head , being driven wildly through the streets of la , then dumped alone outside the unmarked entrance of the o . o . a . institute . inside the impressively detailed waiting room , complete with magazines and inspirational posters , a no nonsense secretary told me to fill out an application that had some more than unnerving questions . was i okay with public nudity , including my own ? who knew i was there , and what was their phone number ? then i was off to a disheveled file room , where an elderly gentleman took my picture before he leaned in and offered a final warning it wasn t too late to turn back . if i wanted out , i just had to say the magic word coward . derrick hinman the tension experience i was the lead character in my own dark , twisted storyit s a fantastic way to set the mood , and to pull participants into the surreal , detailed world that bousman and co writer clint sears have dreamed up . going into too many specifics about what happened to me would ruin the sense of mystery that makes tension so fascinating , but i will say that while there were some typical haunted house activities getting shoved through the dark , being forced to blindly touch unsavory things i wouldn t necessarily call it a horror experience in the traditional sense . it s a psychological one . once i realized the degree to which i could actually interact with the characters i encountered , a weird metamorphosis took place . i not only felt like i was the lead character in my own dark , twisted story , but i increasingly became engaged emotionally . that feeling crescendoed late in the evening , when in one particularly harrowing moment pressed by a mysterious , masked stranger , for reasons i ll keep secret i found myself spontaneously opening up and apologizing for ways in which i d failed friends and family members . it was the kind of scene that i could have theoretically lied my way through , but the events of the evening robbed me of the ability to keep the show s world at arm s length . i was simply there , inescapably present , as the madness of the night swirled around me . a raucous step forward in a new , evolving mediumthe tension experience went beyond what i was expecting mixing fear , empathy , and the sheer visceral thrill of discovery into an unsettling combination that still has me sitting up at night . it isn t just a halloween stunt it s a raucous step forward in a new and evolving storytelling medium that has as much in common with text adventure and video game mechanics as it does with scary movies . the point was driven home when my group reconvened at the end of the show , to discover that our choices and fears had led each of us through radically different scenes , plot points , and dramatic moments . it s a page script , producer gordon bijelonic tells me , and every performer has between six and possible scenes . different keywords can activate a given actor s entrance into the storyline , and if an audience member never hits upon the right words during their conversations in the show , an actor could conceivably just stay in the shadows . he doesn t even show up . he just sits there all night . so that s the good thing . you could come two or three different times , and you re going to have two or three different experiences . derrick hinman the tension experience it s like a real life , walking and talking telltale games adventure , and like those titles it can push unexpected emotional buttons . for bousman , that s precisely the point . the whole reason i wanted to make movies was to get a reaction out of an audience member , to make them feel something . i make people feel every night with this , and i see it , he says , gesturing to the video screens . i see them walking out crying . i see them walking out mad . i see them walking out enraged . and it stays with them , because they re not sitting in a theater watching they are it . they re in the middle . they are a character . and to me , as an artist and a storyteller , that makes me so happy . while tension certainly isn t for everyone , it s impossible to argue that it doesn t accomplish bousman s goals . and while it clearly pulls inspiration from the scarefests and theatrical productions that came before it , its grand ambition is undeniably significant . future productions are planned under the names adrenaline and lust , bijelonic tells me . our goal is to be the cirque de soleil of this world . our goal is to be the cirque de soleil of this world . if anything , it seems like tension is coming along at just the right moment , as the rise of virtual reality and an ever increasing influx of interactive theater productions are bringing the general concept of immersive experiences into the mainstream . whether viewers are losing themselves in virtual worlds , walking into haunted houses or interactive plays , or simply dressing up and taking on fictional personae at comic conventions , they re increasingly interested in moving beyond the passive relationship they ve had with traditional narrative mediums like film and television . this is a richer , more engaged kind of fandom , one that can invoke feverish levels of devotion . and for bousman , that s a two way relationship , with his audience causing the show to evolve and transform even after it s opened . this is the future . it is engaging an audience on a visceral , living , breathing art form level , he says . they are manipulating the story , not us . their choices , who they like , who they respond to who they don t . these things get written out characters die . i think that s what is amazing about this , is that i get to sit back and watch it happen , but the audience is in control . the tension experience ascension is currently running in los angeles . tickets are priced at . 	 elon musk laid out his plan to colonize mars at a conference on tuesday , but it was during the q ampampa session that a woman asked one of the key questions who will be chosen to embark on a risky trip to colonize a harsh planet ? if normal people want to travel to mars , do we need some specific requirements ? she asked . can normal people go ? the spacex ceo had two answers to this line of questioning . we re trying to make it such that anyone can go , he said , with maybe a few days of training . however , the trip will be dangerous . the risk of fatality will be really high . there s no way around it , he later said . it would be basically , are you prepared to die ? if that okay , then you re a candidate for going . but choosing a candidate for a mission to mars might require a bit more than that , and sending anyone to space sounds like a recipe for disaster . astronauts who go into low earth orbit have to pass a strict vetting process . living in space , in a confined environment under high stress situations , takes both physical and mental tolls . so , we re left wondering how much training do you really need ? what personality traits should these spacex sponsored mars colonists have ? should the crews be all male or all female ? the verge spoke to experts to try to fill in the holes in musk s plan and figure out who would be the perfect candidates for this mission . first off , is it true that anyone with a few days of training can undertake a trip through deep space ? let s break this down . on a purely physical level , it s true that you don t need to be a world class athlete to be selected . a reasonably fit person without health complications could be cleared , according to sheryl bishop , a researcher who has worked at the mars desert research station , which simulates life on mars for scientific purposes . select people who are excited and can live with others without getting into fightsnasa requires astronaut hopefuls to pass a space physical that is basically a military physical . it also requires good vision , good blood pressure , and a certain height range . none of this is out of the realm of possibility for most people . nasa doesn t require extraordinary strength or speed . physical fitness , however , is only one part of selection , and it s arguably the easiest part . for nasa , you also need to have a technical degree math , engineering , etc . and at least three years of relevant work experience says anne roemer , the agency s manager for astronaut selection . technical skills and personality traits will limit who gets chosen , much more so than physical requirements . since , only about astronauts have been selected . barry wilmore , for example , first applied to be an astronaut in . he wasn t chosen until , despite having two master s degrees in technical fields and having worked as a navy pilot . wilmore says he was challenged by how rigorous and stressful the technical training was training could have five major systems on the simulation shuttle failing all at once . what kind of personality traits are important ? will all mars colonists have to be gung ho adventurer types ? not exactly . of course , all candidates need to be cool under pressure . a lot of nasa astronauts come from the military , and have flying or combat experience . wilmore , for example who has spent days in space , mostly on the iss flew in operation desert storm during the gulf war , so it was clear that he could perform well under high stress situations . when you are flying , you gotta minimize being within your own mind , says wilmore . you can get flustered and you gotta push that back and be able to clear minded because your life and that of the crew hangs in the balance . good astronauts have an adventurous spirit , but they also need to be disciplined and able to work well with others . life on a space station , or a spaceship , can be boring . people live in a tiny confined space and need to figure out things like how to divide up the housework . when it comes to putting together a crew , a mix of technical skills is also important . you need doctors to keep everyone healthy , engineers that really understand how the ship works , and scientists who can conduct research experiments . all men groups aren t a good ideathis has changed since the early days of spaceflight . the first astronauts we had were stereotypical explorers , the kind of people who want to walk across glaciers and do fieldwork , bishop says . but those first space trips were short , so it was okay to have personalities that don t play well with people over prolonged periods of time , bishop says . going to mars , however , will take months , so it ll be important to select people who are excited and can live with others without getting into fights . do any past expeditions resemble what a trip to mars would be like and what can we learn from them ? mars trips resemble expeditions to antarctica . these explorers have the drive to survive a punishing environment , but can still collaborate with a few people in a remote area for a long time . they might make some of the best possible recruits for a mission to mars . life in the south pole , for example , can be highly regimented , says lauren wise , a laboratory specialist who investigates the contaminated areas of antarctica . she gets up around am every day . there are set meal times , she had to write on a board when she was leaving station limits , and pay very close attention to instructions . life can also be physically and mentally challenging , says wise . she s a small person and sometimes walking in the stronger winds can be quite difficult , she says . she misses activities back home like yoga and swimming and the lack of fresh fruit is a challenge . sharing the small , remote research station with different types of people also requires her to be tolerant and prepared for anything . the ever changing conditions mean that sometimes what you have planned doesn t always occur or happen in the way which you would like it to , she says . you also have to be able to think a little outside the box as you can t just pop down to the hardware store or shop if you need something . so , spacex wants to send people on the first trip . what kind of group is ideal ? all one gender ? coed ? all men groups aren t a good idea . women typically are more supportive than men in their interactions with other group members , and all male groups can be more competitive , says namni goel , a researcher at the university of pennsylvania who has written about sex and gender in space adaptation . other studies show that mixed gender crews do better than all men because adding women to an all male crew can make men less territorial and rude . there s less research on all female groups , and studies from space and other isolated and confined environments often use small sample sizes . it is also important to consider individual differences when thinking about group composition for space missions , adds goel . according to bishop , it s possible that all female groups aren t as good as mixed gender groups because women tend to focus very much on building interpersonal relationships , and having men around might make them focus more on the specific task at hand . there should be a range of ages too because younger people tend to be more flexible in their thinking , while older ones have more experience and perspective , according to bishop . skillset diversity is also important , though large groups of more than people tend to break off into small groups , she adds . this creates an us and them mentality for example , us scientists versus everyone else or us engineers versus everyone else . leaders will need to be wary of this situation and make sure people feel a strong sense of common purpose . what about the psychological challenges ? space is beautiful , but it is also lonely . when you re stuck on a spaceship , you can t just go visit friends and family . wise , the scientist working in antarctica , has some experience with homesickness . her grandmother died while she was stationed , and that was a hard time for her , she says . but she could call her family at least once a week and keep in touch by email . spaceflight is far more than you can imagine during a trip to mars , communication with earth would probably have a to minute delay . not only does this mean no more immediate communication with mission control in emergency situations , weekly calls to loved ones are also out . the people who go will need to be extra resilient to loneliness . there s a lot we still don t know in terms of the psychological challenges of a mission to mars . on the international space station , for example , astronauts can gaze out the window and look at the earth . on a trip to mars , there ll be a time when our planet will look like a tiny star . no one knows how people might react to that . but flying in space can also be a positive experience , of course . astronauts who have viewed the earth from space have reported deep psychological changes , which is often called the overview effect . it s been described as a sense of mental clarity and a feeling of a new kind of perspective and self awareness . looking out at the earth over the course of a year and seeing the impacts that our presence has on the environment , especially on some parts of asia , you know makes me feel like there s more that everyone can do , including myself , to make earth a better place for the future inhabitants , says scott kelly , who spent days on the iss the longest any american has lived in space . wilmore , another nasa astronaut , says that spaceflight is far more than you can imagine . think about leaving the planet and circling the entire globe in minutes you see how it changes and it s just amazing , he says . there s a weightless feeling you feel like superman because you can fly and move heavy objects . it s truly thrilling . 	 when oculus fans unwrap their new motion controllers sometime later this year , they ll find a strange little accessory alongside them a chunk of black plastic with an oddly shaped hole in the middle . this is oculus invitation to try out rock band vr , one of the biggest , most potentially crowd pleasing oculus touch launch titles . a game franchise that lets people play out their rock n roll fantasies sounds like such a natural fit for vr that the core game would barely need to change . as a launch trailer last year simply put it , we wanted to make the rock band experience on oculus so realistic that the player actually feels like they are a rock star . but for all the video s easy jokes about groupies , headbanging , and smashed guitars , the reality is far more complicated and more interesting . as a company , rock band developer harmonix music systems has always focused on building for odd new platforms . the company was founded in by a pair of mit media lab students , eran egozy and alex rigopulos . its early projects weren t games so much as experimental electronic instruments , including projects like the axe , which let players make music by moving a pc joystick , or an epcot center installation that produced a similar effect with infrared sensors . besides guitar hero and rock band , with their custom plastic peripherals , harmonix produced one of the first games for sony s eyetoy camera , as well as one of the most successful xbox kinect game franchises , dance central . in , the studio announced a music visualizer called harmonix music vr for sony s virtual reality platform . we ve always been excited about the kind of new creative outlets that new tech affords us , says greg lopiccolo , a harmonix veteran and rock band vr s creative lead . last year , oculus studios head jason rubin approached the studio about making a new rock band installation , specifically for the then unreleased rift headset . the companies quickly came to an agreement , and lopiccolo s team began work on what would become rock band vr in august . as lopiccolo puts it , they figured out two things right away if done right , rock band in virtual reality would be amazing , and they had no idea how to make it work . the first version of rock band vr looked a lot like the original series . after attaching a motion controller to a standard harmonix guitar peripheral and putting on the rift , players would see a five lane note highway with beats to hit at specific moments , layered over a concert scene . it feels great to stand on stage with a screaming crowd in front of you with your band behind you , says lopiccolo . but the system turned one of virtual reality s biggest selling points , a feeling of physical presence , into a distraction . unless players had memorized a song , they would find themselves spending the whole game staring at the highway , trying to block out everything going on around them . the game s earliest versions made immersion just feel distractingbehind the scenes , says audio lead steve pardo , harmonix was throwing out idea after idea to fix the problem . they stripped the five note system down to three notes , vastly simplifying the beats that players had to match . they tried moving the position of the highway , so it ran out of the guitar s neck instead of across the crowd . the game became easier to play , and more visually distinct from its flatscreen counterpart . but nothing changed the fact that rock band vr was a virtual reality experience that effectively penalized exploring its world . then , the team made a fundamental change instead of celebrating the dexterity of the perfectly executed solo , their game would reward the steady , low key improvisation of rhythm guitar . the new system replaced individual notes with periodic chord markers , then encouraged players to try out their own patterns in the gaps . it was something i kind of have always wanted to do in a way , says pardo . i remember thinking like man , it would be cool if i could just play a power chord , and strum it , and it would be a power chord , right ? he built on a freestyle system that was already being put into rock band , which procedurally generated music based on users input , subtly changing the song based on how they played . it was really kind of indulging in this fantasy i wanted to have for myself . when i take a train out to harmonix s boston offices , the latest build of rock band vr is set up in a little conference room in one corner of the office , undergoing final tests before its debut at seattle s pax gaming show . rock band already requires a lot of hardware , but with the rift and touch , rock band vr takes it to another level . i step into the center of the room and hesitate , unsure whether i should put the guitar on over the rift , or vice versa . the best order , i decide , is controller and then headset , so you can pull off the rift before removing the guitar at the end of a song . everything is unfamiliar enough that i don t even recognize when things go wrong it takes me most of the tutorial to realize that the virtual guitar floating several feet away is actually the result of a bug , and supposed to be in my hands . like a lot of vr projects , rock band vr may actually be easier for people who haven t internalized the assumptions behind traditional video games . hitting button sequences won t take you as far as just following your air guitar instincts , including mimicking the swaggering body language of a rock star , which the rift headset and motion controller can detect and add to your score . even if the set list were exactly the same as an earlier rock band game , the experience would be completely different the way that performing hip swings and hand gestures in front of a kinect in dance central was different from hitting directional pads in its ancestor dance dance revolution . when i convince myself to relax a little , despite knowing that cameras are rolling outside the headset , this turns out to be a lot of fun . i don t exactly feel like i m part of a real band , although the final game is supposed to add a level of narrative development that no other rock band game has had . but it s easier to slip into the fantasy of the digital stage , to get past the inner voice whispering that playing with a fake musical instrument is a little silly . its virtual world adds a whole new answer to the eternal question ampnbspwhy don t you just learn guitar ? because no matter how good you get , few people will ever get so close to the adulation of a real crowd . it s easier to slip into the fantasy of a digital stagebut as with any game , rock band vr introduces layers of abstraction , and occasional frustration . as i try to shake my head in time to david bowie s suffragette city , the headset doesn t pick it up , and i m not sure if i ve totally missed the cue or i m just learning the system s quirks . since the rift doesn t detect foot motion , i have to hit effects pedals by looking at them . and most confusing of all , i can t see my fingers on the guitar frets . that last problem , actually , is eminently fixable . oculus own controllers feature capacitive surfaces that detect touch , and a custom rock band vr guitar could incorporate the same technology , giving you virtual fingers inside the game . the fact that there isn t one that the extent of the new hardware is a little oculus touch holster for older generations of guitar speaks to how much any vr development team still has to hedge its bets . oculus needs games like rock band vr . unlike the htc vive , the rift currently features few experiences that could only take place in virtual reality , and unlike playstation vr , it doesn t have a lot of big names to lean on . the facebook owned company can offer game designers like harmonix lots of money for bold , experimental projects . but that doesn t change the fact that the rift is still a tiny platform . asking people to buy one weird new accessory two , if you count the sold separately oculus touch is difficult enough . staking a whole new line of peripherals on an already marginal product would be almost suicidally optimistic . if any company is in a position to understand the challenges of niche hardware , it s harmonix . despite its contributions , the eyetoy and kinect never developed a robust game catalog , and the kinect in particular has become a cautionary tale for how vr could end up as a creative novelty that never quite finds its place . i think everyone s feeling out the waters , because nobody knows how to do anything , says lopiccolo of the vr industry . we re making all our first mistakes just like everybody else . nobody knows what s going to work and what s not going to work , and i think we feel like we ve stumbled into this corner of vr that works incredibly well . greg lopiccolothis uncertainty extends to basic elements of the experience . we don t know how the physical isolation of the oculus rift will change the party game appeal of rock band , or how the system might translate to other instruments . will people still want to hold impromptu concerts when they can t see who s watching ? even outside the virtual reality aspect of rock band vr , harmonix is giving players unprecedented latitude to make their own music . this is the closest we have ever gotten to what it really feels like to playing guitar . partly just because the guitar mechanic itself is so much more expressive it gives you so much more creative freedom but also because you re on stage and we track your movements , says lopiccolo . there s a whole aspect of gameplay that really has to do with performance , it s not just about playing the guitar . there may be something about vr that inherently encourages experience over mechanics . at the same time , the idea that people want open ended self expression goes counter to one of harmonix s earliest lessons . in ampnbspa interview with cnn , rigopulos and egozy recounted the horrendous failure of the axe in a way that s surprisingly reminiscent of many vr experiences . the product made an incredible demo everyone who stepped up to try it thought it was magical , recalled rigopulos . but then , after minutes , they lost interest . then , after moving to japan to work in its lucrative karaoke industry , they made a counterintuitive discovery . karaoke isn t about personal expression . it s about people reproducing the songs they know as accurately as they can , said rigopulos . the whole notion of adding improvisation elements just wasn t connecting . it was this revelation , effectively , that turned harmonix from an electronic music company to a game development studio . but as risky as working with virtual reality still is , the medium changes things . rock band vr doesn t leave players adrift to improvise on their own . it encourages creativity within guidelines , while providing a sensory experience that s totally different from a karaoke bar or your own living room . and if it does succeed , the reward will be a fantasy unlike anything else in vr perhaps even the oculus rift s saving grace . disclosure matt boch , a designer on rock band vr , is a visiting professor at the nyu game center , my husband s workplace . 	 on tuesday , thousands of people stampeded into a lecture hall in guadalajara , mexico , to hear spacex ceo elon musk talk about how he wants to colonize mars . the fervor of the audience gave the room an electric charge as musk s speech got underway people cheered as he avowed to create a self sustaining mars colony of million people over the next to years . musk dazzled the crowd with concepts for two new types of vehicles a massive reusable rocket booster and a giant transporter to carry people and cargo to mars . he also laid out critical details about them such as how big they would need to be and the materials they would be made from . and we got more insight into the new powerful raptor engine that spacex is building to get this plan off the ground . once the electricity of the room died away , questions about his plan started to surfaceabove all , musk explained how aspects of this architecture such as reusability and propellant choices could bring down the cost of going to mars to less than , a ticket . it was clear that he had been thinking about this minutiae for some time , and experts lauded the idea of trying to make such a massive feat realistic and affordable . if you drive the costs of transportation down by four orders of magnitude , then everything becomes easy , chris mckay , a planetary scientist at nasa ames research center , tells the verge . you need more advanced life support systems ? then you just ship them because they re cheaper to ship . it completely redefines the problem of how you support people on the surface of mars . but once the lecture was over and the electricity of the room died away , questions about his plan started to surface . namely , very few details about human safety were laid out , and some of the engineering claims made by musk seemed incredibly optimistic and even unattainable . how exactly are people going to survive the trip ? musk offered few details about life inside the spaceship that would transport people to mars . though he promised that the trip would be fun with restaurants and zero g games , there were no concrete descriptions of how the passengers would pass the time and , crucially , stay alive . the increased levels of radiation that people will experience on a trip to mars is ampnbspone of nasa s biggest concerns . deep space is filled with tiny energized particles either from solar flares or deep space cosmic rays that have the potential to harm people during the voyage . astronauts on the international space station are largely shielded from this radiation thanks to earth s magnetic field , which deflects most of the deep space particles . but those on missions to mars will not have the planet s magnetic shielding , and it s not known what effects that might have on the human body . musk was remarkably casual about this danger , though . there s going to be some risk of radiation , but it s not deadly , said musk . there will be some slightly increased risk of cancer , but i think it s relatively minor . he went on to describe ways that mars colonists could shield themselves perhaps by reorienting the spaceship during a solar flare and huddling under a column of water . still , he made it clear he wasn t particularly concerned about this problem . the radiation thing is often brought up , but i think it s not too big of a deal , said musk . the radiation thing is often brought up , but i think it s not too big of a deal . this casual approach to radiation isn t shared by space researchers . radiation he maybe down played it a little more than i would have , says mckay . it s not a show stopper , but you have to worry about solar flares . mckay also says there needs to be a storm shelter , in which fuel or some other liquid is used to slow down and deflect incoming particles . he discussed this very quickly . it s a very sketchy solution , but that s basically the solution to radiation . while there may be ways to hide from radiation , there s something that space travelers won t be able to escape on their way to mars microgravity . people s bodies go through dramatic changes in zero g . they can lose bone density , their muscles atrophy , and their eyesight gets worse . what exercise regimes will the crew need to do ? how will days on a ship affect them ? zero g games may be fun , but the entire mission will be for naught if people s bodies deteriorate on the way to mars . more questions remain once the crew reaches mars . what will they do all day , and how long are they expected to stay before they take a return trip ? musk already has some ideas about how best to run the planet he suggests a direct democracy but it seems unlikely that the very first people on mars will be tasked with figuring that . instead , they ll be more concerned with staying alive . where will the colonists live on mars and how will they survive ? not once during his talk did musk mention where people will live once they arrive on mars . spacex s promo video of the mission conveniently ends right as the colonists get to the planet , providing little insight into what life in the company s colony would be like . during a q ampampa after the event , musk said that spacex only wants to build the transport system that will get people to the red planet . it s like building the union pacific railroad , and once that transport system is built , then there s a tremendous opportunity for anyone who wants to go to mars and create something new or build the foundations of a new planet , said musk . it s unclear then who will be responsible for creating the habitatsit s unclear then who will be responsible for creating the habitats and actually constructing the self sustaining civilization musk envisions . such a civilization will have to have key life support systems to create breathable air , a way to clean and recycle water , and a way to feed the colonists . once a colony gets big enough , it s not feasible for all the food to come from earth , so people will have to eventually live off the land . that means learning to cultivate crops no easy feat . martian soil is thought to contain salts known as perchlorates , which are toxic for humans . so if crops are going to be grown on mars , they either need to be grown in soil from earth or the martian soil must be somehow cleaned . spacex musk also didn t address the health challenges people will face on the red planet . radiation levels are still a concern on mars , though there is some shielding from the planet s thin atmosphere . an artificial magnetic field could be created on mars to deflect high energy particles , musk said . but he didn t provide any information of how this magnetic field would be created . neither did musk address the problem of reduced gravity . mars may have more gravity than space , but it still has about one third the gravity of earth . the effects of living for so long in this kind of gravity environment still aren t known . we do not know at all what will be the human response , or the response of an embryo or a young child , to one third gravity , says mckay . what about planetary protection ? another question is how and if musk plans to prevent earth microbes from contaminating mars , and mars microbes if there are any from contaminating earth . the outer space treaty of requires that ampnbspnations exploring other planets take measures against smearing earth microbes across the solar system . there are a few reasons for these precautions . one is scientific containing our microbes means that if we find life on another planet , we can be reasonably sure it s not from our own world . the second is ethical what if we introduce earth life to another planet , where it outcompetes whatever undetected life is already there ? and the third is for safety if we re contaminating mars , could it contaminate us ? a mission to colonize mars with people would necessarily colonize the planet with the microbesa mission to colonize mars with people would necessarily colonize the planet with the microbes in our food , our waste , and on our bodies . moving people back and forth would be an easy way to cross contaminate the two worlds . but how we ll protect mars from our microbes , and us from any on mars , didn t factor into any of the plans that musk discussed yesterday . adhering to planetary protection doesn t seem to be a concern of musk s either when it comes to a colony . so far , we re really not seeing any sign of surface life on mars , he said at a press conference after the lecture . but i think the planet we really need to consider protecting is earth . that s where life exists as we know it in abundance . he then went on to say that people are life s agents and that we can help breathe life to the sterile world of mars . things get even more dicey for planetary protection since musk is a big proponent of terraforming mars the science fiction term for making the planet like earth . last year , musk talked about nuking mars to make it inhabitable during an interview on the late show with stephen colbert . he later explained that he wants to nuke the sky over the martian poles every couple of seconds , to create two tiny pulsing suns over the regions . the tiny suns would then warm up the planet and turn any frozen carbon dioxide into gas . co is a potent greenhouse gas , and its presence in the atmosphere would make mars warmer . during his talk , musk only briefly mentioned terraforming , saying that if we could warm up mars we could create a thicker atmosphere and have flowing water . but he didn t present any plan for this and said at the press conference plans to terraform would be up to the decision of the people on mars . how will the ships return to earth ? musk said he wants to bring his spaceships back to earth but didn t go into detail about how . the spacex ceo said he wants to build methane propellant plants that would create fuel for the spaceships on the red planet , rather than carrying that fuel from earth . methane can be created on mars with relative ease , musk said , because it can be synthesized from subsurface ice and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere . the first ship to land on mars would bring with it a small propellant plant the first ship to land on mars would bring with it a small propellant plant , which would be expanded as time went on , musk said . he noted that a large field of solar panels would be used to power the planet , but he didn t give any details on how this plant would be built or operated , nor how much fuel would be needed to make the return trips possible . i won t go into detail here , but people can think about it offline , musk said . how can musk make such short trips to mars ? musk s presentation today included some estimates for how long the spaceship s journeys would take and they were all quite short , anywhere between and days . nasa s estimates that this trip would take a lot longer the shortest estimate would still be more than half a year long , or about days in between the two planets . i couldn t quite follow where that was coming from , bobby braun , an associate professor of space technology at the georgia institute of technology , tells the verge . i think it d be very hard to get there in the transfer times that he mentioned . when we send robotic missions to mars , they tend to take nine months to get there . musk explained at the press conference that the estimates are based on how fast you can speed up the spaceship going to mars . if the spaceship travels at six kilometers per second , then the trip can go from six or seven months to just three months . and potentially it could go even faster than that . but musk said it would need a substantial amount of energy to get a spaceship to that speed and a substantial amount of energy to brake . how is the whole mars colonization plan going to be funded ? a big chunk of musk s speech revolved around bringing down the cost of going to mars . given his estimates , it would take about million to manufacture one booster , one spaceship , and one propellant tanker . ultimately , that would mean a cost of less than , per ton to get to mars . that seems relatively cheap for such a massive undertaking , but the truth is no one has a solid estimate for how much a human mars mission would cost . estimates have ranged from billion and billion to as high as . trillion . musk gave a number of different ways spacex could fund this endeavor , such as making higher profits and launching more satellites . but even with his low estimates , musk still maintained spacex can t do this all on its own . he argued strongly for the need of collaboration with the government and private industry . it makes sense given that spacex has relied on partnerships for much of its business . nasa has been a fairly big investor in the company , but it remains to be seen if musk s talk will be enough to woo the space agency to pitch in again . in the future , there may be a nasa contract , there may not be , said musk at the press conference . i don t know . thanks to nasa for putting their faith in us https t . co kctblpbsg spacex spacex september , there s no doubt that musk knows rockets . he has a clear vision for the types of vehicles he thinks will make a mars settlement both possible and affordable . and he s proven that he can deliver capable spacecraft , even if there are some questions surrounding the vehicle s reliability . but a human mars settlement is more than just hardware . the lives of people will be at stake , and serious thought needs to be given to the safety of the first human settlers . musk admitted that the first colonists would have to be prepared to die , but killing people either on the way to mars or once they get there will defeat the entire purpose of creating a colony in the first place . spacex may consider itself just a transportation company , but if it wants to get in the business of transporting humans , the company needs to reassure the public it can get them to a destination in one piece . alessandra potenza , angela chen , and rachel becker contributed to this report . spacex trip to mars simulation	 the company that turned live streaming into a sensation last year is ready to introduce its next act . meerkat , ampnbspwhich sparked new interest in mobile broadcasting before ampnbspsputtering amid competition from facebook and twitter , has returned with ampnbsphouseparty . it s an app for video chatting with friends that the company is calling a synchronous social network a place to be together even when you re apart . built under a pseudonym for months , the app for ampnbspandroid and ampnbspios has been gaining traction among young people around the country and it s closing in on million users . its creators say it encourages users to have frequent , candid conversations with their friends and family . the question houseparty will face now that the company is ready to talk about it is that same one that dogged meerkat can it last ? spontaneous togetherness last spring , when his company s live streaming app meerkat became an overnight sensation , ben rubin explained its popularity with two words spontaneous togetherness . starting a broadcast with a couple of taps from a mobile phone , reaching a huge audience of friends and interested strangers , proved irresistible when meerkat ampnbsphad its breakout moment at south by southwest . the company quickly raised million in new funding from investors who thought it could be the next major social platform . then the idea of spontaneous togetherness seemed to spontaneously combust . twitter ampnbspblocked meerkat s access to its social graph and released a significantly more polished live streaming app of its own , periscope , within weeks . facebook built live streaming into its flagship mobile app , which has more than billion monthly users , a few months later . suddenly meerkat was in a three way fight against two companies with significantly more resources at their disposal . meerkatbut from rubin s perspective , meerkat faced an even bigger problem most people simply don t want to broadcast themselves regularly . meerkat users might launch a broadcast a handful of times , but the distance between each broadcast grew larger every time a week between broadcast six and seven , a month between seven and eight . we don t see the category of live media breaking out as we envisioned it last summer , rubin told me last week at the company s offices in san francisco . everybody felt like this is going to be the next big thing . and we did scratch the surface . but what we ended up with is that live is a great feature on top of an existing network . it s not quite yet in a place where it can justify a whole new medium and a whole new set of behaviors where everyone is doing it on a daily basis . in august the company whose actual name is life on air went back to the drawing board . it wasn t the first time the company had previously built yevvo , an earlier take on broadcasting that focused on locations and air , an app for live streaming between friends . after yevvo became a ghost town , the team hacked together meerkat in eight weeks . its success gave them another chance but now the ground was falling out from underneath them again . group video chat for up to eight friendsat a retreat , rubin and his newly hired chief operating officer , sima sistani , asked their team which parts of meerkat they actually enjoyed using . the majority said broadcasts were the most fun when a close friend or family member joined the broadcast to talk with them . rubin wondered whether that might serve as the basis for meerkat s next act . as they had before , the company hacked together a working prototype . open the app and it would immediately begin to broadcast using the front facing camera , while notifying your friends that you were live or as the company now says , in the house . up to seven other friends could join you with a tap , appearing on your phone s screen in video windows of their own . they called the app houseparty a name designed to suggest good times while courting a hip , young demographic . housepartyeven among supporters , some worried whether they were giving up on what meerkat calls one to many broadcasting too soon . i was a little bit skeptical , said josh elman , a partner at greylock ventures and member of the meerkat board . he thought meerkat might still have room to grow , and worried a private broadcasting app might find it difficult to acquire users . but the team loved using their creation , and elman supported the effort . the only problem meerkat didn t want to associate its name with the new product . the company had just raised millions of dollars in support of public live streaming , after all , and a pivot to private sharing was likely to generate noisy criticism . it would also put enormous pressure on the company s next product to be an outsized success . and so the former meerkat staged a hoax . it launched houseparty on android and ios with no fanfare , listing the developer as alexander herzick which happens to be the name of sistani s husband . they chose him as their front man because of his almost nonexistent social media profile . later , after houseparty rose to no . in the app store s top downloads chart , the company built fake facebook and linkedin pages for herzick to support the illusion . when venture capitalists would email him asking to meet , the company responded by sending them daft punk gifs . soon the company dispatched employees to college campuses in alabama , ohio , and arkansas . they met with fraternities , sororities , and other student groups to show them how the app worked . students began using the app to make friday night plans , to reminisce the morning after , and to do homework together during the week . students use it to do make plans and do homeworkfor the company , the best news was that users weren t abandoning the app after five or six broadcasts . instead they returned several times a week and invited their friends . houseparty spread to all states and then other countries . then the company almost lost it all again . by may , houseparty was growing so fast that the team of about people couldn t keep up . users would open the app and find that it wouldn t connect , or the call would drop . everyone was like , it s a good problem to have , sistani said . in the moment it doesn t feel like a good problem to have . app store reviews went from effusively positive to strongly negative . the number of new users slowed to a crawl . the next month , the app s connection to meerkat was revealed by recode . it also laid off about five people , according to recode . but houseparty hired kyle maxwell , a former senior engineer at twitter , to help address its scaling problems . user growth started to pick up again once the school year started , and the team is beginning to dream big again . the idea , rubin says , is to create a live , always on place that you can dip in and out of whenever you want . in his mind , it s the best part of live streaming , minus the social anxieties that come from calling someone or initiating a facetime call . no one ends their day by calling five friends , says sistani , who was formerly the head of media partnerships at tumblr . but if you could talk to five friends simultaneously , even while you were apart , you just might . we have a ton of spaces , mobile networks , where we share and we engage and we interact in an asynchronous way , elman told me over the phone . but we don t have many spaces that we go together at the same time to chill , to hang out , to interact , to be live . look at us having this live phone call this is a very different interaction than you sharing a photo and me liking it . those are all really powerful , too . but i still think this idea of these actual spaces is really important . houseparty has some goofy touches that will endear it to a younger crowd . a friend of a friend can enter your chat , and when they do , a banner warning stranger danger ! flashes on your screen . you can wave at other users to send them a push notification inviting them to join you like a facetime call , sure , but a bit less thirsty . and you can lock your room for privacy . so far it s all free , and there are no ads to be found anywhere . we re making a bet that live video is as real as it gets . if you re older than , houseparty might not be for you . an app that requires me to shoot video of myself is not something i m going to do much of during the work week . if i were , though , i can easily imagine myself opening it up after class to talk about homework and the day s gossip with my friends . a social network for generation z might look something like this , sistani says . she linked the popularity of snapchat among young people with the informal , authentic forms of sharing that it encourages . you might even call it . . . spontaneous togetherness . everything in this new generation is trying to come back to what feels real , she says . so we re making a bet that live video is as real as it gets . 	 this article was originally published on november th , . we have revived it today in light of blackberry s declaration that it s getting out of the business of designing and building its own phones . as the last holdout to favor physical keyboards on smart mobile devices , blackberry s outsourcing move today marks one of the final milestones in the demise of the physical keyboard . so here , once more , is a salute to this now historic input device . i bought a droid twenty one months ago . as a devout user of physical qwerty keyboards , i m pretty sure i m screwed . my two year contract expires in just three more months , but i don t know if my phone will make it . i touch type all my interviews into my droid , but it s simply not reliable anymore . there isn t a day that goes by without some app experiencing crippling slowdown . the phone just can t seem to hold a charge . and it s not like i can just go out and upgrade , even if i had the cash there isn t a single desirable smartphone with a physical qwerty keyboard on the horizon . over the last few months , motorola announced the moto x , the droid ultra , the droid maxx , and the droid mini , but there was no droid to be had . isn t it strange how all the high end smartphones with keyboards have up and disappeared ? recently , i met doug kaufman , manager of handset strategy for sprint . he had a story to share . the qwerty champion for years , i ve been the qwerty champion within sprint , kaufman began . sprint s had one of the largest bases of qwerty going back to the whole messaging phenomenon . . . at one point we were selling percent messaging phones , he explained right off the bat . when android came along and smartphones truly began to take off , handsets with qwerty keyboards did very well for sprint . the samsung moment , the ampnbspevo shift , the ampnbspepic g we sold multimillions of those , said kaufman . it was a big party and nobody came . all the research told sprint that it was on the right track , that physical keyboards were a differentiator that would help the carrier sell phones . when sprint conducted surveys , it found that to percent of respondents with side sliding physical qwerty keyboards reported that it was easy to type words and letters . by contrast , touchscreen only devices typically polled under percent . the best touch only device we ever had was the ampnbspgalaxy note ii , said kaufman , on which percent of respondents said typing was easy . the ampnbspiphone was around percent , just to give you a sense . and for a time , it seemed like that typing experience would actually drive future purchases . when sprint asked customers whether they d buy a physical keyboard the next time around not so long ago percent of existing qwerty users said they would . even one quarter of iphone users , and percent of galaxy note ii users , said they d prefer a physical qwerty keyboard on their next smartphone . so we had all that data , and we said look , there s still the demand for qwerty . and then we went out and built the ampnbsplg mach and the ampnbspphoton q . it was a big party and nobody came . so much for surveys . what happened ? people started buying phones they could recognize , according to kaufman . he believes the reason that qwerty phones stopped selling has little to do with large screens and everything to do with a trend towards iconic handsets flagship devices which boast fancy designs and giant advertising campaigns . at the end of the day , what happened is two things . half of your customers buy the iphone . all those people who said , oh , i m going to buy qwerty , boom , take them out of the equation . and then as you probably know , the market has moved to everyone buying iconic phones . . . people see the advertising , they walk in , they want to buy a ampnbspgalaxy s iii , says kaufman . or an ampnbsphtc one , he adds suddenly . one and doneit s ironic that kaufman would mention htc . the taiwanese company built a good part of its reputation on qwerty handsets before it decided to put all its eggs into one iconic basket . after years of manufacturing tiny windows mobile typing machines , htc built the very first android smartphone , the ampnbspt mobile g . if a cellular carrier needed a qwerty phone to offer their customers , htc was all too happy to provide , manufacturing devices like the evo shift g , the ampnbspg , and t mobile s entire mytouch line . but in , htc decided to focus on just one smartphone at a time . the htc one series was the company s attempt to make its products a little more iconic , a little more like samsung s successful galaxy line . the announcement came with bad news for keyboard fans , though htc designer claude zellweger explained that the firm was moving away from qwerty as a whole . we have texting , emoticons , voice to text and other such methods of communication that have abbreviated our exchanges . why did htc abandon the physical keyboard ? certainly , design played a role . htc design director jonah becker tells me that sliding qwerty devices like my droid are typically significantly thicker and harder to slip into a pocket , and that the moving parts result in a phone that doesn t feel as solid as a monolithic bar type phone . but surprisingly , becker tells me that the physical construction wasn t the primary justification the real reason is not design , but the changes in behavior . he explains how far virtual keyboards have come , how children are growing up with touchscreens , and how written communication has become less critical for the smartphone audience . if a picture tells a thousand words , how many can you convey with a vine or a youtube clip ? we have texting , emoticons , voice to text and other such methods of communication that have abbreviated our exchanges . this all makes a physical qwerty less important , says becker . motorola , the manufacturer of my droid , agrees . there became this interesting tension where people wanted to see information , but they didn t need input as much , motorola svp rick osterloh tells me . htc s qwertya forced choice ? i wasn t totally buying that the world abandoned the idea of physical keyboards overnight . it seemed more likely to me that the cellular industry never gave them a choice . for the past several years , buying a smartphone with a qwerty keyboard has meant settling for less than the latest and greatest technology on the market . when my droid launched in february , it had already been completely outspecced and outclassed by devices with better screens . arguably , there hasn t been a top tier smartphone with a physical keyboard since the samsung epic g set a new high bar for android devices in august , . the carriers had decided to treat qwerty sliders as messaging phones for teens rather than tools of the elite , and adjusted their asks and advertising respectively . who killed the qwerty keyboard ? the usual suspect is the hd screen . visual real estate has become a focal point for the industry . and yet , as screens got wider , they became harder to hold , so manufacturers made them thinner to compensate . thin and wide became the goal , and then the norm . we used to want a tv for these types of experiences , but now we expect a cinematic experience on a phone , says htc s becker . who killed the qwerty keyboard ? the usual suspect is the hd screenand that s where you run into trouble with physical keyboards , according to motorola s rick osterloh . keyboards make it so you have to cut the screen size down , or have a slider form factor which adds a considerable amount of cost , thickness , and weight to the product . there s really no getting around that because it s another mechanical part . . . it ends up being fundamentally thicker by just a few millimeters , he tells me . still , all of this assumes that smartphone buyers would actually rather have a top tier smartphone with a large hd screen instead of a top tier smartphone with a smaller screen and a keyboard . in the past couple of years , that s never even been an option . the niche marketbut what if it were ? would manufacturers and carriers consider building an iconic phone with top of the line specs , a nice hd screen , and a physical qwerty keyboard that slides out from underneath ? even sprint s qwerty champion doug kaufman doesn t think that s likely to happen . i think there would be a segment out there that would buy it , but it s getting smaller every day . . . the oems want a thin , sexy device to put on advertising , he explains . i think the ship has really sailed on qwerty . we saw what happened to the manufacturer who thought different . for their part , htc and motorola say the keyboard is simply not that important . i use the htc one now , and can t imagine going back to a physical keyboard , says becker , adding that htc has to stay focused to achieve its design aims . i don t think there are roadblocks preventing us from building a qwerty phone at any price point . it s that the behaviors and technologies have made them less of a priority , he explains . the combination of voice dictation and predictive software keyboards reduces the imperative to have a physical keyboard for a consumer , says motorola s rick osterloh . is the qwerty so incredibly niche that manufacturers are willing to let blackberry have that market unchallenged ? one anonymous industry insider hints that blackberry s misfortunes might actually be part of the problem . believe me , this is a game of volume . . . if they thought qwerty would be a meaningful niche , it would not go ignored . we saw what happened to the manufacturer who thought different . still , when i push sprint s kaufman just a little bit further , he relents . it d need to be an htc one q , a galaxy s q . . . a flagship phone with top of the line specs . if you could have a galaxy s with a qwerty , i think people would buy that . if any company were to try qwerty again , samsung would seem to be the most likely candidate . though some have accused the korean manufacturer of copying competitors , the company has also shown that it s willing to go to substantial lengths to make its smartphones appear bigger and bolder than the competition . it was samsung that pushed screen sizes to a crazy . inches , and samsung who successfully brought the stylus back from the dead . now that the company already has a screen size for every pocket and purse , perhaps the company could use its marketing prowess to push the physical keyboard once more . i selfishly hope so . 	 when apple ampnbspunveiled the seventh iteration of the iphone yesterday , it made sure to play up the camera . after all , the company has a ampnbspsmall army working on the iphone s ability to take photos . the device s camera is also often touted as one of its most cherished features , keeping apple s smartphone ahead of the competition . yet in recent years , ampnbspcompetition from samsung and others has caught up to apple s imaging lead . the newest apple devices , the iphone and iphone plus , are naturally more capable in the photo department than their predecessors . but apple is stepping up the game with what it s calling a machine learning enhanced image signal processor isp . marketing chief phil schiller says this ai powered isp performs as many as billion operations in just milliseconds . this takes some unpacking and demystifying , and we should start with the ampnbspimage apple used to promote the iphone event . the invite said see you on th , accompanied by an artful arrangement of colorful dots that were blurred out using a popular camera technique . the effect there has a name bokeh . the term comes from the japanese word boke , which means to blur or haze , or more specifically boke aji . as you might guess , that second phrase means the quality of said blur , and it was ampnbsppopularized by photo technique magazine editor mike johnston in , who suggested english speakers use the short version and pronounce it , boh kay . it s a fancy photographer term used to analyze and weigh the artistic properties of blurring out the background of images and , to a greater extent , sources of light behind the subject of a photo . it s how lights at night can turn into fuzzy , grainy orbs , as seen on apple s event invite . smartphones have been very bad at producing bokehthis effect is best achieved by using a shallow depth of field . a standard dslr camera can do this easily by way of a wide aperture , which increases the amount of light the lens allows in when you re snapping a shot . you also typically need a lens capable of producing a wide aperture , expressed in lower f stops . it s something that is very easy to achieve on a professional camera , as well with many mirrorless and lower cost point and shoots these days . to achieve the effect with a smartphone is more difficult . in the past , you could do so with a ton of tinkering , some generous light , and very careful focusing with the tap of your finger . still , because you don t have control over the size of the opening of the lens on your phone , it s hard to blur out the background on a mobile shot . this is where ai comes in . now , we re not discussing your standard voice ai like siri or cortana , or the kind of natural language software employed by google to autocomplete a search result or scan your email messages . this is a computer vision ai that aims to understand the contents of photos . this variety can be used for sophisticated tasks , like when ampnbspfacebook auto tags your friends faces or when ampnbspgoogle teaches an algorithm to identify cats on the internet . a more simple , but still challenging , problem is to determine what the subject of a photo is , and where that subject begins blending in with the background . this is very difficult for machines . software only understands a photo as a series of numeric values pertaining to changes in color . algorithms have no concept of the subject , foreground , or background of an image . it cannot delineate between a dog or a cat or a cloud in the sky . so ai researchers ampnbspuse machine learning to train these programs . by feeding it thousands upon thousands of examples , a software program can begin to understand and make sense of the contents of a photo . it can start to determine where the sky breaks with the treeline , and when two distinct objects happen to overlap , like an owner and their dog . these programs are often referred to as neural nets , because they process these examples in ways similar to the human brain , but with more emphasis on probability . so give software enough photos of cats , for instance , and the machine will begin determining with high accuracy whether a photo contains a cat like image . facebook is using this style of machine learning to help turn the contents of a photo ampnbspinto a spoken description for blind users . google does it within its google photos app , where you can search for mountains or beach and find photos without ever having tagged it or ascribed it a location . using machine learning , tech companies can train software by feeding it examplesfor apple , it sounds a little more basic and a lot more practical . the new iphone s camera and the dual camera lenses on the iphone plus are powered by software that aims to understand the contents of an image . once it identifies people and objects and backgrounds , the phone can automatically perform a number of tasks . those include automatically setting exposure , focus , and white balance . notably , ampnbspapple purchased a startup last year called perceptio that focused on doing this kind of advanced image recognition at higher speeds , without relying on huge stores of data . a more advanced feature , for the iphone plus specifically , allows it to blur it out the background in real time with a new portrait setting . this works because both lenses work together to capture nine layers of depth and create a so called depth map , a process described by a ampnbspnumber of patents apple was granted in the last year . with portrait mode , you can get crisp and tight dslr style images with the kind of bokeh once reserved for only pro grade shots . this is all aided by the device s new f . aperture setting , which lets in way more light and helps amplify the shallow depth of field . it s a neat trick , for sure , but it also helps apple bolster its argument that the iphone is the best smartphone camera on the market . regardless of whether that claim holds up , schiller made the point that the camera may probably be the best camera they ve consumers ever owned , simply because the ubiquity of smartphones trumps how many dslr cameras are out there . so schiller may be throwing out overly grand statements here , as per usual , but it is a distinct possibility the iphone could help a lot of smartphone owners take better pictures than ever . in true apple fashion , you won t need to do too much yourself . you ll select your mode , frame the shot , and let the phone do the heavy lifting . this time around , smarter software behind the scenes will pull more of the weight . apple s iphone event in minutes	 an exploding phone seems like a freak accident , but the same chemical properties that make batteries work also make them likely to catch fire . samsung is learning this the hard way , as it becomes the latest company to recall a device in this case , its new galaxy note phone because the batteries could be dangerous . when batteries explode , it s often the failure of manufacturers to make sure no explosion will happen . exploding batteries can be the consequence of overeager companies pushing technology to the limit . as our screens gets bigger and phones more powerful , they need more energy , but most of us are unwilling to give up battery life or charging speed . we ve already achieved almost percent of the maximum battery life theoretically possible from the lithium ion battery , according to lynden archer , a materials scientist at cornell university , so manufacturers are pushing the limits more and more to eke out only a little bit more energy . there s been a bit of an arms race where every manufacturer of a smartphone wants to get the highest battery life , he says . this trend in the field is producing more and more of a tendency for overcharging so all these models of failure are becoming more commonplace . samsung blames the galaxy note recall on the fact that , in some devices , two parts of the battery that should not have touched came together . but there are many common ways for rechargeable lithium ion batteries to break , and this usually happens because we keep demanding more from the devices . lithium ion batteries are the type used in almost all smartphones and electronics . engineers use lithium because it s light and can hold a lot of energy . as we reported earlier , samsung has stressed that reports of problematic batteries account for less than . percent of the entire volume sold but there s no doubt that this global recall is more than just a minor snafu for the consumer electronics giant . the note launched just a few weeks ago and was met with mostly positive reviews , including our own . more importantly , samsung managed to make waves in the smartphone market weeks before apple launched its highly anticipated new iphone . now , samsung s successful launch has been marred by exploding batteries . to understand what makes a battery safe , it s helpful to know how they work . there are two electrodes , or electrical conductors , on opposite sides . one electrode holds positively charged ions and is called the cathode . the cathode is filled with lithium and that is where the fuel is stored . the opposite electrode holds negatively charged ions and is called the anode . during charging , lithium ions move from the cathode to the anode . when the battery is in use , the lithium moves in the opposite direction . in between are chemicals called electrolytes that conduct the current by helping ions move more easily between the two sides . but even though ions need to move from side to side , the anode and the cathode themselves should never touch because they ll redirect energy to the electrolytes . to prevent this from happening , battery makers insert separators in between . batteries can fail when they re charged too much or too fastthat s what went wrong with the galaxy note the separators were flawed and let the two electrodes touch . this is considered the worst possible failure because it will most certainly lead to fire and possibly even an explosion , says archer . when the electrodes come into contact , all the energy being pumped into the battery goes directly to the electrolytes in the middle instead of in the electrodes on the side . electrolytes aren t very stable to begin with and the quick movement they facilitate also leads to instability . when there s a lot of heat whether through the two electrodes touching , or something as simple as it being too hot outside it can make the electrolyte react with the other chemicals and create gas in a way that releases even more heat . each time the chemicals react , the gases release more and more heat at a faster and faster rate . this creates an uncontrolled positive feedback loop called thermal runaway , which can end in a fire . this is why many phones shut down automatically when it s hot . but there are other ways that batteries become explosive . they can also fail when they re charged too much , or too fast . overcharging is like filling up a bucket with too much water . it doesn t matter how slowly you go because if you pour in too much , the bucket will overflow . in the case of batteries , overcharging happens when too much lithium goes into the anode . this isn t something you risk from keeping your phone plugged in all night most batteries are designed to automatically prevent overcharging . rather , it s a manufacturer defect that can happen when the circuitry that prevents this from happening is faulty . the battery is like a rubber band , says dan steingart , a materials scientist at princeton university . when you re charging the battery , you re stretching the rubber band when you re using it , you re releasing it . just like a rubber band can break if you stretch it too much , putting too much energy into one side will ruin the battery . some scientists are developing a kind of electrolyte that won t burst into flamesthen there s the problem of going too fast . this means trying to drive too much current into the battery , which is a danger for the so called fast charging technology . though they weren t the issue here , samsung does offer fast charging tech . if the charger is incompatible with the battery for any reason , the battery can also short out . this can be avoided by making sure the charger and the battery are meant to work together . charging too much or too fast can lead to a problem called plating . think of the battery like two egg crates . lithium ions need to shuttle between the spaces in the two egg plates to be safely deposited inside , says steingart . if you charge the battery slowly , the lithium has time to find its spot in the egg crate as it goes back and forth . but go too quickly or have too much , and lithium will just deposit itself on the outside of the egg crate and then onto itself . then , each time you recharge , the lithium builds on itself and forms needle like structures called dendrites that can internally short out the battery . the last common source of failure happens when companies try to make batteries store more power by increasing voltage . voltage is a way to measure force . think of voltage like the height of a waterfall , while current is like the amount of water flowing . the higher the voltage , the more power there is in the battery , so manufacturers try to pump this up by adding elements like nickel to the lithium . but again the higher the voltage is , the more likely the electrolytes are to combine in a way that makes them catch fire . some scientists are trying to develop a kind of electrolyte that won t burst into flames as easily . these electrolytes , called ionic liquids , need a lot more heat to form flammable gas , says surya moganty , a chemical engineer who is the chief technology officer of nohms technology . these are often much safer , but there can be challenges with battery life , he says . until we get there though , most of us are stuck with lithium ion batteries . the very fact that these work is an engineering marvel , says steingart , but that doesn t take away from the instability of the devices . anything that can hold this much energy and you can potentially get all the energy out in a couple minutes you should treat like a potential bomb regardless of what it s made out of , he adds . battery tech is continually advancing , but not at the rate of our desire for faster charging and longer battery life and it s up to the manufacturers to remember this , and protect us from what we want . 	 the spread of isis propaganda online has put social media companies in a tough position . governments are urging facebook , twitter , and google to more aggressively remove extremist content , in the hopes of reducing the terrorist group s influence . but the companies self moderation systems have struggled to keep pace , and terrorist material continues to spread online . now , a nonprofit organization has developed an algorithm that it says can automate the removal of terrorist related content . but there are concerns that it could infringe on freedom of speech , and some question whether automated content removal would mitigate radicalization . the algorithm , called eglyph , was announced in june by the counter extremism project cep , a new york based nonprofit organization that tracks extremist groups . eglyph uses so called hashing technology to assign a unique fingerprint to images , videos , and audio that have already been flagged as extremist , and automatically removes any versions that have been uploaded to a social network . it will also automatically delete other versions as soon as users attempt to upload them . a game changer for social media companies ? eglyph was developed by hany farid , professor of computer science at dartmouth college , and is modeled on the photodna algorithm that farid created with microsoft in to combat child pornography . both photodna and eglyph are capable of recognizing images even if they ve been resized or altered , but eglyph extends the technology to video and audio . youtube s contentid system uses similar technology to identify copyright infringing videos . eglyph is in its final stages of testing , and will be made freely available to social media companies . the cep is also compiling a database of extremist content , called the national office on reporting extremism norex , which it hopes will become a comprehensive resource for researchers and social media companies . mark wallace , the ceo of the cep and a former ambassador to the un under president george w . bush , describes eglyph as a game changer . he believes the algorithm , if adopted widely , could help stem the spread of terrorist propaganda and dissuade radical groups from posting extremist content in the first place . if an extremist group knows that the moment they try to post a video online , that it will be immediately removed and it won t have that viral reach , perhaps it s no longer compelling for them because they can no longer accomplish their propaganda aims , wallace says . lawmakers in europe and the us have called on tech companies to more proactively police terrorist propaganda over the past year , following a spate of high profile attacks . last month , a panel of british lawmakers said in a report that facebook , twitter , and other tech giants are consciously failing to combat isis online , echoing previous statements from leaders in france and germany . no group has been as successful at drawing people into its message than isis , ampnbspmichael steinbach , executive assistant director at the national security branch of the fbi , said in a july ampnbspinterview . ampnbsp far right extremism has become a growing concern , as well . germany has pressured facebook and other companies to more swiftly remove xenophobic content and other material targeting refugees and a study published last week by george washington university s program on extremism found that neo nazis and american white nationalist groups continue to thrive on twitter , even as isis influence has waned on the social network . hany farid , the dartmouth computer science professor who developed photodna and eglyph . dartmouth college tech companies have said they re committed to combatting extremism on their platforms , pointing to statistics on content removal and suspensions . last month , twitter announced that it has suspended , accounts for promoting terrorism since mid , including , accounts since february . the industry appears to be moving toward automation , as well . in a blog post announcing the suspensions , twitter added that it has begun incorporating automated technologies , including proprietary spam fighting tools , to supplement its reporting system . in june , reuters reported that facebook and youtube have quietly begun implementing automated hashing systems , though wallace says that discussions with major social media companies about adopting eglyph are still ongoing . there are a lot of questions around what constitutes extremist or problematic content some experts say that automation could help limit the reach that isis and other groups have on social media , though there are questions over how such technologies would be implemented . unlike child pornography , which is more easily identifiable , extremist content covers a broad spectrum , and laws governing its dissemination vary from country to country . no one would argue that we should allow beheading videos , but there are a lot of questions around what constitutes extremist or problematic content , says john horgan , a professor of psychology at georgia state university who has extensively studied isis and other terrorist groups . some worry that the algorithm would inadvertently block propaganda videos or newsworthy content . although many news outlets have not broadcast isis beheading videos , some have aired parts of the clips that do not show any violence . if those clips bear the same fingerprint as the original video , the algorithm may automatically remove them from facebook and twitter . a lot of news organizations have broadcast portions of those videos , and have made a decision that those excerpts are newsworthy , says vivek krishnamurthy , a clinical instructor at harvard law school s cyberlaw clinic . will those uses that are more innocent also come down automatically ? farid acknowledges that child porn and isis propaganda are two totally different beasts , and that news videos or other non malicious media may be inadvertently swept up by his algorithm . but he says mainstream media outlets could be whitelisted , noting that the technology can be calibrated to target any content that violates a company s terms of service . if facebook came today and said we no longer want photos of kittens on our website , we could do that , farid says . automation always comes with false positives some find that prospect troubling . digital rights groups have long expressed concerns over allowing facebook and twitter to be arbiters of free speech , and they fear that an automated system would lead to more widespread censorship . jillian york , director for international freedom of expression at the electronic frontier foundation , cautioned in an email that automation always comes with false positives , adding that sometimes it s not merely the technology , but also the implementation or implementers , that are flawed . joe mcnamee , executive director of the brussels based advocacy group european digital rights edri , said in an interview that efforts to automate content removal may actually hinder counter speech , which a recent google backed study found to be an effective way of sparking online debate . is it really proportionate to scan filter every single upload from every single european , to make sure it is legal ? edri wrote in a blog post in july . if europe takes the lead in mass surveillance and filtering of their citizens uploads to the internet , what hope is there for the open and democratic internet elsewhere in the world ? the bigger question , perhaps , is whether removing extremist content will have any impact on radicalization . politicians have linked online radicalization to recent terrorist attacks , as president barack obama did ampnbspafter the orlando shooting in june . but horgan says the connection is still fuzzy . most people , i suppose , would rightfully assume that we have some sort of baseline understanding of the role that specific content plays in the radicalization process , he says . well guess what ? we don t . the hard drives of american jihadis , he adds , often contain more innocuous content porn , games , cat videos whereas the more gruesome material is probably more important for the fanboys and supporters than it is for operational members . still , horgan acknowledges that the algorithm could play an important role in reducing the footprint of terrorist propaganda , which he says would be a significant move in a grand strategic and psychological sense . farid expects the cat and mouse game to continue , as well . if major social media companies do adopt his algorithm , he has no doubt that extremist groups will try to work around it . and if they succeed , he says he ll continue to tweak the technology . no matter what technology you develop , the adversary will develop a counter technology , farid says . i don t consider that a problem , i consider that a reality . 	 the verge in celebration of our th anniversary , this month we re publishing a series of interviews with innovative leaders about what the next five years hold . to read more about this series , read our editor nilay patel s introduction here . marc andreessen may be the most dedicated optimist in silicon valley . during a year when the public s attention was often focused on international conflict , mass shootings , and a bitter election , the co founder of venture capital firm andreessen horowitz has insistently pointed toward progress . until it fell silent in september , andreessen s hyperactive twitter feed served as a guide to the good news people rising out of poverty , the surprising durability of the us economy , and all manner of fast growing tech products and services . and then , on september th , the account froze . taking a twitter break ! he tweeted , before deleting the rest of his tweets . he has never said why and , when we met in his offices on sand hill road in menlo park , he declined to say much beyond the fact that his seat on facebook s board had presented him with a conflict . plenty of subjects stress andreessen out he believes the next election will somehow be even more contentious than the one we just survived . but generally speaking , he is as optimistic as he s ever been , whether the subject is job creation , the future of autonomous vehicles , or the remarkable progress in the quest to build flying cars . the interviewwhat s made you feel optimistic lately ? a bunch of things . it s honestly hard to not be an optimist in this job , because we get , founders a year who come in here , sit in that chair right there , and they just tell us everything . they unspool the future to us , and they re optimistic or they wouldn t be here . then all the new ideas . i wonder whether people outside a firm like this would be more optimistic if they could see and hear all of that stuff . i m not sure . we re at a very weird cultural movement . a lot of people are just fundamentally unsure and i think , to a certain extent , hearing more good news may just make people angrier . subscribe to our newsletter so you don t miss the rest of the verge interviews . terms apply . subscribelistening to these pitches , are there particular moments where you think , wow , within the next half a decade or so , life is going to change a lot more than it did in the previous five or years ? the big thing happening in the economy that is not well understood is that there are two very different parts of the economy . there s the part where there s rapid technological change and very rapid productivity improvement . in that part of the economy , you would include things like media podcasts versus radio is a great example of rapid technological change . streaming versus broadcast tv and so forth . retail is obviously going through massive productivity improvements and changes . manufacturing the price of televisions has dramatically collapsed in the last years , and the tv you can buy now for bucks is like science fiction compared to what you could get years ago . cars are going through rapid productivity changes now . you ve got these sectors that have gone through these massive productivity changes . they are characterized by rapidly improving quality , but also collapsing prices and rapid productivity growth . there are two very different parts of the economy . you ve got this other , second part of the economy that s the exact opposite where quality is not improving and prices are rising . there you talk about health care , where it feels like every year you pay or percent more and you get some new stuff , but you don t get a lot of new stuff for the money . you talk about education , where the rising cost of a modern college education is just staggering . actually , it s funny all forms of media are collapsing in price , other than textbooks . textbooks are rising in price exactly the same as college tuition , which is a good illustration of the difference between the two sectors . construction , real estate there s been a lot of conversation recently about how we re still fundamentally wedded to physical location way more than you would think at this point with the internet and everything else . in the industries where there s rapid productivity growth , everybody is freaked out , because what are people going to do after everything gets automated ? in the other part of the economy , that second part , health care and education , people are freaked out about , oh my god , it s going to eat the entire budget ! it s going to eat my personal budget . health care and education is going to be every dollar i make as income , and it s going to eat the national budget and drive the united states bankrupt ! and everybody in the economy is going to become either a nurse or teacher . it s really funny , both sides of the economy get polar opposite emotional reactions . i go through all of that to say that the tech industry has been able to build startups and new technologies against that first category but not that second category . tech is super present in retail in the form of e commerce , we re super present in media in the form of internet , we re super present in consumer electronics in the smartphone . we are very much not present , in what we would consider to be a healthy way , in education , health care , construction , childcare , senior care . the great twist on that is that second category that s most of the gdp . most of the spending is most of the gdp , and these are the areas where we have not yet been able to crack the code . how audacious or insane is it to think that you could bring tech to health care or education ? the big thing happening in the valley right now is valley entrepreneurs are getting much more aggressive at starting tech companies in that second category . we are seeing a lot more startups going into , especially , health care , biotech , different applications on that side . we re seeing a lot of startups going into education . we re not so much seeing startups going into construction , but we re seeing lots of startups going into the collaborative work slack and github and telepresence and skype and all of these things , that in theory , in the long run , will make geography less relevant and maybe solve the cost of housing and access to economic opportunity . financial services has had rising costs , not falling costs , which it really shouldn t have we re seeing a lot of fintech startups going into that . it s this reorientation , and the valley is still doing all of the first category things , but it feels like we re now layering on a lot of the second categories . that s very exciting , in that we can have the impact in the second category like we had in the first category , which i think would be good . of course , the other possibility is this is just pure hubris , and five years from now you re going to play this back and you ll be like , aha ! dot com bubble . . he was full of it and he didn t realize it . the entire thing came crashing down . how audacious or insane is it to think that you could bring tech to health care or education ? it s probably . what s the state of robotics , particularly robots you might use around the house ? it depends on what you mean by robot . one definition of robot is every thermostat is a robot now . thermostats used to be literally an analog thing . now they re digital they re computers . it s happening quite quickly . the other thing i think people miss is , you look at a lot of these companies and you say , this company makes self driving cars . this company makes vr headsets . this company makes tabletop robot toys . this company makes drones . and they all look like they re separate categories of things , and they are they do different things . but the grand unifying principle underneath is that they re actually new computer companies . where are all the other computer companies ? it has felt , in the industry , for the last or years , like there was no new opportunity to make a new computer company . it s like , where are all the other computer companies ? the answer is that they are all of these new categories . the drone companies are new computer companies , the self driving car companies are new computer companies , and it s hardware plus software . what s interesting is there are probably more new computer companies in the valley today than there were probably since it s just that the products are all these different shapes , sizes , and descriptions . it s not a laptop , it s a flying machine that does stuff . i will always take a flying machine . exactly pretty cool ! we know of three top end flying car startups in the valley , two of which larry page is funding himself . we haven t funded one yet , but we re starting to get the pitches . i don t know if they ll get them to work . i didn t even think to ask you about flying cars . are the pitches that you re getting on flying cars improving ? there s a couple of big challenges in flying cars . for safety reasons i don t want human beings driving flying cars . in fact , autonomous air is easier than autonomous ground because you have more degrees of freedom to get out of trouble . how do we get the thing airborne and miles without literally running out of charge ? the big constraint on all of this stuff is batteries . assuming no battery breakthrough , what flying car companies are trying to solve , fundamentally , is the power problem which is , how do we get the thing airborne and miles without literally running out of charge ? the single biggest x factor in the next five or years for all of this stuff will be if there is some fundamental breakthrough in battery technology , then basically all of these questions of what s possible get reopened . because if i had or times the amount of power that lasts or times longer , then we re building iron man suits . then all kinds of things start to happen . that breakthrough could happen at any point . i don t think that s necessarily a silicon valley startup that does that . i think that s either a research university or probably a big industrial research lab honeywell , ge , toshiba , or one of these companies . there is tons of r ampampd going into that right now , because it s such an obvious problem . any time that breakthrough happens , that s the big one and then all of the sudden , we really do have flying cars . you mentioned autonomous vehicles . lyft , another one of your portfolio companies , recently said the majority of its rides would be given in autonomous vehicles within five years . what do you expect the rollout of those vehicles is going to look like ? and what s the hold up ? this is the big reason why the google s self driving car isn t out yet . it s a really hard challenge you re driving through the neighborhood and you re going miles an hour , and you turn left into an area that s going miles an hour , and there s a crosswalk , and there s a school , and there s kids running around . that s hard , and you can t screw it up , and there are serious consequences to errors . there are lots and lots of edge cases , because roads move . what happens when there s construction ? you ve got the guys with the stop and the slow sign and the flags . what s the computer supposed to do ? think of how advanced the computer has to be to understand that as compared to understanding just a stop sign . and they have to be able to deal with that because those things pop up in random places all the time . what that basically says is it s unlikely that there will be a mass rollout of self driving cars all at once for all traffic scenarios . therefore , it s unlikely that there will be an instant , freeze dried overnight uber or lyft competitor that is just self driving cars . if you saw sully with the geese in the engine , you still want somebody with judgment sitting there making the call . think about a city with suburbs . some percentage of the trip requests you could satisfy with a self driving car . but to start with , that will be a small percentage of the total trips . a much larger percentage of the trips will still require a human driver . maybe a human driver for the next two years , and then maybe a human monitor in the car , ready to take over when the computer punks out . that s the other thing you get the so called level autonomy , which is basically like the way airplanes work today . yeah , you ve got the autopilot . yeah , the thing can fly itself , it can even take off and land itself , but you ve still got the pilot sitting there in the seat , awake and paying attention , and it s a big problem if you don t because , if you saw sully with the geese in the engine , you still want somebody with judgment sitting there making the call . i think most of those people in this agree with this the deployment model is not going to be an either or deployment model , it s going to be a matrix or a hybrid thing . this is to say , you can see where it is today , you can see where it ultimately ends up , and everything in the middle is complex and will take time . that s why we think lyft and uber and others are going to be central to this . i think most people think self driving cars are more likely to get deployed as a service than as a product . it s easier to deploy them as a service , because you can just put them in the street and let them start giving people rides , as opposed to trying to convince somebody to buy a self driving car . especially if they re more expensive to start because of the sensor packages . how do you expect these kinds of services to affect cities ? there are mayors that would , for example , like to just declare their city core to ban human driven cars . they want a grid of autonomous cars , golf carts , buses , trams , whatever , and it s just a service , all electric , all autonomous . think about what they could do if they had that . they could take out all of the street parking . they could take out all of the parking lots . they could turn the entire downtown area into a park with these very lightweight electric vehicles . no pollution , no noise , no nothing . it would be almost like going to an airport , where you could drive and then you drop your car off and then a self driving golf cart would take you into town . there are cities that want to do that , and not just in the us there are cities internationally that want to do that , including in some countries where the government can order that to happen . college campuses , retirement communities , amusement parks , industrial campuses , and large office complexes in some cases are places where this stuff can get rolled out in a top down way . i think you ll see a hopscotching kind of thing , as opposed to sudden mass adoption . let s say we do get to this fully autonomous vision of the world , and all the people who had long commutes suddenly have all of this free time . what sort of companies do you see emerging from a world where autonomous vehicles are the norm ? this is the thing that i believe is completely missed in all of the fear and uncertainty that people have around this . everybody is a professional pessimist in business these days , including a lot of the vcs . it s like , oh my god , the self driving vehicles are going to displace . million professional driving jobs in the us over the next five years ! oh my god , the economic devastation ! it s going to be terrible for the economy . but the other side of it is all the productivity improvements that come out the other side from people not having to literally sit there paying attention in the car . all of the sudden commutes become viable and , possibly , attractive . the first order of productivity thing that happens is exactly what you said , which is that the entire amount of time spent in the car sitting there paying attention or playing pok mon go when you re supposed to be paying attention all of that time frees up . all of the sudden commutes become viable and , possibly , attractive . at that point , the form factor of the vehicle changes , because at that point , the driver doesn t even need to face forward . there is no driver ! you can have cars that are just rolling living rooms or bedrooms . you could literally just nap on your way to work . or you could have an office . or you could have entertainment pods you could have vr . or you can have a bus that s a giant classroom and the kids can go on a field trip and the teacher could be up there teaching a class for two hours . all of that time , the productivity gained through that to the economy , and to all of us as individuals , is just gigantic . the long run thing that s going to happen here , i think , is very enticing . the really big economic impact of cars was not the car industry the really big economic impact was suburbs and retail and package delivery and movie theaters and motel chains and theme parks and the interstate and truck stops and all the other implications . basically , the entire way we live today is a consequence of the invention of the automobile . because , before that , people just never went anywhere . therefore , everything that you travel to is a consequence of the automobile . we talked about the role of cities earlier . one of the big issues with inequality , which is very vivid right now in the valley and in san francisco , is can you literally afford to live someplace ? it s like this stupid prop . thing we have in california . if you re an old homeowner you pay no property taxes , if you re a new homeowner you get completely drilled . it presumably should be the other way around , but politically , it got corrupted and it got wired up the wrong way . rents in san francisco have doubled in the last five years , which is just complete lunacy . in detroit , you can buy a house for . in the valley , it s hard to buy a house for less than million . it s just complete lunacy . half of the people in detroit should move to the valley and can t . it s just nuts . i think telepresence , ultimately , is the answer . then it s like , okay , smart guy internet , the phone , video conferencing , telepresence , vr , ar , collaboration , slack , github , asana , all of these things . seriously ? the joke in the valley is , help wanted . programmer designer wanted for state of the art silicon valley telepresence software company making collaborative work easy across geography and time zone . must be willing to relocate to san francisco . it s just nuts . stage one , i think , would get transportation to be something where if an hour in the car is actually pleasurable , it s one of the best parts of the day as opposed to one of the worst parts of your day . that would help a lot . because then you could live south of san jose and not kill yourself trying to commute to redwood city . that s one . but the other would be go after telepresence . i think telepresence , ultimately , is the answer . because you just have computer mediated communication , which is just exactly like you and i are in the room together . the way i think about it is , that s the one two punch to solve all of this real estate related nonsense . we can t technologically fix real estate , but we can make it less necessary . you mentioned having the answer to this question , which you get a lot of criticism for , particularly on twitter , about what happens to the . million jobs ? what is your answer to that for how the economy gets remade ? it s a two part answer . these are things that are true and nobody knows . the american economy this year will create . million gross new jobs , and it will destroy million gross jobs . this is where the headlines are misleading . they re unintentionally misleading , but they re misleading . when you read the job headlines it s like , the us economy created , jobs last month , and you re like , that seems like a really small number . it s always reported as the net . the gross is much larger than the net . the us economy is like the duck it looks calm on the top and is paddling furiously underneath . the first order answer to the question is the us economy , just this quarter , will destroy over million jobs normally . the us economy is like the duck it looks calm on the top and is paddling furiously underneath . we will destroy and re create over million jobs just this quarter , and we will do it again in q of , and we ll do it again in q of , and we ll do it again in q of . five and a half million jobs get reallocated over the next five years it sounds like a lot , but it s a drop in the bucket compared to the overall level of change happening in the economy . the other part of the answer is dynamism . the rate of gross creation and destruction of jobs , economists call that dynamism . would you believe that the rate of dynamism , which is to say the absolute size of growth creation and destruction of jobs in the us economy , has been rising continuously ? has the rate of change been rising continuously for the last years or falling continuously ? i would guess rising . everybody thinks it s rising , and the answer is it s been falling . what the numbers show is the us economy is becoming less dynamic over time , not more dynamic . the same thing on startups . the rate of startup formation in the us has been declining for years . everybody thinks it s been rising it s been declining for years . the economy tends to get stereotyped , especially in political seasons everybody either works for a manufacturing company or flips burgers , and you get this wild , oversimplification of the economy . in reality , the economy as it exists today , is this incredibly complex , multidimensional , multifaceted thing with just huge oceans of people doing jobs that we probably have never even heard of , huge numbers of people in all of these different sectors of health care , and in home care , and childcare , huge numbers of people in education , and infrastructure , and government jobs , and the military , and all of these different fields and professions . the rate of dynamism in western europe is a fourth of what it is in the us . it turns out the rate of dynamism in western europe is a fourth of what it is in the us . they ve designed their economic system that way . they want change to happen slowly , it s why they have all of the laws and rules and work restrictions and unions and all of this stuff . it directly translates to their economy being unable to adapt , therefore high unemployment . if you re a capitalist , if you re like me , it s obvious that they re going to have high youth unemployment coming out of that because they ve wired their economy so that it can t adapt . conversely , if you want to have opportunity for people to be very easily able to get work , and be able to very easily change work if they decide to go to a new field or they decide to go get a new level of skill or a new kind of college degree or if they decide they want to move to a new place , you want more change because that creates more opportunity . to your point , the prevailing view is that must be bad , and it s just part of the national pessimism . it is interesting . notwithstanding the fact that we do all of these things to screw up our own country , we are actually still good at this . this year we saw a ton of vr and ar headsets come to the market . does it seem inevitable to you that these will be fully mainstream technologies , or are we still waiting for the right combo of hardware and software to get there ? yes and yes . any guesses on what will be the breakthrough moment for vr ? in general , in venture capital and startups , the hardest thing to call is timing . the way it gets written after the fact is , it was obvious it was going to happen at point x , and the people who thought it would happen earlier were stupid . when you re in the middle of it , it s actually not that obvious . i always like to point out apple came out with the newton in , and boy , it seemed like it was the time . and it turned out it took another years to get to the ipad . maybe it happens now , maybe it doesn t . if it doesn t happen now , what we re trying to do is set up , at our firm , basically a willingness to make the same bet five years from now , and then if it still doesn t work , years from now , and if it doesn t work , years from now . basically , just keep coming at it . is there anything about your everyday life that you think actually is going to be radically different five years from now ? one of the ideas that we play around with here at the firm , we call harry potter world . one of the things about harry potter is everything is moving around and alive . the photos are all going , hey , and the plate goes and refills itself and brings you fresh food , and your beer mug tells you you re drinking too much . everything is just smart . this is my view of the internet of things you re able to infuse intelligence into everything , you re able to put a chip in everything , you re able to put software in everything , you re able to connect everything online , and just everything is a lot smarter . the doorknob is a lot smarter , and the lightbulb is a lot smarter , and your wristwatch is a lot smarter . everything starts to get really , really smart . i think is probably going to be a worse version of this election . the other thing is this geography topic . if anything , the geography problem becomes more intense five years from now . the price of cities relative to the price of not being in cities continues to grow . i think that s going to be a major political stress . i actually think that explains a lot of what s happening in this election . i think is probably going to be a worse version of this election . how so ? with even worse candidates . i think it gets worse . it s not even so much have or have not in terms of wealth or income , it s have or have not in terms of opportunity . and if i m in rural wisconsin or rural ohio or something , and i m in a coal mining town or a steel town where there s just not going to be another steel mill , that is a very stressful way to be . boy , i would love to move to san francisco , but i physically can t because i can t afford it . that s tough . that , to me , explains a lot of what s happening in politics right now and in economics . i think that gets more intense . however , it is also true that your kid in the village in indonesia , or the kid of the steelworker in cleveland , they are going to have access to more and more opportunity . whether it s being able to do remote programming work , or remote design work , or different kinds of educational alternatives . i think there s going to be more economic opportunity opening up in five years more ways for people to be able to provide services online , or be able to sell products online , or be able to find jobs online , or be able to get skills online . i think we really start to move that out in five years . it ll be the steady drumbeat of empowerment and opportunity coming underneath what looks like a very stressed , very angry time . this interview has been edited and condensed for clarity . 	 between one trump tweet after another and inquests into hillary clinton s emails , there s been little attention paid to either party s environmental policies . yet , with devastating flooding in louisiana and wildfires tearing apart the west , both parties environmental platforms deserve more attention . it s no surprise that the republican and democratic party platforms depict starkly different visions for america s open spaces . but specifically , we found the platforms hinge on one underlying and in the republican party s case , unspoken question is climate change real , and a real threat ? while democrats answer the question in their chapter s title , combat climate change , build a clean energy economy , and secure environmental justice , the republican platform s section on energy and the environment , titled america s natural resources , never once uses the words climate change or global warming . platforms show a longstanding division between the partiesa key to understanding how both parties view climate change is to examine their plans for managing public lands . while both parties view land as an economic resource , the republican platform defines its value more narrowly as what can be taken from or below its surface . their policies encourage privatizing public land where possible , expanding oil and gas leases , increasing timber productivity and mining , and opening more federal lands to hunting and fishing . the democratic platform also speaks to some of these economic values specifically the cache of oil and gas below federal lands but it recognizes that open space has other economic and social values , too for hiking and camping , preserving and restoring air and water quality , and as part of the fabric and history of the nation . this shows a longstanding division between our parties , explains daniel fiorino , director of the center for environmental policy at american university . republicans protect the economic interests of extraction industries , while democrats protect the public . one reason that division has become so marked in this election , fiorino says , has to do with controlling what s under those lands coal , oil , and gas . donald trump s energy plan centers on american energy independence , an idea supported by the republican platform . the platform calls to increase oil and gas exploration and drilling on federal lands , including the outer continental shelf and the arctic national wildlife refuge anwr . to drill , or not to drill ? that is the question it s not as if all public lands are closed right now , says oren cass of the manhattan institute , a conservative think tank . cass notes that many federal lands and waters are currently open to timber harvest , oil and gas drilling , and coal mining , and that it will take approximately years to see production from any new oil and gas commitments we would make now . given that long timeframe , we need to ask ourselves where we want to be in a decade , cass says . and in republican eyes , bringing new oil and gas online is pretty much an unmitigated good for the country , as evidenced in the recent private and state led oil and gas boom . however , whether increasing oil production is an unmitigated good for the country is up for debate . the international business times explored how the fracked oil boom in williston , north dakota , for example , brought short lived economic prosperity to the small town . but when oil prices fell , williston was left with high rents , inflated retail prices , and no jobs to speak of , across most sectors . we need to keep percent of fossil fuels in the ground . democrats , on the other hand , oppose offshore and anwr drilling , not for economic reasons , but environmental ones . the platform proposes instead phasing down fossil fuel extraction on public lands and increasing wind and solar production in wyoming and nevada . if you look at the top lines of what climate science means for the world . . . we need to keep percent of fossil fuels in the ground , says jason kowalski , a spokesperson for action , a climate activism group . this would help meet the december threshold set in paris at the annual meeting of all nations in the united nations framework on climate change , called the st conference of parties . attendees , including the us , agreed to reduce carbon emissions enough to hold the average global temperature below . degrees fahrenheit , or degrees celsius , above pre industrial levels . although there is some debate at what point we reach runaway climate change , kowalski noted , most climate scientists agree that warming beyond . degrees fahrenheit would have severe global effects . the republican platform never uses the word climate the republican platform does not once use the word climate , which is perhaps why kowalski calls supporting the platform an act of climate denial . trump has repeatedly denied climate change , except when it threatens his interests . while his views on numerous subjects , including climate change , are more extreme than many in the republican party , the party s platform calls for congress to prohibit the environmental protection agency from moving forward with new greenhouse gas regulations . the republican party believes the most effective way to mitigate climate change is to help developing nations , like china and india , manage their own carbon emissions , cass says . in terms of actually wanting to change estimates of what the temperature is going to be years from now , whether the us develops its oil and gas resources , its coal resources , is pretty much entirely irrelevant , he says . china emits more greenhouse gasses than any other country . but the united states is the second worst emitter of greenhouse gasses , and burdening developing nations with the task of reducing emissions completely ignores that fact . clinton s climate change plan and the democratic platform also call for vast expansions of green technology and renewable energy including installing a half billion solar panels by but not as the sole viable solution to climate change . blocking greenhouse gas regulations would be , fiorino feels , a major setback for global action on climate change with tremendous consequences . and while kowalski says the democratic platform doesn t go as far or move as quickly as he would like , it does represent a huge step to the left for hillary clinton , due in part to pressure from bernie sanders supporters . clinton steps to the left with the democratic platformplatforms , however , are not policies , and what may actually come of democrats and republicans grand plans in will depend on everything from presidential will to congressional cooperation . obama s sweeping climate bill failed in , for example , and his clean power plan is currently facing a lawsuit . but he s been able to work around congress by making an agreement with china s president xi jinping to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , and tucking billion for clean energy research into an economic stimulus package . similarly , if faced with a congress unwilling to pass legislation that would enact democratic platform policies , clinton could work on mitigating climate change through incremental actions . she could refuse to authorize large oil pipeline projects , like obama did with the keystone xl pipeline , or she could instruct all federal agencies to use electric vehicles , kowalski notes . what would become of the policies set forth in the republican platform under a trump administration ? at least when it comes to energy policy , trump s toeing close to the party line , cass says . but whether that will turn into implementing proposed policies is anyone s guess . i think it s impossible to take anything that trump says about policy seriously or to predict what he would actually do if he would win , cass says . 	 the newest way to accurately predict poverty comes from satellite images and machine learning . this imaging technique could make it easier for aid organizations to know where and how to spend their money it may also help governments develop better policy . we already know that the more lit up an area is at night , the richer and more developed it is . researchers use this method to estimate poverty in places where we don t have exact data . but night light estimates are rough and don t tell us much about the wealth differences of the very poor . scientists at stanford university fed a computer three data sources night light images , daytime images , and actual survey data to build an algorithm that predicts how rich or poor any given area is . this method , described in a study published today in the journal science , estimates poverty in more detail than we ve had before . daytime imagery creates a fuller pictureit s hard to measure poverty in the developing world . the best way is by looking at economic data like household wealth and assets collected through household surveys . problem is , we don t have these surveys for much of the world because they re expensive , according to study co author neal jean , a doctoral candidate studying machine learning at stanford . the idea is that if we train our models right , they help us predict poverty in areas where we don t have the surveys , he says , which will help out aid orgs that are working on this issue . using night lights to predict poverty provides important information about the economic growth of different countries , says simon franklin , an economics researcher at the london school of economics who was not involved with the study . but they don t show detailed levels of poverty within a country . they don t tell us whether a place is rural and densely populated , or wealthy and sparsely populated . a village near a lake and a village near a forest could both show up as having zero lights at night . but the two have access to different natural resources , and this affects how wealthy they are . in africa , a lot of these places that are the most poor are actually just uniformly dark at night , says jean . so if you use nighttime lights only to try to find these people , since there s no variation in nighttime lights you can t predict any variation in poverty . daytime imagery creates a fuller picture . building the algorithm took a two step process called transfer learning . first , researchers showed a neural network daytime and nighttime images of five african countries uganda , tanzania , nigeria , malawi , and rwanda . using deep learning techniques , they taught it to predict where night lights would be by looking at the daytime images and searching for correlations . the model learned , for example , that if there are a lot of houses in one area , the same area probably has a lot of light at night . if an area only has dirt , it probably won t . by teaching computers which daytime features translate to night light , researchers can make better predictions about which places are poor . because areas like lakes are expected to be dark at night , dark readings from them can be discarded but readings of darkness from roads and villages can be more closely targeted by researchers and governments trying to help poor communities . for the second step , researchers used a different model called a ridge regression model . this model already knows the connection between land features and lights . scientists then gave it one more set of information actual survey data from the demographic health services and world bank living standards measurement study . the model is less useful for measuring poverty within a citythis time the algorithm didn t just learn that houses in a village usually means there is a certain amount of light . by cross checking with survey data , it saw that for example , these houses have a household income of . a day . now , if we see similar houses in a nearby area where there s no survey data , chances are that it has similar wealth . so why not skip the first step and directly teach the algorithm to predict poverty from daytime images and surveys ? the deep learning approach in the first step only works if you have a lot of data . we have all the daytime and nighttime images , so it s easy to teach the computer to make those connections . but there isn t much survey data , so using deep learning to connect daytime images and poverty information wouldn t create a very accurate algorithm . teaching the model to look at nighttime data first and then survey data gives us more information to fine tune the algorithm . imagine that you re trying to teach an algorithm to recognize a picture of a cat . if you show it two pictures of cats and one picture of a bird , it might later identify a dog as a cat because they re about the same size and both furry with four legs . if you show it thousands of pictures of cats and thousands of pictures of different things that are not cats , it will be much better at distinguishing what is a cat and what isn t . this is , essentially , what the researchers did with their satellite data . the next step is training it to work on other countries and better map poverty across the worldto better explain this transfer learning process , jean uses an analogy from the movie cool runnings . the movie is about a jamaican team that wants to compete in the bobsled event , but they don t have ice , so they train for the olympics by practicing on a dirt hill , he says . dirt isn t the same , but they learn transferable skills that they can apply to the actual task , which is competing on ice in a real bobsled . transfer learning is the most accurate way of predicting average household consumption and wealth of villages . crucially , it beats the night lights model alone by anywhere from to percent of the time depending on the specific trial . but there are limitations to the method , says franklin . first he says it s good for looking at differences in poverty between rural and urban areas , and less useful for measuring poverty within a city . there are very rich areas and very poor areas within any given city , but it s harder to tell the difference in urban areas by using daytime imagery alone . alexei abrahams , an economist at the university of california san diego , pointed out that the current study uses an old series of night light images . since , nasa has been recording night lights with a new and more accurate satellite , so further studies should use the better data . another limitation that jean points out is that the network has been trained specifically to look at five african countries . this means the particular model would probably be far less accurate if tasked with predicting poverty in india or china . but this method is cheap and easy to scale , since all the images were from the public domain , so the next step is training it to work on other countries and better map poverty across the world . 	 antoine routon came to square enix montreal to work on the next big hitman game . he was one of the first employees at the studio , which was founded in with the intention of building big budget blockbusters but that all changed after less than a year . during that time , parent company square enix assessed its studios in europe and north america , and realized that none were focused on the booming market of mobile gaming . leadership decided that the young montreal studio would refocus on smaller games for smaller screens . i remember the day the news was announced , a lot of people s faces were really disappointed , says routon . while many people left , preferring instead to take new jobs working on blockbusters , others , like routon , saw the news as a challenge . those who remained split into small teams and spent two weeks prototyping ideas that they would then pitch to higher ups . there were only two restrictions on those ideas they had to be mobile , and they had to be hitman . routon , a programmer by trade , partnered with designer daniel lutz who had a wild idea to turn the stealth assassination series into a turn based board game . the pair spent those two weeks tinkering with yarn , paper , and plastic pieces from existing board games , before settling on the earliest version of what would become the surprise hit hitman go . the studio then followed that up with a similarly successful game based on tomb raider , and today sees the launch of another turned based adventure , this time set in the cyberpunk future of deus ex . with the go series , square enix montreal has carved out its own niche , creating something unique in the game development space . studios often fall into one of two camps on the one side you have the massive , , person teams that create blockbuster games , and on the other there are the tiny indie studios that build creatively ambitious games with few resources . square enix montreal straddles the line between those two extremes . it has the resources of a big company , but the size and some of the creative freedom of an indie . it s a studio that can make weird new games but attach them to hugely popular franchises . the only reason why we can act this way is because we re small , says routon . our way of working wouldn t work if we were massive . this dichotomy is clear in the studio itself . walking into square enix montreal is much like any large studio at first white walls , similar looking desks , and cardboard cutouts of famous video game characters aside from the fact that it s mostly empty . square enix montreal was originally built to accommodate a team of a few hundred people , but is currently home to around , who cluster together on one side of the office alongside a massive window with a fantastic view of mount royal . hitman go was really a turning point for me personally , and the studio . square enix montreal is also different from most big studios often called aaa studios in industry speak in that everyone , no matter their specialty , is forced to contribute in multiple ways . programmers help with design , and designers pitch ideas for art . it s a lot like an indie studio in that way , also far removed from the aaa space , which typically places developers into very specific roles . before coming to square enix montreal , routon wasn t just a programmer , he was an animation programmer . it was so specific , he says . and then i had to learn to do everything we can t have experts anymore . we can t have people who are experts in something and work in silos . because we re so small we need people who have one or two areas of expertise , and wide breadths of interests and skills . along with this surge of collaboration , or de siloing , a bonding effect filled the void of the departures . i think for the people that stayed , it brought us closer , says routon . there was a sense that this is what we want to do , and it s exciting . hitman go was really a turning point for me personally , and the studio . the game s success was followed by lara croft go in , which similarly took the core basics of a popular franchise in this case , lara s acrobatics and exploration skills and transformed them into a slick , turn based puzzle game that worked perfectly on a phone or tablet . both games racked up awards and modest sales , and hitman go was even ported to devices like the playstation and oculus rift . whereas many companies release rushed , free to play mobile tie ins to coincide with the release of big console games , square enix was doing something very different , dedicating an entire studio to making more crafted experiences designed to evoke the same kind of feelings as their console counterparts , but on a smaller scale . while the go games racked up the accolades , and helped establish square enix montreal as a mobile studio worth watching , it was actually another game that kept the development house going financially . hitman go wasn t the only prototype to come out of that two week game jam it was soon followed by the release of hitman sniper , a much more traditional kind of mobile game . nobody talks about sniper , says square enix montreal brand manager genevi ve st onge . but the truth is that it s the game that s pulling in the most revenue . it s driving us to keep making games , essentially . like routon , dominic allaire has been at the studio since its earliest days , and was excited about the prospect of switching from console to mobile . for me as a producer , i was excited about the challenge of being out of my comfort zone , he says . allaire is the producer on sniper , a game which changed a great deal from inception to release . what was originally envisioned as massive , premium game the kind of ipad experience that would set you back or so it was later adapted into a free to play experience , before the team settled on something in between . it s a game with beautiful d graphics , an experience that s constantly being updated with new features and content , much like a free game . whereas hitman go reimagined the franchise in a new context , sniper takes a very specific part taking out marks through the scope of a sniper rifle and fleshes it out into a competitive multiplayer game . the two hitman games came out of the same studio , but were extremely different . on one side , you had the critically acclaimed go , which was a carefully crafted game designed to last for a finite amount of time . sniper , on the other hand , was a lucrative , ongoing experience with a structure that tried to keep players engaged indefinitely . on one side you had the indie way of thinking , on the other the aaa way . and there was friction . there was a clear culture clash , says st onge . not negative , but just different approaches . this duality in culture made it more difficult to determine who we are and what our values are . there was a clear culture clash . deus ex go is an attempt to resolve those differences and make a more unified studio and hopefully create a better game in the process . half of the deus ex go team comes from the sniper side , while the other half is made up of people who worked on the go series . one of our objectives was to mix and match those teams , says allaire . the goal is to make a game with the tight , hand crafted feel of the go series , but with the ongoing updates of sniper . in addition to its main campaign , deus ex go will also feature new puzzles released every weekday for the foreseeable future . designer tienne giroux likens it to the new york times crossword puzzle . every day a new puzzle unlocks , he says , and friday is the really hard one . the relatively short length of the go games has been an ongoing complaint from players , and it s something the team wanted to fix with deus ex go . the game will also eventually feature a level editor so players can build and share their own puzzles . making new levels for lara croft go was super interesting , but it took months to create levels , says giroux . for deus ex go we built the system in a way that it wouldn t be so time consuming to make them . that includes a new editor that is able to generate puzzles without the need for an artist , which was one of the more time consuming aspects of the previous games . square enix montreal is a unique studio , but in a lot of ways it s also in keeping with square s desire to have individual studios focus on the one specific thing they re good at , whatever that may be . most recently , the company released i am setsuna , a classic style japanese rpg from a similarly small team dubbed tokyo rpg factory , built with the express purpose of building those kinds of old school experiences . outside of deus ex go , square enix montreal isn t saying what it s working on right now . but the studio has made a few recent hires that hint at desire to keep the indie like feeling it has carefully cultivated . those pick ups include teddy dief , an artist and designer best known for his work on the crowdfunded hit hyper light drifter , and renaud b dard , the sole programmer on seminal puzzle platformer fez , who most recently worked at below developer capy games in toronto . both were tempted to join by the idea of combining the creative freedom of an indie studio with the structure and resources of a big publisher . there was a lot of confidence in what we can achieve . i wasn t looking to take a job after we did hyper light drifter , says dief . i was just going to do the next thing , and float around , and find some new collaborators . he previously worked at both microsoft studios and disney , but spent the past four years as a full time indie . there were some adjustments coming to square enix montreal . dief says he spent his first few weeks at square enix montreal rearranging furniture to improve the creative energy , and he s particularly worried about his first canadian winter . but he notes that it hasn t been a major change creatively . i have not encountered anything in the two months i ve been here that has forced my hand to make a decision i didn t want to make . in that sense , i have felt very free , he says . the team here that created the go games created a niche for themselves , and there s just no reason to disrupt that . there s a reason to grow it , and explore new places with it , and see where it goes next . b dard echoes those thoughts , saying there was a lot of confidence in what we can achieve . so we do have a lot of creative freedom to just come up with something cool . for those early employees who decided to stick with square enix montreal through a relatively turbulent time of change , those statements are a form of validation . while sales and awards are great , the admiration of their peers is perhaps even more important , and having notable indies like dief and b dard not only want to join the studio , but feel at home once they re there , is a great example of that . whatever comes next , it s clear that much like the board game like take on hitman that set everything in motion it likely won t be what you expect . nothing that s worth making is obvious , says routon . read next deus ex s cyberpunk future makes for a brilliant puzzle game	 i m standing between two boats one intact , one cracked into two jagged halves . they re each about the size of a conventional canoe , but they have masts , rumpled sails , tiny handrails around the edges , and little decks connected with miniature stairs . both ships are spangled with bright orange , yellow , and red spots , but up close , the spots resolve into tiny autumn leaf decals , meticulously applied to every surface in thick layers . these are two of the sets for laika studios new stop motion film kubo and the two strings , and when they appear in the film , they look immense the japanese child warrior kubo and his animal companion monkey leap and roll across those decks , fighting an enemy who hovers above them in midair , in the middle of a violent storm that rips leaves off the ships and tosses them around on surging waves . it s a big scene . these are , comparatively , little boats . but the detail on them is spectacular . standing next to them , it s easy to see how many hours of work went into constructing them to look like real sailing ships made of leaves , even through the lens of an ultra high def canon d mark iii positioned inches away from the decks . kubo s production manager , dan pascall , says the most time consuming part of making the ships isn t even immediately evident the design crew had to map every leaf thousands of them , each individually laser cut and about the size of a human thumbnail and reproduce the exact same pattern on both ships , so they d match from shot to shot within the film . it s a lot of effort for something most people wouldn t notice . god knows , pascall sighs , there are easier ways to make movies . watch our short documentary on laika s innovative team that refrain there are easier ways , but we challenge ourselves to take ultra detailed , time intensive routes instead came up repeatedly during my visit to laika . from their hillsboro , oregon warehouse , just west of portland and at a comfortable remove from hollywood and silicon valley , laika has positioned itself as a studio that has the time for those routes , and is scaled to afford the extra effort . where other studios are increasingly moving to a make or break , blockbuster only model , laika s roughly employees , are quietly turning out a film every two or three years , making million features that bring in around million at the box office . focus features handles their distribution , and until this year , even their marketing has seemed home grown , focusing on sizzle reels and modest , tasteful videos about how their hands on aesthetic makes them stand out in a digital marketplace . the ethos of this whole place is that we are artists first and foremost , says ceo travis knight . when we started laika years ago , we could see the writing on the wall . stop motion animation was basically taking its last , dying breath . we had to come up with a way , if we wanted to continue to make a living in this medium that we loved , to bring it into a new era , to invigorate it . when we started laika , stop motion animation was taking its last , dying breath . when he mentions the dying breaths of stop motion , he s talking about famed stop motion house will vinton studios , the claymation house responsible for the tv show the pj s , as well as the california raisins and other advertising hits . knight interned there , working as a young animator , and when the company had major financial problems , knight s father phil , founder of nike , became the majority shareholder and installed travis first as a board member , then as ceo and president . the knights rebranded the studio as laika in , and moved it away from advertising and into feature film production . kubo is the first film travis knight personally directed , but he s been a hands on animator on all three of its previous feature films s coraline , s paranorman , and s the boxtrolls . that s him in the post credits scene at the end of the boxtrolls , personally animating two characters from the film having a wink wink meta conversation about being controlled by invisible hands . it s no wonder that laika has few peers these days in a film industry that favors quick turnaround and endless scalability , stop motion is an inherently slow , difficult way to tell a story it involves moving characters around on set by hand , shooting tiny movements individually , at a rate of individual frames of action for each actual second . that s particularly challenging with an expansive , epic fable like kubo . the story features more than separate sets , some complicated water effects , and a lot of fast paced physical action . but laika s version of stop motion is particularly striking because its characters and backdrops are rendered in such detail , and move so smoothly , that its films could be mistaken for wholly cgi creations , instead of stop motion with digital assistance . and its processes are striking because they re all built around the idea that technology has to service art rather than the other way around . if a director wants a particular visual effect , even if it s never been done in animation before , it s up to the fabricators and artists to figure out how to make it happen . knight appears to be a true believer in the artistic singularity of stop motion animation . in person , he comes across as a visionary who talks entirely in enthusiastic speeches about laika , art , creativity , the storytelling tradition , buddhist teachings , and the japanese concept of beauty in impermanence . at the same time , he can be disarming and self effacing . we wanted kubo to be a stop motion david lean film , he explains . to be myth in miniature . and to make a small scale movie that s shot on a bunch of gussied up tabletops in the middle of a crummy warehouse look and feel like a big epic fantasy on an endless majestic vista , that s a real challenge . so it took all of our tools to make that happen . knight isn t kidding about the gussied up tabletops , or the crummy warehouse . what i saw of laika studios was mostly one , foot , sweaty , high ceilinged space partitioned off into individual overheated little rooms by floor to ceiling black curtains . the remaining kubo sets and puppets including a wriggling robot eyeball plant controlled with a bowling ball sized trackball mouse dominate the little makeshift rooms they re placed in . but they d probably dominate any room . the sets are fantastically detailed little worlds , built from foam , paint , wood , and resin , and designed to look seamless when assembled , but to pull apart easily so animators can access any point of them for a scene . according to pascall , the art department had to build multiple sets for each animator who worked on kubo . the animators time is the most precious thing that we have , he says . so we need three sets for each of them one they re currently animating on , one ready and waiting for the next scene , and one that s being prepped . more facts from the set of kubo textures inspired by the japanese woodblock artist kiyoshi saito are worked into kubo s sets , costumes , and characters to unify them . even the digital raindrops in the storm scenes have their own saito pattern . laika doesn t use painted skies anymore they re all digital , because the paintings would have to be huge to entirely cover the sets from every angle . laika doesn t destroy elements from its films . it has auctioned them in , one coraline puppet sold for more than , and sent pieces out for exhibitions . otherwise , everything the studio has constructed since coraline is kept in storage . the sisters fluttering feathered capes were one of the biggest challenges . they re lined with a heavy lattice of criss crossed piano wire that holds it rigid in a wide variety of elaborate poses . kubo s tiny shoes were hand woven out of period authentic grasses , then cast in rubber for durability . the moon beast , kubo s primary antagonist , is laika s first entirely d printed character . laika beta tested a new resin printer from d printing company stratasys in order to build it . the delicate gold flecks visible on moon beast s chiton are mylar party balloons from a local grocery store . to achieve moon beast s otherworldly glow , the animators shot each frame of its scenes twice , once under normal light , once under ultraviolet flight . then the frames were digitally composited . the giant skeleton puppet s long , pointy fingers turned out to be a problem when the animators realized its hands couldn t close . they wound up cutting off the fingers bit by bit as the hand tightens . one of laika s ideals is that only one animator should work on a given scene at a time . we don t double up on animators per shot , pascall says . we ve tried it in the past , and it doesn t work . they work at different paces , so it slows them down overall . he says they sometimes shoot layers or characters separately , then composite them digitally , especially if the characters are far apart in a shot , and the depth of field would keep one of them out of focus for the camera . but for instance , in a scene where kubo stands in a wooded area and a wind blows through the trees , that s the work of a single animator moving every leaf and branch separately . the process is incredibly laborious on kubo , animators worked simultaneously on their own scenes , each trying to achieve the company goal of . seconds of animation per week , and more often , only hitting about three seconds per week . and before they can even get started on a scene , other teams have spent many months assembling all the materials the animators are going to use . according to puppet fabrication supervisor georgina hayns , an individual hero puppet can take four to nine months to design and build , so the fabrication team starts its work some to months before shooting on a project begins . each shoot requires many copies of the same puppet , again so multiple animators can work simultaneously there were separate kubo puppets on this shoot . each puppet requires a complicated custom body , handmade clothing , and a rig that can hold the tens of thousands of d printed faces the animators swap in and out . a quick sequence at the end of laika s paranorman shows a sped up version of the complete puppet fabrication process . because of the wear and tear on the puppets caused by constant handling , the fabrication department includes a maintenance team that re tightens the puppets joints after every shot . and because the wires in the puppets fingers are so fine and fragile , each puppet requires a backup library of hands . the fingers can break mid shot , hayns says , so she has one crazy little department that just makes spare hands if we ve got puppets out there , we probably have pairs of hands . each puppet also represents a lot of problem solving , both for costumes and for particular character traits . on kubo , one issue was how to give kubo s ally monkey muscles that moved , and fur that could be fluffy , or matted , or soaked for individual scenes . she was definitely the biggest challenge , because we had never made anything like her before , hayns says . we built her an a completely different way , with a completely different approach , from the inside out . but she was a huge success as well . hayns team eventually built the character as a rigid armature with a muscle suit around it that could squash and stretch to suggest the body under the silicon infused fur . kubo s costumes are similarly individually rigged in hidden layers , with latticeworks of wires and weights to let them hold consistent folds and wrinkles through months of handling . they re the result of intensive research into traditional japanese robes and laika s first experiments with silk costumes , but they re driven by engineering as much as traditional costuming . from each show , we learn new techniques , and we have new groundbreaking things happen , hayns says . but we re always looking to see what cool new technology is hitting the market . you can get d printers that are actually making fabrics at this point . it s just not quite small enough for us yet . we re not afraid of technology . we embrace it . we love doing something new , and making our movies as bright and as bold as we can with whatever s out there . one new thing in the case of kubo and the two strings is a greater reliance on cgi , especially to handle water effects and fill out crowd scenes . in a scene where the kubo character tells a story to an admiring audience , most of the viewers are digital creations rather than physical ones . laika doesn t have a problem with digital assists they ve been necessary from the beginning , to erase the rigs that hold up the puppets , and the seams between the upper and lower face plates . even laika s first feature , coraline , had some computer animated effects . it s such an overwhelmingly collaborative process . but the company addresses the cg characters in the same hands on , aesthetics driven way it addresses the physical ones . computer generated characters go through the same design processes as the puppets , with the costume department providing the vfx team with fabric swatches to scan , and the fabrication department building physical character models for the effects team to manipulate , then copy into a digital environment . the advantage of the physical maquettes for vfx supervisor steve emerson is that his team can put them on the sets to study how they interact with the lighting systems , in order to build more accurate digital models . with a typical film production , by the time you re talking about visual effects , the camera team , the sets , all that is done , emerson says . they ve all moved on , and you re picking up the pieces and figuring it out . what s great about the work we re doing is , not only are we collaborating , we re running in parallel . we re not developing in a vacuum . it s such an overwhelmingly collaborative process . laika s processes have to be collaborative , because of that emphasis on artistic choices first . when a director calls for a marionette skeleton with a foot arm span , big enough to grab or stomp on the normal character puppets , it s up to the fabrication department to figure out how to build it . on kubo , that skeleton was built in pieces , with its legs as a separate set , being animated in a different room . and it s up to the rigging department to work with them to hang the skeleton s top half from the ceiling in a way that will give the animator full motion control . here , animation rigging supervisor oliver jones and his team were able to build a sliding system of pulleys that let animators move the skeleton s arms smoothly and freely , then step on a floor pad to lock them precisely into place for each shot . and when a thorny issue crops up in pre production , it s never clear which department is going to solve it . emerson says that as the head of computer effects , he s used to keeping his mouth shut in meetings , to make sure the fabrication , rigging , d printing , and artistic departments have first crack at each new issue . we re not purists about stop motion , knight says . but he does prefer creative technological problem solving over one size fits all software solutions . within these walls , you have giant , throbbing , nasa size brains that are inventing technologies , and then you have luddites , people who are still working with their hands like artists and craftspeople were a century ago . i love that convergence of different types of methodologies and people . i think it creates a ground for innovation . for laika , kubo is the result of years of satisfying , fulfilling workthat innovation is going to continue to be necessary if knight s going to meet his next goal , of getting laika to a one feature a year release schedule . it s going to take some getting to , pascall says . right now , we re at an month turnaround , and that brings a lot of challenges . we re doing three things at once marketing on kubo , shooting the next film , and pre production on a third , and we re doing it all with the same crew . the studio is also expanding beyond its , foot confines into the building next door , which brings its own set of logistical headaches , especially with production currently underway . every department has to move . there have been lots of sleepless nights . but there s also huge incentive to expand , not just because the studio s end products are so unique , but because of the hands on , intensely cooperative process that creates them . knight is enthusiastic about laika s future not because kubo is perfect , but because it s the end result of years of satisfying , fulfilling work . the entire film is filled with all different kinds of imperfections and failings , and it s always something you have to come to terms with , he says . sometimes it s maddening to work in this medium , because of the imperfections . but that s one of the things that makes it inherently beautiful . we really embrace that side of it , because it makes these films human . photography by vjeran pavic	 from siri to alexa , voice interfaces are becoming increasingly common , but for all their recent advances , they often struggle with one of the most basic characteristics of human speech accents . the problem is so prevalent that computer scientists have identified the ampnbspexistence of a machine voice , a ampnbspstandardized way of speaking that individuals with accents adopt in the hope of being understood . ampnbspresearchers even warn about the existence of a ampnbsp speech divide that ostracizes individuals whose accents differ from those the machines have been trained on . as is often the case with technology built on large data sets , the problem begins with the input . if you only train your interface using a narrow selection of voices , then it won t know how to respond to accents that fall outside of its frame of reference . according to marsal gavalda , the head of machine intelligence at yik yak and an expert on speech recognition , academics have been studying the problem since the s . speech recognition s lack of diversity is rooted in data sets collected decades ago historically , speech recognition systems have been trained from data collected mostly in universities , and mostly from the student population , gavalda tells the verge . the diversity of voices reflect the student population years ago . for example , a project in the early s known as ampnbspcall home gave students credits to make free , long distance phone calls . their calls would be recorded , transcribed , and annotated , then sold as data sets to research teams and computer scientists . it was the easiest place to collect these samples , says gavalda . he adds that researchers also collected audio from news broadcasters but again , this meant selecting only the most neutral accents . there s an easy way to fix this , though collect more data . companies like google have been doing exactly that as their voice interfaces become more integral to their software and hardware , and the internet has made this collection pretty straightforward . as was first ampnbspspotted by quartz , the search giant has been using a third party company , appen , to corral a diverse array of accented audio samples from the website s users . recruiting at r beermoneycontractors for appen have been posting on a number of subredddits , including those dedicated to part time work r slavelabour , r workonline , r beermoney , etc as well as individual cities . r edinburgh was where the request for samples was originally spotted , presumably to iron out understanding of the ampnbspunderserved scottish accent . i m currently recruiting to collect speech data for google , reads one ampnbsptypical request . it requires you to use an android to complete the task . the task is recording voice prompts like indy now , google what s the time . each phrase takes around seconds . adults are paid to record , phrases , while under s can record phrases and earn . neither appen nor google would confirm that they were involved in the project , but a well placed source told the verge that the search giant regularly collects voice data to improve its services it s just usually not so visible . we talked to a number of redditors who completed the task , and asked them about their experiences with voice interface tech . there were regional accents from the uk and america , as well as indian and chinese accented english , with most users saying they d had difficulty with tech like siri and alexa in the past . all said they went through the same process of being directed to a mobile webpage where there was a record button to tap , and a number of phrases to read out . these voice samples were mostly addressed to google beginning ok google , hey , google , etc . , but some just asked for the names of popular tv shows , toys , and video game including a number of youtube channels , like ampnbspsky does minecraft . others spanned a range of typical google searches , including hunting for recipes how to make a birthday cake , understanding idioms hey google , get cold feet , beating pub quizzes presidents in order , and looking for that perfect karaoke number you ll be in my heart just music . i need to annunciate a ton and use simple phrases . one respondent told the verge by email i m originally from china , but i ve lived in the us for about a decade , so i speak pretty much understandable english . ampnbspthe closest description of my accent would be us northeast with a hint of singaporean newscaster . however , i do need to ampnbspenunciate ampnbspa ton and use simple phrases for applications like siri and google now to work . i can t really converse with my phone . after audio samples are collected by appen they re annotated by the company s in house linguists , with longer sentences broken down grammatically , and contextual information added was the sample recorded on a phone ? inside ? outdoors ? . mark brayan , the company s ceo , wouldn t comment on the company s work with google , but told the verge that the firm collects and annotates a process it refers to as decoration audio samples from around the world , with employees able to translate some languages . brayan says demand for the company s services has increased massively in recent years , especially as voice interfaces become more common and users expect more out of them . to go from understanding percent of words to percent , the recognizer has to digest infrequently used words , of which there are millions , says brayan . companies often request audio samples for specific vocabulariessometimes the company has to produce samples of specific vocabularies , related to , for example , a sport or a hobby . one of the big challenges is what we call named entity recognition , says brayan . that s brand names , product names , individual names , and so on . companies can ask for specific accents , or they can just say where they re hoping to launch a product and appen will produce the relevant voices . so if you re launching in canada , for example , you need not only the french language but also french accented canadian english . incorporating unrepresented english speaking accents will be a big step forward for voice interfaces , says gavalda . you could argue that the majority of english speakers are not even native speakers . he compares the situation to clinical trials for pharmaceutical companies that only recruited white men . it wasn t until an ampnbspact of congress in that it became illegal to exclude women and minorities from such vital research . if you think about it you re developing a of medicine , he says , so it stand to reason you would make it work equally well with all different types of people . being able to ask siri or alexa questions obviously isn t as important as having access to effective medicine , but it is exclusion all the same . thankfully , as google s trawling for accents on reddit shows , it s relatively easy to remedy . just collect the audio samples , and let the machine learning systems process them . after all , a computer doesn t really hear accents there are just sounds it recognizes and those it doesn t . it just needs the data . correction a previous version of this story stated that appen employees had posted to reddit . it was third party contractors appen had hired who did to . we regret the error . 	 at first glance , mafia iii doesn t look all that unique . it s yet another crime focused open world game that has players starting from the bottom and building up an underworld empire from scratch . it takes place in a fictionalized version of a major american city in this case , new orleans and has lots of shooting and driving . but mafia iii isn t the grand theft auto clone it seems , something that i came to understand after playing through a handful of missions in the game . everything you re doing in the open world is driving you forward , explains creative director haden blackman . lincoln doesn t go off fishing or something everything furthers his goal . when you take on the role of protagonist lincoln clay in his attempt to build a new crime organization to take on the italian mafia , everything action you perform whether it s a wild car chase or tapping a neighborhood s phone lines feeds into that larger motivation to take control of the city s vast criminal underworld . mafia iii takes place in new bordeaux , a virtual version of new orleans in , and stars clay as a vietnam veteran who gets mixed up in the black mob when he returns home from duty . early on in the game the entire organization is killed by the italian mafia , and clay is the sole survivor . with the help of a trio of allies including mafia ii protagonist vito scaletta clay sets to rebuilding a new mob to get revenge . the story is told in part through cutscenes structured to look like an old documentary , so that it almost feels like you re watching events unfold that already happened years ago . everything furthers his goal . after playing an hour long demo of the game , i was struck by how cohesive mafia iii s world and story felt . in most open world games , the narrative and actual game experience are largely separate . your character may be facing inner turmoil about his crumbling life , but that doesn t stop you from stealing cars and joyriding while tuning in to easy listening radio stations instead of continuing on with your violent endgame ambitions . that s not the case in new bordeaux . take clay himself , for instance . if you play uncharted or gta , you might wonder how a regular person can wield a gun like a soldier , and take down dozens of enemies with ease . for clay , it makes a lot more sense he was trained to use a variety of weapons both by the army and the mob . before the game begins , he s had experience in life or death situations . he s familiar with extreme violence . his history also has narrative benefits , allowing the writers comment on the culturally turbulent time during which the game is set the same year as the civil rights act of . the idea that the player might think about race a little bit as they play , to me is important , says blackman . you ll hear things in the game that lincoln would hear as a black man in . the city s police officers will often cast you a suspicious gaze , and in some neighborhoods , store owners will call the cops just because you re hanging outside for too long . this thematic consistency extends to the structure of the game . what you re doing in mafia iii isn t all that different from other open world games driving , shooting , collecting money , upgrading your character . the difference , at least as developer hangar pitches it , is that these are the things clay would really do in his quest to take down the mafia . they re not filler violence . the thematic consistency extends throughout the gameblowing up cargo trucks is fun , sure , but it also is a way to hinder the operations of the mafia . the same goes for wreaking havoc in a mafia owned restaurant or hideout . they re side diversions that also serve a purpose . when you steal cash from one of these establishments , you re not just putting it in your own pocket , you re taking it out of theirs . even character progression is tied to the theme instead of earning new abilities and gear through gaining experience points , you get them by making money and taking control over parts of the city . in order to tell that story in an open world , the team at developer hangar had to redesign and condense the city that inspired it to better facilitate the game experience there s a reason it s called new bordeaux , not new orleans . streets are wider , and the layout eliminates the plentiful degree turns found in real new orleans . the bayou is moved a bit closer to downtown , and the developers also introduce elevation to the relatively flat city in order to make driving around more fun . a high speed car chase isn t the same without a few jumps . that said , there s attention to real details in this fictionalized version of new orleans . you ll hear news broadcasts on the radio that tell not only of your exploits , but also real world events from the time . new bordeaux s many varied districts include not just well known spots like canal street and the french quarter , but also smaller , working class neighborhoods , all designed to look like they did in real life . all of the elements you d expect from new orleans from the neon light signage to the mausoleum like above ground tombs are here , as are some you likely don t even know about . there s so much more to it , says blackman . there s an obligatory scene with mardi gras , but it takes place in the aftermath of the event , so you can see it from a different side . there s so much more to it . getting those details right involves a lot of research . in addition to taking several trips to new orleans over the course of development , the team also read plenty of books and watched a number of documentaries from the period . blackman estimates that he s read a few dozen books on the mob alone , not to mention topics covering everything from the history of voodoo to the city s varied architecture . those specific details were then used as a form of guidance . a lot of it was making sure we could be inspired by it , but not so beholden to it that we had to build the city block for block , blackman says . even after only playing the game for a relatively short period of time , it s clear that when these different elements work together as intended , mafia iii feels distinct and fascinating . the actions i was taking weren t especially unique a lot of shooting , tossing grenades , and hiding behind cover but the reasons for them were . at the end of the day , almost every game boils down to just a handful of mechanics , says blackman . you re shooting , you re driving , you re stalking , depending on the game . so how do you keep that fresh ? for us , we had to make it tied into the narrative . mafia iii is coming to the pc , ps , and xbox one on october th . 	 for the first time , scientists have figured out how to view changes to gene activity in living brains . the brain scan technique may aid discoveries in how alzheimer s treatments , schizophrenia , and other neurological disorders work . and not just that this approach may also help scientists evaluate whether drugs work the way they re supposed to . the researchers focused on molecules that regulate how tightly dna wraps around the proteins that serve as structural units for our genetic material . think of the dna as string and these proteins as a spool how tightly or loosely the string is wound around the spool has effects on how dna expresses itself . these molecules , called histone deacetylases , are part of what determines how tightly the dna is wound . for instance , in alzheimer s disease , high levels of these histone deacetylases hdacs for short have been found in the parts of the brain that regulates memory . today s results are a big step forward for epigeneticsto get a better sense of how these hdacs work , scientists led by hsiao ying wey and tonya gilbert at the martinos center for biomedical imaging at harvard medical school spent seven years developing the chemical compound described today in the journal science translational medicine . the compound they eventually hit on , called c martinostat , binds to the hdacs , showing researchers where the enzymes are in the brain , and how much of them there is . in today s study , scientists injected eight healthy patients with the compound and then tracked it with pet brain scans . this has provided us with the first glimpse into living human brains of how these enzymes work , says jacob hooker , director of radiochemistry at martinos and co author of the study . today s results are a big step forward for a burgeoning field called epigenetics , where scientists are answering the eternal nature or nurture question with both . nature gives us our dna code , but nurture can make it work in different ways . going back to the dna as string metaphor , epigeneticists want to figure out how things like diet and exercise cause chemical changes that make the dna wind more or less tightly around the spool , and how those changes affect us . it s been a lesser known area until recently , but people are excited by new studies that show how the environment and genetics combine to influence a lot of conditions . one notable paper , for example , suggested that schizophrenia develops when the brain gets rid of too many connections between neurons . not only does today s study the first time we ve seen epigenetic activity in the living human brain finally move us beyond mice studies , the technique could potentially be used to diagnose disorders . researchers also learned that the pattern of hdac enzymes is more consistent than we would have predicted , which suggests further ways to research brain disease . it s extremely important to know directly how the enzymes are distributed . we ve long known that these enzymes play a part in disorders like depression and addiction , says mira jakovcevski , an epigenetics researcher at germany s max planck institute for psychiatry , who was not part of the study . in the past , scientists studying the brain tissue of psychiatric patients after death found abnormal levels of hdacs , usually too much . but studies on dead brain tissue or in mice don t tell us much about how enzymes work in the living human brain . the level of enzymes change rapidly after death and dead brain tissue is usually at least hours old . in addition , scientists studying slices of dead tissue usually only look at one region at a time , while a scan of the living brain lets them look at any region that they want at the same time . it s extremely important to know directly how the enzymes are distributed in the living brain , says jakovcevski , and this is a very elegant way of doing it . now we know what normal hdac levels look like and there are a couple surprises . first , it turns out that healthy people at rest basically have the enzyme in all the same places . this is a little unexpected because the core claim of the field is that gene expression can vary widely . in many cases , it can be changed by everything from three months of biking using only one leg to how much fat is in a diet . so we d expect that to be true here too , with the enzyme showing up at different levels in many different places in the brain . instead , the eight subjects all had the same pattern lots of hdacs in the cerebellum , an area important for motor control , and much less in white matter which is mostly connective tissue , the amygdala which regulates emotions , and hippocampus which helps with navigation . the consistency of these results suggest that it is important to study the connection between hdacs and these specific regions gene expression to better understand neurological diseases . the next step is learning to recognize what diseased brains look likeinterestingly , the team thinks brain regions with the most hdac may also be those with genes that are most locked in , or resistant to change . we ve seen that too much hdac can cause learning problems , so it would make sense that having a lot of these enzymes would prevent learning even in a normal brain . this isn t necessarily a bad thing , because too much flexibility in the brain can lead to other problems . hooker and his colleagues are now developing experiments with in brain animal scans and hdac blockers to test this hypothesis . the new technique isn t perfect it s a first step . we don t know yet how hdac levels might change naturally in a healthy brain for example , as people age over time . the compound c martinostat binds to three of the types of hdac known to exist . that means some activity is still a mystery . and the results may not be the same as a drug that binds to only one type , or to all . in addition , we still need more methods to track the other hdac enzymes and build a more complete picture of how they work , notes jakovcevski . before , if researchers tried to track a drug that claims to treat alzheimer s in this way , the image would basically be black . and it s always foolish to think that visualizing something means we understand it fully . just because we can see where hdacs are working doesn t automatically mean we understand how to interpret the signals , says hooker . the biggest gap is that when we see something different in patients , we re still not going to know exactly what to do . for hooker and his team , the next step is learning to recognize when something is different in patients and what that looks like for different conditions . they ve received funding to study people who have schizophrenia , alzheimer s , and huntington s disease . huntington s , an inherited disease that causes both movement problems and dementia , is an especially interesting case because doctors can predict when certain symptoms will appear long before they actually do . this means the researchers can scan people at diagnosis and know just when to scan in the future to see how enzyme levels change as certain symptoms develop . some research suggests that blocking hdac could help patients with alzheimer s . so far , nothing that works on hdac to treat neurological diseases has been approved by the us food and drug administration , partly because it s hard to prove a drug works when you can t really see what it s doing . before , if researchers tried to track a drug that claims to treat alzheimer s in this way , the image would basically be black , says hooker . behavioral trials can show whether a drug improves someone s condition , but without seeing how it works directly , it s hard to prove that it s worth running these expensive trials . with c martinoset , scientists know directly if their drug acts on the right enzymes and so he hopes it will be helpful for us to understand more and companies developing clinical trials and then , of course , to people . 	 for years , google has been building a lobbying machine that outpaces its silicon valley peers , turning the internet giant into a major washington presence . in , the company ampnbspsurpassed at ampampt , verizon , and comcast in lobbying spending dollars , and it s been particularly adept at building relationships with the white house . as of march , google averaged ampnbspabout one meeting a week with the obama administration , and google staff frequently move into jobs with the white house , or vice versa . but the figures on meetings and revolving doors don t always show how google maneuvers those relationships when facing a fight . more than , pages of emails the nonprofit group ampnbspcampaign for accountability recently launched ampnbspa project to compile documents about the company s lobbying practices , obtained through the freedom of information act . the group says the repository of documents will be a resource for monitoring how google interacts with the government . the first installment , which the group obtained through an independent researcher and shared with the verge , features ampnbspmore than , pages of emails between the white house office of science and technology policy and google employees . in the email exchanges , google employees coordinate their messaging with the white house , occasionally steering around divisions within the administration . nothing in the documents suggests improper behavior they are a window into google s high level work on policy matters , and provide a case study on how deep the company s lobbying efforts go . provides a case study of a google persuasion campaignin december , google saw a threat , as thousands of representatives met at the world conference on international telecommunications to consider a proposed revision of the international telecommunication regulations , which govern how communication services are used around the world . after years , the conference was set to determine whether to bring more of the internet under the purview of the regulations . the us government had a seat at the table , as did google , which sent private industry delegates to the conference to advise the us . google cast opposition to the revision as ampnbspa fight for internet freedom , and certainly others in the tech industry took that line , although ampnbspcritics argued google was more interested in preventing increased costs for using global network infrastructure . the emails obtained by the campaign for accountability help sketch the anatomy of a google persuasion campaign , as the company detected and dealt with perceived problems before , during , and after a crisis . we re not making any judgements or drawing any conclusions about specific policies that google has pursued , says anne weismann , the campaign for accountability s executive director . it s not clear how the campaign is funded , and the group declined to discuss donors , including any who may conflict with google . our only bias is that google is not transparent enough , weismann says . our only bias is that google is not transparent enough . discussions with the white house started weeks ahead of the conference , the emails show , and the white house alerted google to an issue early on . r . david edelman , senior advisor for internet policy , reached out to the company after documents related to wcit began to leak . since google is mentioned by name several times here , i thought you should see if you haven t already , edelman wrote to google senior policy counsel johanna shelton , sending her ampnbspa forbes article . as the conference started , google contacted the office of science and technology policy with concerns that the state department would agree to an unfavorable deal . ross lajeunesse , a delegate to the conference and then google s global head of free expression and international relations , wrote an email to the white house s edelman expressing worry that the united states would sign on rather than face the optics of being one of the few countries not to . google was concerned a deal would be reachedlajeunesse wrote that his read was that the state department was interested in reaching a deal . at the end of the note , he wrote , please keep my fingerprints off this , but given our mutual interest in this working out well for the internet innovation . . . edelman replied that he had faith in the delegation ambassador appointed to negotiate the talks , but agreed that the proposal then under consideration was unacceptable to the office of science and technology policy . after google sensed that potential hurdle , it went to great lengths to convince the state department that it was making the wrong move . at one point , eric likely referring to then executive chairman eric schmidt , although his last name isn t mentioned made a call to hillary clinton s office . i understand that eric personally called secretary clinton s office , which was an impressive show of force , edelman wrote to lajeunesse in an email . i d be curious to know his reaction to the conversation . it s unclear who eric spoke to clinton herself , or a member of the staff . schmidt is now a supporter of clinton s presidential campaign . ultimately , countries out of the participating signed on , with the united states one of those against . it was a complicated , mixed result the final decision reached may have been more about signaling what binding resolutions could be made , rather than actually passing such resolutions . lajeunesse , in an email to edelman , bluntly said we lost , although edelman responded , the world lost . this treaty now has no legitimacy . i understand that eric personally called secretary clinton s office , which was an impressive show of force . it s difficult to say what role google , which declined to comment , may have had in the us decision to not sign . but the company and the office of science and technology policy discussed working for the same cause , even against others in government with misgivings . after the vote , edelman suggested a post wcit huddle with lajeunesse , and again alluded to internal disagreements . i d like to hear your thoughts on what worked , what didn t , and where to go from here , edelman wrote . and let me just say what s been said a thousand times thank you for you and your team s tireless efforts even amidst adversity within our own ranks on behalf of the us and the free internet . exchanges between lajeunesse and edelman also discussed how to talk about wcit publicly . i m working with dc team for a strategy of how to characterize wcit victory , loss or a less manichean spin and what that , in turn , means moving forward , lajeunesse wrote . the emails show lajeunesse and edelman set up a private meeting , as edelman wrote that a white house delegate gathering could resolve questions over how to discuss the issue . ultimately , whatever discussions were had about how to discuss the vote , google continued ringing alarm bells . in a statement ampnbsplater sent to reporters , a google spokesperson said the vote showed that governments want to increase regulation and censorship of the internet . 	 twice , jason vale was diagnosed with cancers that should have killed him . but years after the first tumor was found in his chest when he was , vale is still alive . the reason for his survival is not chemo , radiation , cancer drugs , or surgery , vale claims . he says he owes his life to a controversial natural product that s been making headlines for years apricot seeds . vale first learned about the seeds when he was and was diagnosed with renal cell carcinoma , a common type of kidney cancer . he refused any medical treatment and he says he only treated himself with the kernels , eating up to a day . when i ate the seeds , my tumor shrunk down and when i stopped eating the seeds the tumor grew , vale said in a voice message sent over text . i used alternative medicine . that s why i can t credit traditional medicine , because i didn t take it when it shrunk . some believe apricot kernels can fight or prevent cancervale is not alone in believing that apricot kernels the soft , almond like seeds found inside apricot pits can fight or prevent cancer . the internet is full of accounts written by people who claim apricot kernels have saved their lives . the seeds contain amygdalin , a compound also called laetrile that some people believe has cancer fighting properties . but amygdalin is actually converted into cyanide in the body , a poison that can cause nausea , headaches , insomnia , and nervousness . cyanide can also lower blood pressure to unsafe levels and even lead to death . laetrile was shown to have no anticancer activity in human clinical trials , according to the national cancer institute , and its use for treating cancer is illegal in the us . apricot seeds have been popular in the us since at least the s , when laetrile was popularized as a cancer treatment . hollywood star steve mcqueen famously traveled to mexico in to cure his terminal cancer with laetrile , but died within months of beginning the therapy . the kernels have remained a cult phenomenon ever since , even though they re known to have caused death in children who ate them . and they re not the only superfood touted for cancer treatment . a quick google search shows thousands of articles about the vitamin rich fruits and veggies that are thought to fight or prevent cancer from kale to broccoli to blueberries to green tea . though these foods are healthy , the science behind their cancer fighting properties is murky , experts say . sometimes there s no science at all . and often , these foods can even interfere with chemotherapy , radiation , and cancer drugs , putting patients at risk . many people believe that a natural product , herbs , and fluids are safer than chemotherapy radiation treatment , says k . simon yeung , a pharmacist and herbalist at memorial sloan kettering cancer center and the manager of the about herbs database , which informs patients on unproven anticancer treatments . however , we do know that natural doesn t always mean safe and sometimes they have more side effects than people believe . natural doesn t always mean safe . eating lots of fruits and vegetables can actually help prevent cancer , experts say . but focusing on certain particular superfoods is counterproductive , because it encourages people to eat a few foods and ignore others . superfoods is a term that seeks to describe food products with , apparently , superpowers , says casey dunlop , a health information office at cancer research uk . it s actually a marketing term . it s not based on any scientific evidence . or sometimes the science isn t clear cut . certain vegetables like broccoli , brussels sprouts , and cauliflower have been found to help lower the risk of prostate and breast cancer in certain studies , but not in others . translating small lab studies into actual cancer treatments that work on a large scale is also hard . our bodies are a lot more complex than a lab study , says dunlop . these findings haven t translated into big population studies . in the case of apricot seeds , which contain amygdalin also found in almonds and apple seeds , even a small dose is toxic because of the cyanide . their toxicity has been known for years . more recently , the european food safety authority efsa europe s food safety watchdog warned that the seeds are dangerous , especially for children . in its report , the efsa notes a number of cases of children who were hospitalized for cyanide poisoning caused by apricot kernels , including such cases in turkey , where the seeds are a common food . a month old girl died because of high cyanide levels in her blood after eating kernels . wikimedia commons the researchers found that adults should limit themselves to three small kernels a day , and toddlers to one small kernel . but online , people recommend much higher doses . on his website , vale talks about eating as many as seeds per day . veronique desaulniers , who has a website about beating breast cancer only with natural treatments , says the general recommendation is one kernel per pounds of body weight . and sandi rog , who has a blog titled i beat cancer with vitamin b another name for amygdalin , says cancer patients should eat three to six seeds per hour . rog didn t respond to repeated requests for comment . when the kernels are chewed or ground , the amygdalin is degraded to cyanide . people who believe in the power of apricot kernels think that this cyanide is only toxic to cancer cells , but scientists say that s not true . the cyanide is toxic to all cells because it interferes with their oxygen supply and it is particularly bad for the brain and heart , which require constant oxygen to function . but devotees of a nutrition based approach to cancer don t believe this . how can scientists say that apricot kernels a natural product are toxic , when chemotherapy is known for damaging healthy body tissues alongside the cancer cells , they wonder . toniann vizzi , the vice president of the p foundation , a non profit organization that helps raise awareness about childhood cancer , says her year old son takes three apricot kernels a day in his protein shake . her son , gino vizzi , was diagnosed with chronic myelogenous leukemia cml when he was . cml is incurable , so vizzi will have to do chemotherapy for the rest of his life , but in the meantime he s on an organic diet rich in vegetables , juices , vitamins , filtered water , and probiotics . the diet includes the apricot seeds . why not ? it s not gonna harm you , says his mom , toniann . it s something that i think god gave us to use and if you re doing okay with it and it works , why not ? the patients want to do everything they can . the why not argument is one that experts see time and again when dealing with cancer patients , who are particularly vulnerable to falling prey to sham cures . it s very difficult because with cancer patients , the patients want to do everything they can , says adriana salmon , a clinical dietitian at the university of texas md anderson cancer center . and sometimes they feel like they don t have control over their treatment and they feel like , oh , if i do this , i m going to help myself . cancer centers usually offer nutrition advice to patients , both because patients interest in alternative medicine is growing and also because eating a healthy , plant based diet can help cancer patients deal with the side effects of chemotherapy and radiation . but these nutritionists don t suggest that nutrition alone can cure cancer . vale , who refused treatment for his kidney cancer , began selling apricot seeds on the internet as a cancer cure . eventually in the us food and drug administration got a court injunction to stop him , and in vale was convicted to five years in prison for criminal contempt of the injunction . after his time at the federal correctional institution at fort dix in new jersey , his kidney tumor grew larger until , in , vale had his kidney removed . today , vale doesn t have cancer but he eats four to seeds every day , most days , for prevention . his website , apricots from god , is a mishmash of his own cancer survival story , medical reports about his tumors , newspaper clippings about laetrile , warning letters from the fda , and testimonials from people claiming to have cured themselves with the kernels . on the upper right corner , a store tab links you to a related website where you can buy herbal products , enzymes , and organic teas . under a cancer fighters tab , you can find the apricot seeds . a one month starter package that contains a pound of bitter apricot seeds , supplements like coral calcium tea bags , and a dvd of the film world without cancer about laetrile , goes for . even in the face of the evidence that apricot seeds are toxic , even after jail time , vale remains a believer . 	 this weekend the ultimate fighting championship is celebrating it s th pay per view fight card , a massive event that will put more ufc champions into the cage in one night than ever before . but the fights aren t the only thing fans will be tuning in to see . it s also been widely reported that the company will use the event to announce its parent company , zuffa llc , has been acquired for more than billion . that s a whopping increase from the million the company sold for back in , when it was banned from broadcast television and on the verge of bankruptcy . sale or not , the event will serve as a capstone to one of the most successful and unlikely turnaround stories in the last two decades of american business . at some level , the ufc s success is simple . like any sports media company , it had to produce good content and build its fanbase . its formula was to pit the world s best martial artists against each other in an eight sided cage . but another key element to the ufc s success is technological its evolution from a generic fight promoter into one of the most agile and forward thinking digital media companies in the world of sports . take this weekend s ufc , the biggest card of fights the company has ever put on . the evening will kick off at pm to subscribers who pay . for ufc fight pass , the company s streaming service . at pm it will switch over to fox sports , available to anyone and supported by ads . for the main card at pm things shift to a pay per view model , which costs . for the last five fights . the ufc will also move many fights off cable onto fox , a basic broadcast network . there isn t another major sports league on earth that spreads a single night of action across online streaming , basic cable , broadcast television , and pay per view . they have done a very good job of slicing and dicing the media rights they have , says brandon ross , a media analyst with btig research . the nfl are the masters of squeezing the most juice out of their content , but the ufc is doing it with a more modern , ground up approach . the streaming platform the ufc has built also represents it most interesting opportunity for growth . the core business of live sporting events is limited by time , space , and talent . but that s much less true in the digital realm , where the ufc is rapidly becoming the netflix of combat sports . that sounds grandiose , but hear me out it s streaming platform , launched in december of , costs a month , and is available around the world . to give customers something to watch , the ufc acquired a massive library of archival content , basically the history of modern mma from to the present , similar to the way netflix packed its library with older movies and tv series . the ufc has become the best streaming platform for all combat sports now the ufc has begun operating as the technology platform and distribution channel for smaller promotions across the globe . just as outlets like netflix can offer a streaming platform to comedians and indie directors without a good way to reach consumers , the ufc is now the aggregator for mma promotions that aren t big enough to build their own streaming service . you could also draw a parallel to major league baseball s tech division , which was early to streaming for its own teams before branching out to act as the platform for sports like golf and hockey , not to mention hbo . over the last few months the ufc has streamed events put on by small promotions in japan , brazil , england , and russia . and it s even started showing sports tangential to mma , such as kickboxing matches and brazilian jiu jitsu tournaments . you have a lot of leagues out there , especially on a worldwide basis , that are simply not big enough to have their own direct to consumer platform , says ross . the ufc is the only one out there with the scale to pull it off . and it builds the ufc s power further . unlike traditional television , which is supported by advertising and must aim to reach the greatest number of viewers possible , the ufc can adopt a strategy of narrow casting that has been touted by executives at netflix , amazon , and youtube . a jiu jitsu tournament might not bring in a huge viewing audience , but if it captures a few new subscribers , and provides some extra value to current ones , then it makes sense as a business venture for the ufc . here s an example . twenty four hours before the start of any fight card , the ufc works to build excitement with a weigh in . the fighters strip down , flex for the camera , and line up to face each other for the last time before they enter the cage . the audience cheers lustily , and , as often as not , this moment of mutual intimidation descends into a scuffle , a little taste of violence to further whet the appetite of the crowd . the ufc s online business can scale faster than its fight business there is still a weigh in for this weekend s fights , but that s not what i ll be watching . at pm i ll tune into a livestream of cage warriors , a small british mma promotion . the event is being put on at the camden centre in london , a venue with a listed capacity of people . this is the kind of small local show that doesn t grab a big audience or pay its fighters much . but for the devoted fight fan like me , it s an absolute treat , and a good reason to keep paying . a month . for people in the uk who want to see their local fighter , it s also the only option save going to the arena itself . the company , like netflix , always insists on global rights and maintains full control of its original content . whereas most sports rely on their traditional tv broadcaster to create the content for the most part , we ve always been the kind of company that produces our own content , and as a result , we have , in all of our traditional tv deals , been able to hold back rights that have given the ability to take advantage of these outlets , says marshall zelanik , the ufc s chief content officer . unlike the nfl or nba , which have signed long term licensing deals with outlets like espn and give broadcast networks the responsibility for creating the content which appears on tv , the ufc owns and produces all of its events . the ufc s dominance can be a bit worrying there is a lot to love about fight pass as a fan of combat sports . but the ufc s relative dominance is also a bit worrying . we want to really document the history of this sport , and we re in a good position to do it , because it is so young , we are the leader in it , says marshall zelaznik , the ufc s executive vice president and chief content officer . the ufc spent most of its life as a company defining itself in opposition to competing promotions . having all but vanquished them , says zelaznik , we want to now become the archivist . but as eagle eyed fans have pointed out , the ufc often edits its video in a way that makes its favored fighters look better . take a controversial win by demetrious johnson , the ufc s current flyweight champion . in ampnbspthe original broadcast the judges decision to award him the victory elicited boos , whistles , and few cheers from the crowd , a fact the announcer even comments on , saying , obviously the crowd not liking the decision . but in the version of the bout ampnbspcurrently on fight pass , the boos have been replaced with canned cheers . it creates an odd dissonance , when the announcer notes the crowd is unhappy , but the audio plays only gentle applause . in another instance , the ufc ampnbspcut out footage of michael bisping , the current middleweight champion , spitting on the opponent s cornermen after winning the fight . the company is of course under no legal obligation to preserve its fight videos exactly as they were originally broadcast . but if it hopes to be the archivist for the history of an entire sport , it should try to preserve the record as faithfully as possible . mistakes are erased and fighters are effaced another fighter appears to have been buried in the company s archive . ufc fight pass allows users to search for videos by name . you can find almost any athlete , even obscure combatants who fought for the promotion just once or twice . and yet there is no fighter page for tito ortiz , who for almost a decade was one of the promotion s most popular champions , but has since developed an ampnbspantagonistic relationship with the company . of course , similar complaints have been made about the way the wwe professional wrestling s biggest promotion selectively edits its archives . you could argue that s okay because the wwe scripts its fights , while the action inside the ufc cage is supposed to be unfettered competition , but the two companies have plenty in common . the ufc learned how to build stars and those individuals really helped to catalyze and mainstream the business , says jason cruz , an analyst with mma payout , a website focused on the business of the sport . it became as much about celebrity and entertainment as sports and combat . the ufc figured out that real combat can take the same breaks for narrative or character development that professional wrestling can . and with the ultimate fighter series , where a group of aspiring amateurs compete for a ufc contract while living in a real world style house together , the company moved into outright reality television . that was really key to the turnaround , says cruz . the fights are real , the drama isn treality television has also been key to the ufc s international success . it has franchised out its ultimate fighter series , doing seasons based in brazil , latin america , and the uk , with more far flung locales planned for the future . if wanda , the massive chinese conglomerate , ends up buying the company as has been speculated , it could help expand the sport to that enormous market . demographically speaking , the ufc is in a better spot than many major american sports . it s audience is far younger , more international , and increasingly female . they moved into a void that boxing left behind , says cruz . its biggest liability at this point , might be its own success . the company has made it through two ftc investigations without charges , but is facing an ampnbspanti trust lawsuit from a large group of fighters , including many former ufc athletes , alleging that it sought to limit their pay and ability to organize , abusing its power as a monopolist in the market . when you think about mixed martial arts , you think about the ufc , says ross . it s like kleenex for combat sports . the ufc s early failures positioned it for success the ufc s success , at least in part , grew out of the company s failures before it was acquired by zuffa . i think someone once said that a successful strategy is always created looking backwards , says zelaznik . when zuffa took over the ufc it was ampnbspbanned from television in states . that freed the company up to experiment with emerging web platforms . it started streaming on facebook five years ago , well before most people thought of the social network as a place for live video . and it moved aggressively to stream fights on the web in any territory where it didn t have a broadcast tv partner . that wasn t by accident , that really was dana and lorenzo , ufc president and ceo , carrying a bit of a chip on our shoulder in the early days , because it was an uphill fight to get traditional media companies to care , says zelaznik . the aggressive sort of irreverent nature of what digital media is , in that it isn t traditional , in that you can make your way there , that was an outlet for our ownership and they knew it . 	 the verge in celebration of our th anniversary , this month we re publishing a series of interviews with innovative leaders about what the next five years hold . to read more about this series , read our editor nilay patel s introduction here . aaron levie spends more time thinking about the future of work than most . when the year old entrepreneur co founded box , it was as a place for average people to store their files online dropbox before there was dropbox . but years ahead of dropbox ceo drew houston , levie saw that the real money in online storage was in the workplace and so the company turned to making products that let people collaborate at work . the result is a company that successfully went public and beat wall street s expectations in its last earnings report , though it still has yet to turn a profit . levie says it will be cash flow positive by the end of the year . when levie is away from box , he s surveying the tech landscape for other innovations . he has been a savvy investor , making early bets on companies including stripe , zenefits , instacart , authy , robinhood , and color genomics . his work has given him an optimism about the way that new productivity tools will make working life better for the average cubicle dweller making organizations more transparent , and good ideas easier to spread . levie is also an evangelist for artificial intelligence , which is slowly but surely working its way into the office . the future of work is in many ways a story about the future of ai about what it can predict , what it can prevent , and what it can do on your behalf . the interviewyour company exists , in part , because mobile devices enable us to demand consumer quality experiences in our work software . five years from now ish , how close will we be to parity between work and consumer software ? will we even recognize a distinction ultimately between these two things ? i think you sort of nailed it , which is mobile and cloud sort of conspire to redefine what enterprise software looks like and how it runs and how it operates . i would say we are already on the cusp of that happening , where our enterprise technology should resemble and be as simple as our consumer technology . what we actually have is an issue where there s just a disparity of the tools that the most early adopting types of companies are using and the tools that the rest of the world uses . if you were to look at maybe how we work , we re probably already using mostly technology that feels like , and is indistinguishable from , consumer software . but if you go to large corporations all around the world , whether it s dow chemical , or ford , or these big businesses around the planet , there s a separation of the haves and have nots of modern technology . i think five years from now , we will have converged . companies won t be implementing old technology anymore . subscribe to our newsletter so you don t miss the rest of the verge interviews . terms apply . subscribehow will the tools themselves changes ? i think what s going to happen is enterprise software will become more and more deceptively simple . ampnbspit ll feel like we re using just a consumer application . i think we would agree that a product like slack , or what facebook is doing with facebook at work these just resemble consumer applications . and how does that change organizations over time ? if you study modern management science of just how organizations have been built up over the past years , you have a very clear hierarchy . the hierarchy has been built up to empower the flow of information up and down the organization . we had to structure our organizations in a very specific way because we didn t have technology to help us communicate in real time with anybody , anywhere . the best ideas don t necessarily free flow to the people making the decision . you have a lot of companies that are very hierarchical , where the way you get ahead is you hoard information , you hoard power . the best ideas don t necessarily free flow to the people making the decision . you get only a small subset of the ideas to work off of . most organizations , the way they re designed is not necessarily the right organizational structure with the right people at the top , because it s the people that have gotten ahead using a very specific set of tools that were built up in a non digital era . now , imagine an organization that can share information in real time with anybody , anywhere across the company . you essentially have a virtual space that flattens the organization , where now it s actually not just about the people that are able to obtain and retain the information , but the people that put forth the best ideas and can execute on those . i think you ll start to see that work just changes in a pretty material way , because it s not about how much information you have versus everybody else . everybody has the same level of information . now it s about who can execute on that information and who can continue to put forth better and better ideas . the speed at which our companies are going to run and operate is going to change pretty dramatically . the kinds of organizations that will win will be those that can adapt to this in the best way , and so far we ve seen that it s companies like the ubers and the facebooks of the world that are able to operate and work in this way . the legacy companies just cannot move and change fast enough to act on this . hearing all this , someone who works at a more traditional , siloed organizations , might think , wow , it sounds like work is going to take over my whole life , and i need to make total institutional awareness of every interaction inside my company . ampnbspall of these changes that you re describing , which do have many advantages in the organization do they have real advantages for the employee ? there are a lot of people around the world that actually want to do awesome things . they want to do their best work , but they re not recognized by the organization . their ideas don t bubble up to the top , because of the complex and archaic way that we built businesses . i think that some people will lose in this future the people that got ahead hoarding information and working in a way that was very specific to that model of an organization . you ll have a new era of people that are able to win on their ideas , and able to win on what maybe we would consider to be actually better reasons , that open up opportunity for a lot of people that previously their voices were not necessarily heard . i m generally optimistic . i did a couple internships before we started box . it was just so obvious that due to the hierarchical structure of an organization , if you were or entering that company , it s going to take you or years for your ideas to be valued by anybody at the top of the organization . that s just how it was structured . actually , nobody at the top of the organization wants you to get ahead , because the whole design of the system is that way you can have a clear hierarchy , people can keep their jobs , etc . we actually do want disruption to that structure . we want organizations to be able to get the best ideas so they can change more rapidly , so they can perform in the best way possible . i m generally optimistic . for many people who do this kind of knowledge work , email has been the foundation of their day for decades . will that still be the case five years from now ? email is to communication as newspapers are to media or news , which is to say that there s going to be multiple channels over time . email has been the dominant channel , but we now know there are other experiences , there are other paradigms that we want to be able to have with our communication . we want a real time experience . that s where a slack or a chat tool comes in . you can t fit real time in email , and any time you try , it creates just a very complex frankensteinian product that nobody really wants , like google wave or something . five years from now , do you think you will send fewer emails than you do today ? i actually send not a large amount of emails , so i don t think i could send fewer emails . i think that i already am using different tools . how do you think advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning will reshape work over the next several years ? we think about it in a bunch of ways . most of the most interesting ai machine learning examples that we ve seen so far have been on the consumer side . all of this stuff serves to make our daily lives a little bit more convenient . it helps us engage with the people we want to connect with , tells us when there s a birthday coming up . that s essentially what it s doing . siri helps us interact with information in our device in so many ways . we ve never actually seen real deep machine learning or narrow ai applied to business problems . it s just never really happened at any meaningful scale . there s been some kind of pattern recognition and anomaly detection , but never really have we applied actual advanced intelligence and machine learning to business problems . what happens when we take all these business applications and we start to apply real intelligence ? what happens when we take all these business applications and we start to apply real intelligence to them ? that , to us , paints a very , very different picture of what could possibly happen in the workplace . there s a whole range of outcomes , but at the starting point you just think how much time we all collectively waste doing things that literally require no thought . when you can ampnbsphave the computer do those things for you , now maybe we ve started to save , , percent of the time that we have in a given day . technology is helping us just focus on the things where we fundamentally have to interact with the tool or system , but the technology is doing the rest for us . all the way to the other end of the spectrum , which are things that people weren t doing in the first place . now it s possible for the first time ever to have computers aid a person in a way that wasn t previously possible . that s where the power of ai in healthcare or life sciences or financial services starts becoming incredibly powerful which is , how do you take the experiences that tens of millions of patients have had on a specific drug and apply that to just one individual patient that a doctor is interacting with ? how can we take all of the data that we have and be able to apply it in a highly precise way that no individual could have previously done because they weren t able to process across all of that information ? it s going to be everything from saving time to completely changing business or human outcomes because of this technology . sundar pichai had a pretty good analogy of ai is the new mobile which is to say software that isn t mobile today just feels out of date and clunky . well , software in five years from now where you re having to do anything manual is going to feel out of date and clunky . if you re in sales , it should be telling you who to sell to . the technology should be telling you what to do if you re in sales , it should be telling you who to sell to . if you re in marketing , it should tell you who to market to . if you are in healthcare , it should give you suggestions of the potential prescription or the diagnosis that you should have . if you are in manufacturing , it should instantly collapse your supply chain so you know where the potential problems are going to be so you can go right after them . i m probably more in the optimistic side of the spectrum . there s a lot of fear that it will disrupt jobs , but i think it ll probably more have an impact , at least for the foreseeable future , of raising of the level of work that we re all able to do because we just won t waste our time doing the stuff that is entirely redundant to what a computer can do . when it comes to the future of work , does it feel like we re on the verge of kind of a fresh wave of really generational companies that may have something to do with ai and machine learning ? i m probably more on the side that ai will have a much bigger impact on existing modern technologies than sort of an ai first company emerging that does a bunch of these new things . i think there are some companies that are pure ai first that are building powerful platforms that i think have a strong chance of being successful , but because you need a large amount of data and interaction already to be able to make use of that , the companies that should have a strong benefit or advantage should be companies like slack and box and workday and salesforce . because they already have the usage , they already have the data , and now ai is just a turbocharger for what people can do . ai will be something where you will get disrupted if you don t have it , but i believe it s an enabling technology as opposed to a disruptive technology because it s intended to dramatically enhance our existing tools and services . now , the one caveat i would say , just so i don t look stupid and not like somebody claiming that phones need keyboards or something , is if there s a fundamental shift in where ai is in five or years from now and it does things we simply can t even contemplate today , potentially you would want completely new types of experiences to be built off of that that existing incumbents couldn t adapt to for business model reasons or whatever . that would be what makes it disruptive . five years from now , are there technological tools you hope you have that you don t have today ? virtual reality will probably have more impact in the enterprise space than the consumer space . i think virtual reality will probably have more impact in the enterprise space than it does in the consumer space at its mature peak , because i think the implications are so enormous that it at least has the makings of being one of the very , very fundamentally disruptive technologies . we sort of see vr as maybe being to the non office worker as ipad was to the knowledge worker , which is the ipad was the first thing that was like , okay , i can kind of digitize my entire mobile experience around documents and email and communication . there s the perfect form factor for being able to go and do that . i think vr has the ability to bring that same level of immersive experience , but in a world where we haven t necessarily enabled people with best in class technology . whether that s manufacturing , when you re designing a product or you want to go look at the building that you re creating , or in education , or if you re in healthcare and you want to be able to instantly learn about or interact with multiple patients and different experiences . we always overestimate the change in two or three years and underestimate it in a decade . it s probably in that type of category , which is things that we think about vr being useful for today are just based on us just imagining a very linear shift . it s going to be more of a function change . how will trump s election change the course of business either yours or silicon valley s in general ? are you making contingency plans you weren t before for the next four years ? this election exposed serious divisions throughout the nation . at box , we re committed to our values of openness and equality and will do everything to fight for them , including being an advocate for racial and gender equality , lgbtq rights , fair immigration policies , and more . there are many policies we ll need to debate in tech , but equality should be a non negotiable principle for america . this election showed that many communities have been left behind . second , this election showed that many communities have been left behind as we ve entered the st century . in silicon valley , we need to be more honest about the negative consequences technology can have for people both in america and abroad . this isn t to say we shouldn t aggressively push forward with innovation . it simply means that we have to work better with each other , the government , and our communities to help the benefits of innovation be more broadly shared and advance policies that help people weather the disruptions technology can cause . this is only going get to get more important . technology is on the verge of re shaping industries like healthcare , transportation , and manufacturing , just to name a few . finally , we all want america to remain a leader in innovation and the global economy . we have to recognize that it s not a given we ll end up ahead . america s role in the world of technology is unmistakable today , but maintaining our leadership is going to require making smart policy choices , cultivating partnerships between the public and private sectors , renewed investment in education , and fostering a culture of entrepreneurship . we can t take anything for granted . this interview has been edited and condensed for clarity . 	 activists in belarus are facing increased surveillance from the government , according to a new report from amnesty international , and telecommunications companies are facilitating it . the report , published today , sheds light on how powerful surveillance has forced many activists underground , while underscoring the importance of encryption as a way to evade censors . the report from amnesty international , a london based human rights watchdog , is based in part on interviews with more than activists , including lgbt rights advocates , human rights workers , independent journalists , and lawyers living in belarus or in exile . it describes how the government s large and secretive surveillance program has been used to stifle dissent and free speech , whether by eavesdropping on email or phone conversations , tracking the locations of activists , or seizing private information to prosecute or blackmail them . as a result , many activists have begun avoiding email and phone calls altogether , making it increasingly difficult to carry out their advocacy work . nearly all of the activists interviewed said they now protect their data with encrypted email services , chat apps , and hard drives tools that amnesty describes as an essential part of their work . most people are afraid to speak openly on the phone . most people are afraid to speak openly on the phone , one independent journalist told amnesty . it s like part of your mindset . you assume from the beginning that you live in fear , that everything is bad , that you cannot control or influence it . belarusian president alexander lukashenko , frequently described as europe s last dictator , has gradually tightened his government s control over the internet in recent years , in what rights groups say is an attempt to stifle opposition . a law passed in expanded the state s power to block websites without first requiring judicial approval , and in , belarus announced a directive that would allow the government to block online anonymization tools like virtual private networks vpns and the tor encryption service . amnesty notes that there s no sign yet that the government has begun to block tor , though joshua franco , lead author of this week s report , says that activists fear a crackdown . in the us and europe , much of the debate surrounding encryption has centered on terrorism and national security . law enforcement agencies have argued that tech companies should provide them with backdoor access to the encrypted data of suspected criminals , but apple and other major companies have said that doing so would jeopardize the security and privacy of their users . in a phone interview , franco said that the plight of belarusian activists sheds light on the benefits of encryption , which he says are too often overlooked . that s really strong evidence , to me , that the emphasis on terrorism and crime when we speak of encryption is really misplaced and incomplete , said franco , a technology and human rights researcher at amnesty . you need to see the role this is playing for people trying to do legitimate activism in a place like belarus , where without this encryption they d be in real trouble . max sarychauthe engine behind belarus surveillance apparatus is sorm a powerful surveillance system , first developed by the russian kgb , that allows authorities to monitor email and phone communications in real time . all internet and mobile providers operating in belarus are required by law to make their systems compatible with sorm , and to retain user data for up to five years . authorities can remotely access the data without notifying telecoms or customers , and under vaguely defined legal justification . the three largest mobile carriers in belarus are mts , a russian belarusian joint venture , life , which is percent owned by the turkish company turkcell , and velcom , a subsidiary of telekom austria group . in response to amnesty s inquiry , the swedish company teliasonera , which owns percent of turkcell , said it has expressed the importance of freedom of expression and privacy to turkcell , and that its policies state that governments should not have direct access to a company s networks and systems . telekom austria group said it is obliged to follow belarusian law , and that it had raised challenges to government surveillance practices , though it did not provide examples . other telecoms did not respond to amnesty s inquiries , but the report says that there is no public evidence to suggest that they are taking steps to mitigate or account for surveillance in belarus , and that they therefore appear to be failing in their duty to exercise due diligence regarding these human rights concerns . an asymmetrical battle with powerful surveillance apparatuses . it is simply not enough for them to point to the law as justification for this , says edin omanovic , a research officer at privacy international who was not involved in the amnesty report . as a hugely profitable industry , they have a responsibility to actively resist the use of such a surveillance model in a much more coordinated and substantial way , including transparency reports and challenges to government requests . ampnbsp experts fear that the situation for activists in belarus and neighboring countries may only worsen . adrian shahbaz , research manager at the us based rights group freedom house , notes that the government has recently put out tenders for equipment that would enable it to trace voip communications and access data that has been deleted on smartphones . throughout the region , authorities from moscow to tashkent are determined to find new ways to undermine tools such as tor or vpns in order to take greater control over the flow of information online , shabaz said in an email . encryption technologies are often the only tools that activists possess in an asymmetrical battle with powerful surveillance apparatuses . encryption has provided a way for activists to circumvent mass surveillance in belarus , but franco says that it still hasn t allowed them to reach the audiences that their advocacy depends upon . lots of activists were complaining to me and saying , look , we know about security , we know about encryption , we know how to keep this sensitive information secret , franco says . but at the end of the day , if we keep everything secret , we re just a secret group . so how do we actually do the activism that we re trying to do ? 	 official police business is a weekly column and newsletter by reporter matt stroud about new developments in police technology , and the ways technology is changing law enforcement think body cameras , cell site simulators , surveillance systems , and electroshock weapons . sign up to receive opb in your email every wednesday at officialpolicebusiness . com , or check for it here at the verge . in january , judges on a federal circuit court instructed police departments to treat tasers similarly to the way they treat firearms as deadly weapons that can t be used when someone is merely resisting arrest . those instructions were a big deal , setting policing precedent for departments in five states , and potentially leading the way for much more stringent rules about how tasers are used by police nationwide . taser international , the company that exclusively produces and sells those electroshock weapons to police departments , filed a court document on june th asking the united states supreme court to give the circuit court s instructions a second look . taser s move made sense if the instructions go unchallenged , some police departments could change use of force policies to place tasers more in line with firearms than with less lethal devices . taser international would thus risk competing directly with gun manufacturers to provide police departments with weapons , threatening the company s business model . taser international would risk competing directly with gun manufacturers the case stretches back to april rd , . that day , ronald armstrong a man who suffered from bipolar disorder and paranoid schizophrenia had been off his medications for nearly a week , and began attempting to puncture the skin of his leg to let the air out . observing this , his sister convinced him to go with her to nearby moore regional hospital in pinehurst , north carolina , to commit himself and get treatment . at the hospital , armstrong began the intake process but reconsidered midway through and walked out of the building . local police were called , and three showed up . but they had no grounds to arrest armstrong , since he hadn t actually committed any crime . still , he was acting strangely he wandered along a busy road by the hospital s entrance , and after the officers convinced him to move to the roadside , he sat on the ground and began eating dandelions and grass , and putting lit cigarettes out on his tongue . doctors at the hospital had , by that time , decided armstrong was a danger to himself . north carolina law requires that involuntary commitment orders need to be written and notarized before taking effect . the officers had been making sure to keep him in one spot , but they didn t attempt to arrest him before those orders were final . when the orders went through , the three officers approached and surrounded armstrong , preparing to arrest him . armstrong resisted by sitting down and wrapping his arms and legs around the post holding up a stop sign . before long , armstrong s sister noticed that he d stopped movingthe officers weren t in the mood to mess around . within about seconds of the officers being notified that armstrong s commitment orders had gone through , an officer shocked him five times with a taser . this worked to get armstrong away from the stop sign . the officers then cuffed armstrong , and set him face down on the ground . before long , armstrong s sister noticed that he d stopped moving . one officer on scene attempted cpr on armstrong , and another called emergency medical services . an ambulance arrived shortly thereafter to take him to a local emergency room . he was pronounced dead when he arrived there . the armstrong family sued the village of pinehurst in the u . s . district court for the middle district of north carolina on may th , , accusing the officers of violating armstrong s fourth and fourteenth amendment rights by using excessive force . the family also sued taser international , but taser was dismissed from the case early on since the company s training literature has warned , since , that tasers exposure can result in death or serious injury . a judge in the u . s . district court granted summary judgement in favor of the pinehurst officers , asserting that they were protected by qualified immunity the legal doctrine that protects police officers from prosecution in most situations . the family appealed , and , in january , a panel of judges on the u . s . court of appeals for the fourth circuit issued an opinion agreeing with the lower court that the pinehurst officers were not subject to liability in this case . but the fourth circuit added a precedent setting caveat . the fourth circuit added a precedent setting caveat where , during the course of seizing an out numbered mentally ill individual who is a danger only to himself , police officers choose to deploy a taser in the face of stationary and non violent resistance to being handcuffed , those officers use unreasonably excessive force , the opinion read . law enforcement officers should now be on notice that such taser use violates the fourth amendment . clarifying this point , the opinion stated that taser use is unreasonable force in response to resistance that does not raise a risk of immediate danger , and that physical resistance is not synonymous with risk of immediate danger . in other words from that point forward , police under the fourth circuit s jurisdiction needed to start rethinking and redefining , in policies how tasers are used on the street . that decision sent shockwaves throughout departments in the region , which includes maryland , north carolina , south carolina , virginia , and west virginia . police departments all over the region were advised to write up new policies taking the fourth circuit s opinion into account . which isn t to say they were happy about it . taser use is severe and injurious regardless of the mode to which the taser is set . all future taser use is now subject to the fourth circuit s pronouncement that taser use is severe and injurious regardless of the mode to which the taser is set , read a directive from the north carolina justice academy , which trains police in the state . although that statement is not factually true , today the court said it , and thus it s now controlling law . taser use can indeed be severe and injurious the company s own training manuals clearly state as much . and while there is no official tally of deaths connected to taser use , amnesty international connected at least deaths to taser use by . more recent estimates put the number of people who died after being shocked with a taser close to , . the insistence that tasers are safe , despite evidence to the contrary , has inspired a very strange thing , however the village of pinehurst which technically won in its fourth circuit case is now appealing the armstrong decision to the u . s . supreme court . and among the friend of the court briefs filed in favor of that appeal is one from taser international which was dismissed from the case nearly three years ago . taser international argued that the fourth circuit s opinion wasn t consistent with standards throughout the county . the u . s . supreme court should resolve the significant conflict between the circuits regarding the propriety of taser conducted electrical weapon use in response to a subject s active yet non violent resistance to a lawful seizure , taser s filing read . a single , familiar standard is essential when a subject actively resists seizure , officers can use a taser cew to gain compliance but when a suspect does not resist , or has stopped resisting , they cannot . it goes on taser use should be evaluated like any other use of force , on a case by case basis . i knew that the chances of getting this overturned in my favor were very slim . that argument and pinehurst s appeal to the supreme court is especially surprising to karonnie r . truzy , who represented the armstrong family . he technically lost twice once in district court , then again in the circuit court and still had no intention of appealing the case . i knew that the chances of getting this overturned in my favor were very slim , he told me last week , so there was no way i was going to ask for a rehearing and overturn some very good law that had been established . truzy believes that the supreme court appeal is being pushed by the company itself . truzy said that a member of taser s legal team contacted him in january , days after the fourth circuit opinion was issued , to suggest that he ask the fourth circuit to hear arguments in the armstrong case again . according to truzy , the lawyer said taser would file a friend of the court brief supporting truzy s appeal for rehearing at the fourth circuit level . truzy declined to file for rehearing , but taser filed a brief supporting armstrong anyway . it was rejected by the fourth circuit , since truzy hadn t filed anything . truzy didn t hear anything further until june , when he was informed that pinehurst would be asking the supreme court to hear the case and that taser was now filing a friend of the court brief supporting pinehurst . why is taser so interested in having this case reheard ? truzy reasons that if police departments need to start thinking about tasers as something closer on the use of force spectrum to deadly weapons , why would they purchase tasers at all ? a glock g firearm , for example a gun often used by police officers retails for around a taser x p is more than double that price , at , . . if policies indicate both can only be used in deadly force situations , why would a police department pay double for the weapon that s less lethal by design ? which is why taser international is screaming very loud , truzy said . because now the fourth circuit is cutting into taser s business model . who would ve thought the the fourth circuit would have had the balls to write what they wrote in their opinion . who would ve thought the the fourth circuit would have had the balls to write what they wrote in their opinion , truzy continued . nobody . no one thought that . and when the fourth circuit did that , now taser international was reeling , along with these other police organizations , because they re like , wow , we never thought that they would do that . they re completely caught off script and , wow , what s going to happen if this catches on at other circuits ? what s going to happen if other circuits start quoting armstrong in their opinions ? there s no way we can let this language stand . taser s vice president of strategic communications , steve tuttle , disagreed , calling truzy s reading way off . taser s amicus brief in support of the village of pinehurst s cert petition is based on numerous independent studies clearly demonstrating that an officer s use of a taser cew instead of hands on physical force results in substantially fewer injuries to officers and subjects alike , he wrote in an emailed statement . plaintiffs counsel granted blanket consent for any interested party to file an amicus brief in the supreme court , which is standard practice . does truzy believe the supreme court is going to take up the appeal ? if you would ve asked me before the appeal was filed , i would ve said no because they re not in the habit of taking cases from the winning side just to clarify language within a case , truzy said . but in this case , not only has taser international filed a friend of the court brief in favor of a rehearing , so has the national fraternal order of police , and the southern states police benevolent association . you ask me right now ? he says . i would tell you that i have no idea . 	 earlier this year , japan s space agency suffered a major blow when its new x ray astronomy satellite , known as hitomi , broke apart in space just one month after the vehicle had launched . but before the spacecraft met its premature demise , it was able to squeeze in a bit of valuable science . by observing x ray emissions coming from a cluster of galaxies million light years away , hitomi measured just how fast interstellar gases moved between the galaxies within the cluster . the gas is not as turbulent as the researchers expectedthe measurements defied some scientists expectations the gas is moving at about miles kilometers per second , according to ampnbspa new study published today in nature . that s not as turbulent as the researchers expected , since galaxies within the cluster are moving much faster , at thousands of miles per second . it s an interesting finding , but perhaps the most valuable aspect of this study is that it hints at all the science that the spacecraft could have done . hitomi s loss was painful for the astronomy community , as it was supposed to tell us more about the structure of the universe by observing turbulent galaxy clusters and high energy black holes . it was very exciting to get the science , but it s devastating to lose the spacecraft , study author andrew fabian , director of the institute of astronomy at the university of cambridge , told the verge . it feels like a door was opened and we can see through it and then immediately the door is slammed shut . but today s study could serve as a good advertisement for sending up another hitomi like spacecraft to fill the void the satellite left behind . the death of hitomihitomi , which translates to pupil of the eye , launched from the tanegashima space center in japan on february th . the satellite was transported into orbit by one of jaxa s h iia rockets , but the spacecraft wasn t functional for very long . the problem started with a glitchthe problem started with a glitch . hitomi had two ways to determine its position in space a star tracker , which measures the positions of stars , and a sensor that measures the spacecraft s inertia . for some reason , the latter sensor , known as the inertial reference unit iru , detected that hitomi had started to roll slowly , even though that wasn t the case . it wasn t rotating at all . normally if the star tracker and iru data don t match up , the spacecraft is supposed to default to whatever the star tracker is saying . but at this point , the star tracker had been turned off and wasn t capturing any data . an artistic rendering of the hitomi spacecraft . jaxa based on the iru data , hitomi tried to counteract this non existent spin by rotating in the opposite direction . that actually initiated a spin , which wasn t supposed to occur . as the rotation got worse , the satellite tried to go into a type of safety mode , where it uses rocket thrusters to stabilize itself and point its solar panels at the sun . how those thrusters fire depends on the position of the spacecraft s center of gravity . but one of hitomi s instruments had been extended , changing the overall shape of the spacecraft and moving its center of gravity . the flight controllers hadn t updated the spacecraft s knowledge of this new shape , so the thrusters fired in the wrong direction . this spun the spacecraft even faster . it resulted in a positive feedback situation where it kept on getting worse and the rocket motors kept firing until essentially the whole spacecraft was spinning about once every five seconds , said fabian . eventually that caused the satellite to break apart its solar panels ripped away , cutting off hitomi s source of power . on march th , ampnbspjaxa announced that it had lost communication and wasn t able to get it back . what a tragedy that was , said jonathan mcdowell , an astrophysicist working at the harvard smithsonian center for astrophysics , who was not involved in the study . and really , really unfortunate , and very much human error i m afraid . they had inadequate planning for likely failure modes . observing perseusprior to the failure , hitomi had been looking at x ray emissions from the perseus cluster specifically those coming from the hot gases that lie between the cluster s galaxies . most of the gas in the universe is found between galaxies , but the gases in clusters are particularly hot . clusters are thought to contain a lot of dark matter a mysterious type of material that doesn t reflect or emit light but has a gravitational pull . the dark matter causes compression of the gas between the galaxies and heating of that gas so it ends up at a temperature of million degrees kelvin , said fabian . the gas in clusters is also particularly dense , leading to constant collisions that emit x rays . that movement was thought to be particularly messy . at the center of galaxy clusters is a supermassive black hole , which releases a ton of energy that interacts with the gases in the cluster . this interaction , known as black hole feedback , helps keep the gases hot by churning them around . originally , it was thought to be a very turbulent process , but today s study shows that chaos to be a little less chaotic than expected . the fact that we see a relatively quiet or low velocity is telling us something about how violent this feedback process is , said fabian . the part of the perseus cluster viewed by hitomi . hitomi collaboration jaxa , nasa , esa , sron , csa today s study also shows the incredible amount of precision of hitomi s soft x ray spectrometer , which measured the x ray emissions . the researchers argue that their measurements of gas speed could vary by about miles kilometers per second . that makes their measurements pretty spot on . it demonstrates the potential of this kind of instrument , said fabian . it really can perform in space and make these precision measurements . fabian hopes that such precise measurements will inspire scientists to create another hitomi with a soft x ray spectrometer sooner rather than later . the european space agency is planning on launching a much larger spectrometer in with its athena spacecraft . and other satellites , like the chandra and xmm newton telescopes , can do high resolution x ray mapping , but they can t get the same kind of precise measurements of galaxy clusters that hitomi could capture . there s been no instrument that has a precision within a factor of to close to that of that hitomi , said fabian . new horizons mission extended after pluto flyby	 i wanted to know what it s like to nap inside a giant futuristic egg , so i went to a sleep clinic in downtown manhattan to find out . there , i entered the metronaps energypod pods that look like very comfy chairs you d expect to see on a spaceship . they re used by places like google and nasa , and they re getting a sensory upgrade thanks to a new partnership with a company called pzizz , which promises soundtracks that can put you to sleep . can music really make us fall asleep ? as i sat on the chair , i closed the visor and found myself in semi darkness . the chair lifted up so that i could lie down , and then the trip began . pzizz activated , a mechanical female voice said . enjoy your metronap . the goal of the partnership between the two companies is to make the metronaps napping experience even better , by bringing in pzizz s proven solution to inducing sleep , says metronaps ceo christopher lindholst . the proven solution is pzizz s use of psychoacoustics a field of science that studies sound perception and how sound affects the brain . the psychoacoustic techniques pzizz uses are supposed to induce sleep . and pzizz ceo rockwell shah assures me that the company s technology intelligently combines music , voiceover , and sound effects in a way that will quickly quiet your mind , put you to sleep , keep you to sleep , and then wake you up feeling refreshed . i am not a napper , and never have been . and as someone who sometimes lies awake in the middle of the night for no particular reason , i found the promise intriguing . can music really make us fall asleep ? can sound frequencies tell my brain to just shut up and get to bed ? the science says it s not that easy . sleep is one of the most complicated neurological behaviors we have , says seth horowitz , a neuroscientist who s done extensive research on human hearing and sleep . the brain works in mysterious ways , and we don t even know exactly why we sleep . we do know that if we don t sleep , we die . and sleeping less than seven hours a night like one in three americans do may be unhealthy , leading to an increased risk of obesity , diabetes , high blood pressure , heart disease , stroke , and frequent mental distress . but there are a lot of unknowns , and scientists are still debating whether napping is beneficial . research has shown that napping can improve brain function , like memory and focus , but it s also linked to higher mortality rates . there s a lot we don t really understand about napping , says yue leng , a sleep researcher at the university of cambridge , including how long a good nap should last . metronaps in the meantime , psychoacoustic researchers are trying to crack the code of how to induce sleep . but finding the exact recipe for the perfect nap is hard . there s research that shows that certain beats can trick the brain into matching the right frequency it needs to slow down and go to sleep . for example , beats that are around or hertz the same frequency of our sleeping brains can induce the brain to snooze off . that frequency is what entrains or kicks brain wave action into gear , and then the brain goes to that state , says lee bartel , associate director of the music and health research collaboratory at the university of toronto . bartel has studied how music affects the brain for years . certain beats can trick the brain into falling asleepanother psychoacoustic technique is the use of low frequency vibrations that have little momentary glitches , also called pseudo random low frequency vibrations . those sounds , which affect the inner ear , are meant to make you drowsy by simulating the same sleepiness associated with prolonged motion a condition called sopite syndrome . it resembles the way you nod off in a moving car , or how a baby falls asleep while being rocked . that slow , not quite perfect rock back and forth motion is very good for inducing sleep , and has been the basis of lullabies and trying to put kids to sleep for thousands of years , says horowitz . the sopite syndrome technique is one of the psychoacoustic techniques that pzizz uses . the soundtracks included in the metronaps energypods vary based on how long you decide to nap anywhere between and minutes . i chose a minute nap with a voice that guided me through relaxation . for a few minutes , i ll guide you as you prepare to relax , the pod said , this time in a deep , low , and soft male voice that reminded me of morgan freeman . the man told me to close my eyes , set aside any concerns and considerations , stretch my muscles from head to toe , and breathe more and more easily . at a certain point , the voice started reciting a celtic saying about the deep peace of the running waves and the smiling stars , which kind of made me roll my eyes . the sound in the background was soothing and pleasant it reminded me of the music you d hear in a church or the whale section of an aquarium . there were harps , and it was like being underwater . the guided relaxation is meant to shift the focus of your mind from your daily problems to your body , so that your tight muscles can relax , says bartel . that s the crucial thing , he says . you need to change your focus . but having a voice talk you to sleep doesn t work for everyone . just like binaural beats , low frequency vibrations , and other psychoacoustic techniques can t put everyone to sleep . and what works for someone might not work for someone else . one person may like to sleep with a white noise machine , while another prefers classical music . my mom falls asleep listening to the radio , but i need silence . you can resist the entrainment , says bartel . the entrainment is not the inevitable . just because you get a boost in delta brainwave activity doesn t mean that you will be asleep . this is , and by god we re gonna have state of the art sleep . a lot of it has to do with placebo , bartel says . products that promise you the best sleep you ve ever had because they re backed by science can convince lots of people that they ll work just because they sound legit . we can get a lot of satisfied customers by just making them believe that this is going to be really powerful exotic and it s going to be powerful because it s exotic , bartel says . that s some of the appeal that the metronaps energypods , and other napping pods , have . a very comfy , zero gravity chair and a pair of headphones with relaxing music would be probably as effective , bartel says . it has to do , i suppose , with the technological novelty of it , he says . we are in the st century , this is , and by god we re gonna have state of the art sleep . so it d better cost , and look like a space module . but i m an inherently skeptical human being and i m not sure i buy faith in the exotic . just before my minutes of napping were up , a pink light turned on in the energypod and the voice gently told me to wake up . as i expected , i hadn t fallen asleep for one second . 	 sitting in an aria hotel penthouse suite with views of the las vegas strip and the vast mojave desert beyond , george hotz was ready to bury the hatchet with the elon musk . i m an elon musk fan , he said . he jerked me around , i jerked him around , we re even . in a splashy bloomberg business feature published late last year , hotz was less conciliatory . otherwise known as geohot , the programmer first earned worldwide fame by cracking the iphone and the playstation as a teen . now , he is the ceo and founder of comma . ai , a company that aims to get self driving cars on the road by the end of the year . in the bloomberg profile , he called mobileye the outfit behind the driver assist tech at tesla and a number of other major car manufacturers absurd and a company that s behind the times . the piece recounts how musk allegedly promised hotz a lucrative contract if he delivered a superior product , but kept moving the goal line until the deal fell apart . no matter , hotz said . within a few months , he claimed he would post youtube videos of his car trouncing tesla s autopilot system over the golden gate bridge and on la s i , near musk s home . after the article s publication , tesla downplayed hotz s accomplishment in a tersely worded correction we think it is extremely unlikely that a single person or even a small company that lacks extensive engineering validation capability will be able to produce an autonomous driving system that can be deployed to production vehicles , it read . it may work as a limited demo on a known stretch of road tesla had such a system two years ago but then requires enormous resources to debug over millions of miles of widely differing roads . it was late may when i travelled to las vegas to meet hotz and take a ride in comma . ai s highly modified acura ilx . it was also more than a few months since hotz had promised to deliver proof of his victory over tesla . i asked him where the videos were . hotz laughed . it became less relevant , he said . both systems have become quite good . it could still happen . ampnbspsitting on the couch in his tech nerd turned ceo uniform an untucked button down shirt , sports jacket , and tattered baggy jeans hotz went on what i started to realize over the last couple of months is that tesla s not our competition our competition is almost nonexistent . tesla s never going to sell aftermarket self driving systems for honda civics . that s what we re doing . unlike tesla , hotz says , comma . ai is committed to building a product for the general public or as he likes to put it , deliver ghost riding for the masses . for less than , hotz promises to sell a kit that will let customers transform dumb cars into smart , self driving ones . installation will be a cinch , he says no more difficult or time intensive than building a piece of ikea furniture . though he s vague about which cars the final product will work on if your car has electronic stability control and electronic power steering , there s a chance we could make it work it won t work on your chevy he s confident it ll ship by the end of the year . what makes comma . ai s autonomous driving system unique is that instead of prioritizing a series of hard rules for the car to obey always take turn x at speed y hotz takes a grassroots approach to teaching vehicles the rules of the road the system tracks driver habits , aggregates them , and then instructs the car to emulate them . if most drivers slow down at a particular rate , comma . ai cars will too if most drivers would cut into a corner at this speed , comma . ai will do the same . instead of sitting in a room with a bunch of engineers , talking about how driving works and what we think is a good driver , we actually look , get data from good drivers and even bad drivers so we know what not to do , put that into our machine learning algorithms and get a driving agent , says hotz . all of which makes gathering massive troves of data so important to developing the company s technology by the end of , comma . ai hopes to have gathered billion miles of information . unlike google or tesla , comma . ai doesn t have a fleet on the road collecting data , so the company is trying something different on the day of my visit , hotz announced the chffr pronounced chauffeur app , which runs on a phone mounted to your dash , tracks your driving habits , and feeds them back into the company s database . the app and its accompanying site will launch this month , available on the nexus p , galaxy s , and galaxy s phones with a wider rollout planned down the line . the more miles you log , the more comma points you earn . those at the top of the publicly published leaderboard , hotz says , will be rewarded . comma points are really incredible and if you earn comma points you ll feel really great . i promise great things will come to the people at the top of the comma point leaderboard , hotz told me with a grin . my guess ? high scorers will be rewarded with the company s self driving kits when they launch . all good drivers are good in the same way , but all bad drivers are bad in different ways . comma . ai s approach certainly has its upsides . it creates a natural player on the road , giving the impression of a human driver rather than an automated pilot . it will also be dynamically adaptable instead of spending millions of dollars to map every road , with enough driver data a comma . ai vehicle will naturally pick up local driving habits . for instance , the company had done most of its car training in the bay area , where lanes are demarcated by white lines . but the roads around las vegas used botts dots . that posed a problem , but one which the car would , after a certain time of driver observation , adapt to . in places where roads aren t demarcated at all , hotz says , the car will learn from driver data to , for instance , follow the traffic ahead . but crowdsourcing driver ed also poses questions . by aggregating and copying driver habits , comma . ai is partially assuming that the average driver is a good driver , or at least a model to be imitated . as someone who has driven on a public road more than once , i d be hesitant to make that assumption nhtsa estimates that percent of car accidents are caused by human error . one of the promises of self driving cars , after all , is to create safer roads , not re create robot replicas of our faulty selves . hotz believes that the bad driver outliers will fade out in the mix . all good drivers are good in the same way , but all bad drivers are bad in different ways , he says , paraphrasing tolstoy . the committee driver will be excellent . so , how does the system perform in the real world ? from the aria suite , we descended to find comma . ai s acura in the resort s parking structure . aside from a handful of external sensors and a big black comma emblazoned on the hood , the acura was inconspicuous . inside , it was a different story . minus a joystick , the interior looked much like it did in the bloomberg profile large swaths of the dashboard paneling had been removed a warren of cables snaked out from the gutted glove compartment . a massive . inch screen tesla s is only inches , hotz is keen to point out shows the car s view of the road ahead but also offers all the amenities of a laptop computer complete with corresponding keyboard . the entire final product , hotz told me , will be the size of a breadbox . at the time of my visit the car was rigged with forward facing radar , fastened to the bumper by generous amounts of tape , and a wide angle camera located just behind the rear view mirror . the production system would also be linked to a gps unit , although it wasn t for our demo . we navigated the two blocks from the aria to interstate , the main thoroughfare from las vegas to los angeles . three lanes in either direction , it s a long , straight , and predictable expanse of road a perfect testing ground for comma . ai s system . we counted down from five and hotz poked a button on the flatscreen monitor . with a loud ding hotz appropriated the buckle your seatbelt ding from commercial planes , autonomous driving was engaged . similar to basic cruise control , hotz set his desired speed . next , he took his hands and feet off the wheel and pedals , and we were off . comma . ai s system doesn t read signs and isn t aware of local speed limits . with seemingly little difficulty , the acura stayed in its lane it slowed down in response to cars ahead , and sped back up when it felt safe . hotz , meanwhile , made a show of the autonomous abilities , pivoting in his seat to talk to the cameraman in the back seat and gesturing effusively to make a point . at one point , he pulled up netflix on the monitor and we watched the pilot of unbreakable kimmy schmidt hotz was unfamiliar with the show , but seemed genuinely amused by its premise , cruising down the freeway at miles an hour . maybe the most remarkable aspect of driving on the open highway was just how mundane it felt aside from a couple dicey moments , i felt safe . lulled into conversation , we missed our exit and drove off into the desert much farther than either hotz or i had intended . that s not to say the system was by any means perfect , and hotz was keen to remind me that it is still in beta . we let the car attempt ampnbspon and off ramps and it took both too quickly , cutting into the turn so sharply that hotz had to retake control . the system likes to follow the car ahead , and on one occasion hotz had to intervene before the ilx took us off the highway to follow an unwitting driver on their commute . and there are other challenges and shortfalls , too in the limited city driving i witnessed , the system felt less sure of itself . hotz says that though the car does a good job of recognizing speed variation in vehicles ahead , it can have a hard time recognizing a car at a standstill . that is , to put it mildly , a problem . and there are some capabilities that the system just doesn t have it can t automatically switch lanes , or read stop signs and red lights . hotz dismisses these features as cheap gimmicks , though he s open to incorporating them into the final product . without a gps unit , it doesn t know where it is , and can t actually direct you to a destination . but considering the company has been around for all of months , comma . ai has built a fairly impressive system a sort of advanced cruise control that i found myself longing for days later when i had to drive a couple hundred dull miles by myself . and comma . ai has already attracted significant interest in april , venture capital firm andreessen horowitz offered a modest but notable . million investment . perhaps spurring a z to action , cruise automation , another self driving startup that sought to produce add on kits , had just sold to gm for a reported billion . if comma . ai can deliver on its , kit , it might be a significant player as the industry matures . all of which made me wonder whether , somewhere in the back of his mind , hotz was still gunning for musk . as we drove back to the aria , i asked hotz about a recent profile of his company in forbes . the story featured a photograph from his office of an elon musk dartboard , two darts lodged in musk s forehead . now that they ve reached a detente , i asked hotz if he d taken the board down . there are better targets out there , he smiled , his hands off the wheel . but it s still a nice decoration . letting your tesla drive itself is a bad idea	 the music industry is at war with youtube . if this sounds familiar , it should . the two entities have been warring for a decade over how much youtube should be paying the music labels for hosting the music videos and songs that helped turn the video site into a monolith . youtube says it s paid out billion to the music industry and that s plenty the music industry says it s been paid the same amount by ampnbspspotify and it doesn t even offer music videos and has accounted for far fewer streams . the fight ampnbspisn t new , but recently the stakes have been raised . musicians and their managers were imbued with a renewed vigor for the battle after the riaa released a report in march stating ampnbspvinyl record sales in brought in more revenue than youtube . major industry players like irving azoff ampnbspchastised youtube in op eds , and artists including katy perry , billy joel , and rod stewart petitioned the us government to amend the digital millennium copyright act dmca . combine that with the fact that all of the major labels have begun to renegotiate their deals with youtube , and you have the perfect ingredients for a fight . vinyl record sales in brought in more revenue than youtubethe music industry says the dmca , which was passed in , is outdated and needs to be rewritten . the industry s biggest complaint about the dmca is that the take down process for unlicensed content is too complicated , and even after something is taken down , it can be put back up instantly without consequence , thanks to the safe harbor provision that limits the liability of websites hosting stolen content uploaded by users . changing the dmca , and specifically the rules around safe harbor , could have a much broader impact than just improving business for musicians on youtube , however . some experts warn that smaller companies and individual users would be more vulnerable to lawsuits , takedowns , and arbitrary censorship . undermining the reliability of the dmca safe harbors would be disastrous for the internet economy . and it isn t just the large , well known internet platforms that would be affected , said matthew schrupers , vice president of law and policy at the computer ampamp communications industry association . the music industry argues that the safe harbor provision is detrimental to rights holders . it puts all of the cost of copyright enforcement on the backs of copyright holders , one music executive told the verge . youtube has countered with a series of data points . percent of copyright management on sound recordings posted to youtube happens through content id , meaning it s an automated process with a fairly low lift for copyright holders . they only need to upload their songs once for youtube s algorithms to analyze . and rather than take down music , youtube says the major labels have chosen to monetize percent of the content identified by content id . but the labels say content id doesn t identify everything , and that s the problem . in a filing to the us copyright office as part of a review of the dmca , universal music group raised questions about the efficiency of youtube s content id system . in a footnote , it noted that universal music publishing group estimates that content id fails to identify upwards of of the use of umpg s compositions on youtube . undermining the reliability of the dmca safe harbors would be disastrous for the internet economy . recording industry association of america ceo cary sherman believes the dmca has been exploited nefariously by companies like grooveshark , which he called a pirate and is currently being exploited in a different way by youtube . the dmca has become a problem because companies that were clearly pirates could hide behind it , sherman said in an interview with the verge . youtube is in its own category because it s a legitimate company , sherman says , but it s still able to take advantage of the dmca to negotiate better deals because the content is going to be up there whether labels like it or not . that s a hobson s choice for any company , they either get some revenue , but way below market , or they get no revenue and spend all their time and money trying to take down all the tens of thousands of illegal copies that are on youtube , which is a near impossibility , says sherman . sherman said a notice and stay down policy one that didn t require copyright holders to keep filing notices for the same content over and over would go a long way to satisfying the music industry s biggest complaint . if when an illegal file were taken down it stayed down , so that it didn t get repopulated immediately afterwards , that would make a big difference . what you took down today you don t have to take down again tomorrow . that would be a huge improvement over the current situation . the labels want more revenue per stream in their next licensing dealsbut industry experts like schrupers are quick to point out that youtube offers some of the most advanced tools for copyright protection it is important to recognize that while complaints about the dmca often cite youtube , youtube is actually one of the few platforms that already offers what complainants ask for . content id can ampnbspautomatically block copyrighted songs from being uploaded on youtube after a copyright holder provides a reference track , but youtube says the labels only choose that option for percent of their content on the platform . sources within the music industry say it s not that cut and dry , claiming the labels have no choice but to monetize the content . they say youtube hasn t been able to keep their music off the service even when they wanted them to warner music group ampnbsppulled its content from youtube in , and in the nine months that it was not licensing its music to the service , the label estimates it spent million to keep its content off youtube . wmg views these efforts as having been largely unsuccessful , the company wrote in a filing to the us copyright office . as for the why the music industry is up in arms over this issue right now , schrupers has a familiar theory . the cognitive dissonance of the music sector complaining about a platform that already offers what they re demanding can be explained by the fact that these complaints are being raised in the context of the major labels preparing to renegotiate licenses with youtube . we get it , we understand that our future is streaming . and schrupers is right , in a sense . the beef between the music industry and youtube over dmca goes back years , and there has been little movement in congress . we re hearing more about it now because it provides additional leverage at the negotiating table . the labels want more revenue per stream in their next licensing deals ampnbsp and have a legitimate argument when you look at the growth rate of music streaming on youtube versus the growth of revenue and youtube doesn t want to give it to them . it happened with ampnbsppandora , then it was ampnbspspotify s turn , and now we re back around to youtube . right now , the chances of getting a significant change to the dmca through congress are extremely low , and the music industry realizes it . we know that s a tough road , sherman said . the reality is that congress has not shown itself to be capable of enacting non controversial legislation , let alone anything that would be controversial . so we re very realistic about the fact that this would be a steep hill to climb . but we also feel like it would be irresponsible of us not to inform policymakers that there s a problem a very serious problem that needs attention . the fear is when the physical and digital sales finally dry up which could happen sooner than you think the current economics of music streaming won t be able to sustain the industry . we re an industry that is already percent digital , sherman continued . we get it , we understand that our future is streaming . that s where all the indications are , in terms of future revenues . we just want to make sure , therefore , that the laws that undergird a streaming business model economy will support a sustainable music industry in this new world . there is no timetable for new licensing deals to get donemusic industry sources believe that youtube could enact some of their desired changes if they wanted to . youtube could improve content id , making it available to all creators , instead of just the bigger entities who match youtube s ampnbspcriteria . it could also allow music behind the youtube red paywall that is currently only used by a select few creators . label sources say youtube is reaching out to the music industry more than it has on these issues in the past , and that the two sides are having constructive talks despite the rhetoric . youtube can still play music owned by the labels on a month to month basis until the new contracts are in place , but right now there is no timetable for the licensing deals to get done . the music labels aren t rushing into anything , with sources stating that the negotiation process will likely go on for some time . but no matter how long it takes , the deals will ultimately get done . youtube isn t youtube without music , and the music industry understands that streaming is its future . at look at the features on youtube music	 when donald trump revealed his energy plan in north dakota last week , he framed it as a jobs issue . environmental regulations put in place during the obama administration led to job loss among hard working americans , he said and a clinton presidency would only make things worse . she wants to shut down the coal mines . and if crooked hillary can shut down the mines , she can shutdown your business too , trump said . his own energy plan , on other hand , will create trillions in new wealth . but in the days since the speech , many experts have pointed out that the us is actually producing more oil domestically than it has in the last years . in addition , it s incorrect to blame environmental regulations for a decline in coal demand because the real driving force is the low cost of natural gas . and so , for energy policy experts , trump s speech was a demonstration of the candidate s fundamental misunderstanding of what drives demand for various energy sources . but the biggest problem surrounding trump s energy plan isn t that it makes no sense it s that it doesn t actually exist at least not out in the open . trump says his plan will create trillions in new wealth . with the november elections just five months away , the trump campaign hasn t released a policy paper showing that trumps plan can , in fact , reform the current energy policies in the us to create trillions in new wealth . in contrast , clinton and sanders have both published climate and energy plans . because of this , practically every expert i spoke with had to first tell me that evaluating trump s plan is nearly impossible . it s not a plan it s a speech , says david victor , director of the laboratory on international law and regulation at the university of california at san diego . it s not just that the trump campaign is vague on details . it s that we have actually no clue where this came from and how they did the basic analysis . still , there s some meat in trump s speech to dissect . so , here s a list of the many , many things trump got wrong trump thinks making the us energy independent would be good for the economybecause trump gave too few details in his speech , it s hard to tell exactly what he means by energy independent . for most people , this would mean relying solely on domestic production to power the us . but given that trump also called for a renewal of the keystone xl pipeline project a project that would bring canadian oil into the us he clearly doesn t actually want to cut out all foreign oil sources . so , let s just operate under the assumption that trump wants to stop importing oil from countries outside north america . first , the us is the largest oil producer in the world . that means that even though trump is trying to paint the us as a country that s trapped under the weight of foreign oil markets , americans are actually doing pretty well for themselves . it is this diversity of supply that reduces risk furthermore , relying on a single source of energy the us s own supply is risky . if something were to happen , like a devastating hurricane in the gulf of mexico , then the us wouldn t have other , reliable sources to turn to . you ve got all kinds of economic shocks that can occur in the united states and globally , says brian murray , interim director of the duke university energy initiative . the more sources of supply that you have , the less likely you are to be affected by supply and demand shocks throughout the world . ampnbsprobert stavins , director of the environmental economics program at harvard university , agrees it is this diversity of supply that reduces risk and that provides security , not reliance on a single source . trump thinks wind farms kill more than million birds each yearin his speech , trump blamed government misconduct for fast tracking wind projects that kill more than million birds a year . it s not clear where that number comes from , but either way , it s completely inaccurate . in , researchers estimated that , birds are killed each year when they collide with wind turbines a little over one third of trump s estimate . the fish and wildlife service , on the other hand , says that wind turbines kill somewhere between , and , birds each year . trump s argument is a classic and dubious line of attack on wind energy . by some estimates , coal mining kills close to million birds each year . and oil and gas kill between , and million . so claiming that wind turbines are killing american birds is ridiculous in comparison . but the argument is especially disingenuous coming from trump , who recently mocked endangered animal protections in california . trump thinks environmental regulations are killing the coal industryenvironmental regulations , like restrictions on federal land use , have had an effect on the coal industry , but regulatory impacts are nothing compared to the effect that the natural gas industry coal s main competitor has had on energy production in the us . the truth is the natural gas is a lot cheaper right now , so coal is being left behind . we all know the coal industry has been largely devastated because of natural gas , says charles ebinger , senior fellow in the energy security and climate initiative at the brookings institute , a nonprofit organization . because of this , any attempt at bringing back coal would probably have an adverse affect on natural gas production , he says . supporting fracking would lose more jobs for coal workersbut that s not even the weirdest part of trump s position on coal . in his speech , trump referred to using untapped reserves of natural gas on federal lands . this is clearly a reference to fracking . but if he removes the regulations that prevent fracking on these lands , that would probably lower the cost of natural gas even further effectively stabbing the us coal industry in the back . trump s promised support of greater natural gas fracking would actually have the effect of lowering demand for coal , causing more mines to close , jobs to be lost , etc . , of the us coal industry , stavins says . trump thinks the paris climate agreement gives foreign bureaucrats control over how much the energy the us consumes so he wants to cancel it the paris climate agreement definitely doesn t give foreign bureaucrats control over how much energy the us uses . the agreement clearly states that countries can determine their own plans for cutting emissions . i don t know if he is ignorant of the facts or intentionally lying , but either is terrible for a presidential candidate , stavins says . as for canceling the agreement , the us doesn t have the power to make that happen . so far , more than countries have approved the agreement . but trump might be able to pull the us out of the agreement before it s ratified . this would be a very bad move from a foreign diplomacy standpoint , however . with the paris agreement , nearly two decades of us climate diplomacy has finally won the day . and now the us would protest and drop out ? just one more way in which a trump presidency would be an embarrassment , and a terrible threat to the welfare of the united states and the world , stavins says . trump thinks the oil and gas industry support million high paying americans jobs the oil and gas industry isn t a big player when it comes to jobs in the us . in january , , workers were directly employed in oil and gas extraction , while the coal industry employed another , in , according to the bureau of labor statistics . trump didn t mention climate change but his denial shines througheven though trump talked about getting rid of the paris climate agreement and environmental regulations , he failed to mention climate change during his energy address . in fact , the closest he came was to say that , as president , he would deal with real environmental challenges , not the phony ones we ve been hearing about , presumably a nod to climate change , which he s said is a lie . trump is a well documented climate change denialist and conspiracy theorist , claiming it s a hoax orchestrated by the chinese . failing to mention climate change might actually be a strategic move for him . diving into that subject would have turned an already terrible energy speech into a farce . the concept of global warming was created by and for the chinese in order to make u . s . manufacturing non competitive . donald j . trump realdonaldtrump november , based on this speech alone , trump comes off as both ignorant and intentionally deceptive . but he didn t stop there . in california last week , he told an audience that the state s devastating drought is a fabrication . they re taking the water and shoving it out to sea , he said , before adding that he knew how to solve the problem . all it would take would be to redirect water to central valley farmers , while ignoring concerns about endangered fish . trump s denial of a very real problem is scary . but as the grist point out , his position didn t come out of nowhere republicans have been blaming the drought on bad environmental policies for some time now . he ll try to make himself in favor of everything . because trump has yet to publish an energy policy paper , debunking his plans is a mostly futile practice . holding back means that he can tailor his speeches to his audience without having to worry about making sure that what he says aligns with his proposed policies . trump has this way of taking credit for all sides of an issue , jeremiah bohr , a sociologist at the university of wisconsin oshkosh told me . he ll try to make himself in favor of everything . so what does presidential candidate trump stand for ? in the last month , we learned that trump wants to kill california s smelt , but save birds from wind turbines . he s also fine with denying climate change publicly while citing it as a reason to ampnbspsave his irish golf course . and when he s dealing with fossil fuels , it s totally fine to expand fracking while somehow reviving the coal industry . the contradictions are so abundant that it s hard to keep track . of course , each of these positions could be entirely different tomorrow . 	 in february , a man with a painter s mask and a gun walked into a bank of america office in ramona , california , and walked out with more than , . police tried to track down the bank robber , but the mask prevented a positive id and the trail went cold . until , in november of the same year , someone matching his description robbed the same bank again . this time , witnesses identified timothy graham , a year old who had taken out steep loans from chase earlier that year . when they searched graham s apartment , investigators found clothes and a gun matching those used in the robbery , effectively sealing the case . the november holdup was solved , and there was reason to think graham had been responsible for the february holdup too , but how could they prove it ? none of the witnesses saw graham s face in february , and graham himself wasn t talking . he was physically similar to the man who held up the bank in february but it was only enough to keep the case going , not enough to make it stick . so investigators tried a new trick they called google . in an affidavit filed on february th , nearly a year after the initial robbery , the fbi requested location data pulled from graham s samsung galaxy s . investigators had already gone to graham s wireless carrier , at ampampt , but google s data was more precise , potentially placing graham inside the bank at the time the robbery was taking place . based on my training and experience and in consultation with other agents , an investigator wrote , i believe it is likely that google can provide me with gps data , cell site information and wi fi access points for graham s phone . i believe it is likely that google can provide me with gps data that data is collected as the result of a little known google feature that builds a comprehensive history of where a user has been information that s proved valuable to police and advertisers alike . a verge investigation found affidavits from two different cases from the last four months in which police have obtained court orders for google s location data . both are embedded below . additional orders may have been filed under seal or through less transparent channels . it s not clear whether either of the public warrants were filled . no google based evidence was presented in graham s trial , and the other suspect plead guilty before a full case could be presented . still , there s no evidence of a legal challenge to either warrant . there s also reason to think the investigators legal tactic would have been successful , since google s policy is to comply with lawful warrants for location data . while the warrants are still rare , police appear to be catching on to the powerful new tactic , which allows them to collect a wealth of information on the movements and activities of android users , available as soon as there s probable cause to search . the data is collected by google s location history system , which has been present in various services for years but was made particularly visible with the release of timeline last july . location history uses the phone s location data to build a persistent portrait of where a user has traveled with their phone , a history that can be viewed or edited in the timeline tab of google maps . every time the phone establishes a strong enough location point , the system makes an entry in the user s timeline history , establishing that the user was in that place at that time . google photos users can even incorporate photos into the stream if the systems are fully integrated . the result is meant to let users visualize your real world routines , as google put it in timeline s official announcement , similar to facebook s persistent history of everything you ve shared . visualize your real world routines while a user s location history is largely private , google can still use the data to target ads , and it s accessible to warrant requests from law enforcement . it s also only collected if a user enabled location history while setting up their phone , although declining to do so also limits personalization features in google now and other products . the result is a persistent setting in any google account , which users can opt in or out of through ampnbspthe account settings page . the data is far more accurate than what s available from wireless carriers . police routinely request location data from phone companies , but the result is determined on the basis of the nearest cell tower , which typically only provides a general estimate of a phone s location . in graham s case , at ampampt warned that the results were less than exact , and they were subsequently ruled inadmissible . the location systems in android and ios combine that data with gps , local wi fi networks , and other sources . that lets android pinpoint users to a single building , rather than a single city block . james bareham that capability is also being actively promoted within the law enforcement community . in november , the intercept reported a training manual specifically instructing police in how to obtain android location data , available online here . written by police training expert aaron edens , the manual instructs police in how to issue preservation orders to prevent the loss of user deleted data and how to manage the kmf location files google typically provides in response to warrant requests . the manual even offers a template for search warrants requesting the data . both affidavits uncovered by the verge were filed in the months following the publication of edens manual , although it s unclear if either team of investigators read the manual itself . the capability is far more widespread on android phones than ios . while both ios and android can judge location with the same precision , the location history functions can t easily log that data outside of the android ecosystem . android phones pair to google accounts at the operating system level , so as long as location history is enabled when the phone is first launched , location data can be collected even if you ve never opened the timeline tab . the result is a comprehensive location record , collected entirely in the background . it s possible to construct a similar record from an iphone , but it s much more difficult . google maps can collect the same location data in ios , but it doesn t automatically connect that information to a specific user . iphone users can get the same timeline experience by installing the google app , which also enables android style voice search , but it requires significant action on the user s part . the verge s research turned up no equivalent affidavits concerning ios phones or data stored by apple maps . they want to know not just that you were in a mall , but that you were in a gap store . it would be possible , even profitable , for apple to build an equivalent system in apple maps , but so far , the company has declined to do so . apple does collect location data from users , but according to the company s privacy policy , location data is collected anonymously in a form that does not personally identify you unless the user provides explicit consent . apple executives say the resulting data is not tied to a user s account , and thus cannot be used to determine a specific person s location after the fact . there are a few ways for android users to manage or opt out of that record once they re aware of it . users can delete or rename specific data points from within the maps app , which google says will delete the information from company servers within half an hour of the initial request . police can request the preservation of those records once a specific suspect is identified , but that won t preserve data retroactively . you can also opt out of the system entirely by turning off location history , a broad setting that also disables google now and the explore function in maps . that choice is presented during the setup of an android phone , but modifiable at any point afterwards from ampnbspthe account privacy page . consistent location records are extremely valuable for google s advertising business . google s doubleclick system can use the records to target ads more precisely , a system that brings in billions each year and effectively funds the company s product ventures . the better google s data is , the more its ads are worth a strong incentive for continuing to collect and store exact location data . the more google knows about your shopping , dining , commuting persona , it ultimately translates to higher cpms for marketers , says mike ragusa , a director of mobile at ignitionone . they want to know not just that you were in a mall , but that you were in a gap store . unlike data given to police , the advertising data is only available in aggregate form , making it all but impossible for a third party advertiser to reconstruct a specific person s activities . with a warrant , police can see the private , individual form of the data , which is otherwise only available to google . that data can be extremely valuable to an investigation , since unlike carrier data , it s often precise enough to place a suspect at the scene of the crime . in graham s case , that s exactly what investigators were hoping to do , using the collected android data to prove the accused armed robber was inside the bank when the robbery took place . we have a long track record of advocating on behalf of our users . in another case , police were looking to solve different retail robberies in the dc metro area over the course of a year . police believed the same man was behind all robberies , based on his weapon and choice of tactics . when a man named david flowers was arrested in connection with the last robbery , police turned to his phone , an htc desire . on the basis that google collects and retains location data from android enabled mobile devices , police requested all the location data between the phone s activation and the date of flowers arrest . these are the only two public affidavits uncovered so far , but it s entirely possible that more have been filed under seal . business records of this kind are also frequent targets for national security requests , a gag ordered subpoena that some judges have criticized as unconstitutional , although google says those requests are insufficient to obtain location data . ampnbspthe company s most recent transparency report lists just over , us government requests in the first half of , percent of which produced some user data , although the majority of those requests are typically for gmail inbox content . the company does not break out location requests individually . the personal privacy implications are pretty clear but so are the law enforcement applications . it s also difficult to be sure that google complied with either of the two public affidavits , although the court record shows no legal objections filed . reached by the verge , a google representative declined to comment on the specifics of the cases , but said the warrants were consistent with the company s general policy towards user data . we respond to valid legal requests and require a warrant to disclose location history information , a google spokesperson said in a statement . we have a long track record of advocating on behalf of our users . in requiring a warrant , google is choosing a higher standard than many courts . earlier this week , the fourth circuit court of appeals maintained that the lighter burden of a subpoena was sufficient to obtain location records from a wireless carrier , although the precedent remains controversial . but all the courts agree warrants are sufficient , and since the location records are available on google servers , it s not clear whether the company would have legal grounds for resisting the orders . there s also reason to think there will be more orders in the months to come , as more investigators learn how to access google s cache of data . as edens manual makes clear , being able to track a suspect s movements after the fact is a powerful investigative tool too powerful for police to pass up . this could revitalize cold cases and potentially help solve active investigations , edens writes in the manual . the personal privacy implications are pretty clear but so are the law enforcement applications . update pm et updated with further information from google on how location history interacts with a user s account , a company stance on national security letter requests for location data , and other clarifications . us v . timothy grahamus v . david flowers	 the building where the department of homeland security tracks every cyber attack against the us is surprisingly bland . with its neutral exterior and circular drive , i wasn t even sure we were at the right place until i saw our press liaison standing in the lobby . there are no signs to distinguish it from the generic office park that surrounds it , and the doorman wouldn t even confirm if dhs had an office inside . the national cybersecurity and communications integration center , better known by the abbreviated nccic , opened in to serve as a place where dhs could monitor cyber threats across government agencies and critical infrastructure , such as power grids and dams . if an attacker ends up on the department of agriculture s network or a government employee surfs to a malicious website , for example , the nccic is supposed to detect it . until recently , the government has relied on its own information gathering , as well as partnerships with outside companies , to monitor its network and stay ahead of digital threats . but now , dhs is restructuring its work because of a law passed this past december as part of a huge omnibus bill the cyber information sharing act , or cisa . the legislation focuses the agency on an effort to build out a more comprehensive cyber threat detection system , one that s fed by information shared with the government by various companies . after the lobby and a short elevator ride , a bare , fluorescently lit hall led to an office door with a sign advertising weekly office doughnuts . phyllis schneck , the deputy under secretary for cybersecurity and communications at dhs , greeted us and took us through to the main nccic floor . the nccic looks similar to what you see depicted in movies as nasa mission control long tables with computers and screens . employees include ex military personnel and it professionals . they speak to each other as they work , just like normal coworkers , except they re coordinating the nation s cybersecurity defenses . the workstations face four massive screens that have mini displays within them . they show different measurements , like the number of unsecured critical infrastructure hubs that are being launched and the network status of every agency . if suspicious traffic shows up on one of the four big screens , a person responds and loops in others , schneck explained . the alert is noted through a change in the screen s color green signaling that everything is all clear and red meaning things aren t looking so good . when we arrived , the entire center was powered down into declassified mode , so we didn t observe any real time cyber threats . in addition to government agencies , dhs also assists in investigations abroad . following the hacking of a power grid in ukraine , for example , dhs sent employees to the country to investigate . the agency later issued a report on the incident . dhs doesn t just watch for human threats . it also monitors natural phenomena , like sunspots , fires , floods , and typhoons . the agency tracks the sun , because as schneck explained , a catastrophic situation could affect satellite communications , given that computers are just big magnets that respond to radiation . as cisa gets going , the agency will start integrating private companies cyber experiences into its malware prevention system . though dhs says this will better protect the us government and its entities from attacks , not everyone agrees . privacy advocates worry about companies sharing personal data with the government , while others have concerns about disrupting corporate workflows . consumers also might not feel comfortable with the idea that their data could be given to dhs without their permission . schneck says information sharing could greatly increase america s cybersecurity defenses if done correctly . for instance , if a company realizes its employees are being spammed with malicious phishing emails , it could send information about the sender and the email s contents to dhs , which will alert cybersecurity bureaus around the world to the threat s existence , and , hopefully , thwart the attackers . jeh johnson , the secretary of homeland security , ampnbsphas equated information sharing to the see something , say something of cybersecurity . the government pointed to its biggest cybersecurity failure as the primary evidence of cisa s merits the data breaches at the office of personnel management . investigators discovered that the same group who hacked into anthem healthcare last year and stole information on millions of americans also compromised opm . if anthem had shared information about the attacks ampnbspwith the government , like ip addresses and the attackers malicious links , opm officials could have monitored their own network for those same things , potentially protecting opm from attacks , or at least detecting them sooner . attackers were in opm s network for months . essentially , this is where cisa would have been put into action , government officials said . in the weeks and months following the opm disaster , lawmakers began strongly pushing for cyber information sharing . dhs heralded cisa as the legislative solution the country needed . the bill encouraged companies to voluntarily share information about malicious cyber encounters by offering them immunity from related lawsuits , so they they could share users data without worrying about getting sued for privacy infringements . but while this might entice companies to participate , privacy advocates say it leaves consumers in the dark . only a small amount of data is needed to thwart an attack , mark jaycox , civil liberties legislative lead for the electronic frontier foundation , said in an interview with the verge . oversharing could easily happen and remain undisclosed to the public . beyond that , the list of companies sharing information is secret , too . we don t know what companies have joined or asked to join the information sharing , jaycox said . we re now approaching another side of this bill and why it was terrible the transparency aspects . no consumers would feel comfortable using a service if they know their information , including personal details , ampnbspis going directly into dhs threat intelligence arsenal , katie moussouris , former chief policy officer at hackerone , said in an interview . just look at what happened to trust in technology companies after edward snowden s leaks . a pew research center study from found that percent of us adults thought they had lost control of their personal data to companies . despite privacy concerns , the bill passed and is now law . only six companies have signed up to fully participate , the associated press reported in march . following our tour of the nccic , schneck took us to her office . she insists privacy was and continues to be a major consideration , and that the agency asks for only the essential technical details when incident information is shared . we brief privacy folks all the time , she said . look , it s not worth protecting something if we re giving up our rights as americans . so what information goes into the nccic ? the agency published guidelines in february to clarify . companies should share anything that helps investigate an incident or vulnerability . information isn t directly related to a cyberthreat if it is not necessary to assist others to detect , prevent , or mitigate the threat . so , for example , with a phishing email , a company should send dhs the sender of the email , the malicious url , any malicious files attached , the contents of the email , and any additional information that could help thwart future attacks . the name and email address of the email s targets should not be shared , the agency says . whether companies will follow these guidelines remains to be seen , though the system s guaranteed secrecy makes it difficult for the public to check . sharing this information will go a long way to keeping us entities and interests secure , schneck said . she thinks of malware and threats in terms of virtual viruses , and just like a flu vaccine helps the body protect against the influenza virus , putting indicators of compromise into dhs cyber center will act as a vaccine of sorts the nccic will be able to more quickly detect malware and other cyber threats across the country s networks . but while that might be the case , companies aren t liable if they overshare users data , and consumers won t readily know if that s even happening . some companies also say they ve already created a system around warrant requests and will share user information if legally obliged . they don t really need voluntary information sharing , moussouris said . schneck remains idealistic , however . she hopes that greater information sharing will eventually allow the agency to detect and thwart an attack without a human ever getting involved , especially when it comes to state sponsored attacks , she said . her vision is probably even more ambitious than it sounds . dhs needs to get more companies to share data , to improve its technology to be better able to detect changing threats , and humans may still be needed to determine when data is sensitive . the future of a fully autonomous threat detection system remains a long way off . maybe that s a good thing , though , as we grapple with the current system and the questions it introduces . photography amelia holowaty krales the verge 	 we aren t making a cyberpunk game , says magdalena tomkowicz , story designer on the upcoming ruiner . but we re making a game that s influenced by cyberpunk works of fiction and reality . despite these semantics , the word cyberpunk is likely the first thing that comes to mind when you see ruiner . the world , which you view from a top down perspective , is full of grimy streets lined with flashing neon signs . the protagonist looks like he s from a cybernetic motorcycle gang , complete with a mask that conceals his entire face with a customizable screen . ruiner s myriad of inspirations include some of the usual suspects think ghost in the shell and akira as well as real world technology anxieties like cryotechnology and the advent of virtual and augmented reality . these are the things we like , says gameplay designer jakub styli ski , and the thing that came out was ruiner . ruiner is set in , in a city called rengkok . in this rendition of the future , the lower class of the city are addicted to virtual worlds instead of drugs . you play as a man in search of his brother , guided by a mysterious hacker who serves as the voice in your ear . the game handles sort of like a sci fi take on the brutal action game hotline miami in fact , that was the original concept . from there it grew . the environments became bigger , shifting away from the closed rooms of its inspiration , and new gadgets and weapons kept being added . the feel of the game really came into place when the developers introduced a dash ability that lets you zip around the levels like a superhero . pretty much everyone on ruiner s small team has experience working on big games . styli ski and tomkowicz previously worked at cd projekt red and techland , for instance , where they helped create big budget games , like the witcher and dead island . they came up with the initial concept for ruiner in may , and that december they formed the studio , reikon , in poland . at the beginning of they started working on ruiner full time and the game is expected to launch on pc later this year . if it looks impressive for an independently developed game , that s due in part to the team s background . that s something we learned at cd projekt red , says styli ski . they have this way of , instead of cutting very important stuff , they just work more . it s kind of crazy , and we always hated that way of approaching working on a game , but now when we started working on our game we did not want to let go . for instance , in order to make the game stand out from the competition , they decided to create detailed , d graphics instead of a simpler style that would ve been faster and cheaper . it also helped that art director benedykt szneider isn t a fan of pixel art . whenever we have a difficult problem , an ambitious problem , we solve it with an even more ambitious solution , adds tomkowicz . though its influences are clear , in the beginning the team at reikon was reticent about using the word cyberpunk to describe ruiner . we didn t actually want to make a cyberpunk game , and for a long time we wanted to not use the word cyberpunk , to show that this wasn t a thing where you had to expect rainy streets and neon signs , says tomkowicz . for a long time we thought let s not use the word cyberpunk . let s just make the game and let the people read the themes that are there by themselves . eventually they relented , realizing that the people who would be most interested in the game are probably already into the theme . the initial concern was that the term would place limitations on the game . even now , the team has heard feedback about certain elements , after showing ruiner off at events like pax . the dashing mechanic , for instance , was deemed more sci fi than cyberpunk by some . the team s solution for this is to simply design whatever gameplay features work best , and then figure out how they fit into the universe afterward . in ruiner s fiction the dash ability exists because of the character s augmented legs , for instance , and his ability to heal on the spot is because of helpful swarms of flying nanobots delivered by drones , of course . top down shooters aren t exactly known for their narratives it s a genre typically focused on arcade style fast action but storytelling is a big part of ruiner . from the start we wanted the game to be really strong in four dimensions , says tomkowicz . story and gameplay are two of those , the others are graphics and sound . the game won t have traditional cut scenes , she says , but instead will relay its narrative through a combination of dialog with other characters , collectible items that provide new information , and the environment around you . just looking at the city itself can tell you a lot . we are trying to make the dialog have as little text as possible , she says , so that the game speaks for itself . that s also part of the thinking behind the tourist mode that will be included in the final product . while ruiner will be a challenging game , the developers realize that some people will be frustrated by the gameplay , yet still intrigued by the beautiful dystopia you can explore . we know that some people despise combat , some people aren t interested in a game that s really hard , says styli ski . so why not let them play the game ? details of the mode are in flux since it s still in development , but it will be a substantially easier version of the main game . for a group used to working within a bigger studio , where the resources are there to support your wild ideas , the indie mentality of ruiner has been a challenge . it was very hard in the beginning , at least for me , because when i came up with an idea , like percent of the time i had to scrap it immediately because it wasn t doable , says styli ski . at the same time , it s also been an educational experience , forcing each member of the group to work on aspects of the game that are outside of their typical expertise . it s so inspiring , says tomkowicz . we learned a lot at cd projekt and techland , but compared to those experiences , now we are learning at light speed . 	 past the towers of downtown miami and over biscayne bay sits the city of miami beach . perched on the tip of a narrow barrier island , miami beach is a resort community of just under , people , though its population swells with a steady stream of tourists . through the wall of hotels that line its shore is the city s central draw the wide , white stretch of miami beach s beach . the beach is the centerpiece of the city s promise of escape escape from cold winters or college classes or family , where you can drink goblets of bright green liquor and cruise down ocean drive in a rented tangerine lamborghini before retiring to the warm sand . to the casual observer , the beach may look like the only natural bit of the city , a fringe of shore reaching out from under the glass and pastel skyline . but this would be false the beach is every bit as artificial as the towers and turquoise pools . for years the sea has been eating away at the shore , and the city has spent millions of dollars pumping up sand from the seafloor to replace it , only to have it wash away again . every handful of sand on miami beach was placed there by someone . that sand is washing away ever faster . the sea around miami is rising a third of an inch a year , and it s accelerating . the region is far from alone in its predicament , or in its response to an eroding coast it s becoming hard to find a populated beach in the united states that doesn t require regular infusions of sand , says rob young , director of the program for the study of developed shorelines at western carolina university . virginia beach , north carolina s outer banks , new york s long island , new jersey s cape may , and countless other coastal cities are trapped in the same cycle , a cycle whose pace will become harder to maintain as the ocean rises . there isn t a natural grain of sand on the beach in northern new jersey there is no miami beach unless we build it , young says . the real endangered species on the coast of the us isn t the piping plover or the loggerhead sea turtle . it s an unengineered beach . the sea has been slowly cutting a divot into the shore in front of miami beach s iconic fontainebleau hotel , encroaching nearly to the promenade . patching it would normally be a small job . but miami beach has a problem , one more cities will soon face it has run out of sand in the ocean nearby . the beach is the tattered edge of the land . it s made of debris , which we call sand when it s too small to think about discretely , though exactly what it consists of varies . it could be pulverized coral , like in the maldives , or crushed clamshells , like shark bay , australia , or discarded glass , like around fort bragg , california . often it s rock that has been crushed by glaciers or eroded off mountains and washed down rivers to the sea . beaches made from black basalt or purple garnet have a certain novelty value , but the ideal beach , the one you see on ads for airlines and beer , is sugary and white . it s likely calcium carbonate or quartz . coastal engineers talk about beach behavior , as if dealing with an unruly animal rather than a geologic feature . waves sort sand grains to a depth where they no longer move them , so some beaches change with the seasons , as winter storms suck sand offshore , leaving only cobblestones , and smaller waves push it back in the summer . one thing all beaches have in common is that they re always shifting , wave by wave over years or overnight , with a storm . for much of the th century , people tried to hold beaches in place by building groins lines of rock or wood pylons protruding from the shore . but groins robbed downdrift beaches of sand that would have come their way , creating new erosion problems . some came to be called spite groins . seawalls made things worse , further blocking the natural movement of sand and forcing waves back onto the shore , scouring away the beach . by the s , there was very little beach left on miami beach or shore at the jersey shore . so a new response became popular add sand . that job largely fell to the us army corps of engineers . dredges floated offshore , extending scoops or hoses tipped with cutter heads into the seafloor and piping sand back onto the eroding beach . nourishment , as the practice is called , maintained the beach , but it was also an admission that there would never be a permanent solution to fixing the shore in place . once you start nourishing a beach , you can never stop . its equilibrium state lies elsewhere , and wave after wave will eat away at the shore , and you ll keep having to find new sand to replace it . sand seems like an infinite resource , but it isn t . you can t put just any kind of sand on a beach . forget about the thousands of miles of dunes in the sahara and gobi rounded by wind , those grains are too smooth . sand made by crushing rock is too jagged . stones worn down by rivers and waves over millennia is ideal , but even then , it has to be the right type . if the grains are too small , they wash away quickly too large , and the beach becomes a steep bank . if they re the wrong density or wrong shape say , plate like shards of broken shells they ll float in the water , causing clouds . if the sand is too dark it will trap heat , and can shift the gender of sea turtles born there . you want to match the native sand as close as you can , says kevin bodge , a coastal engineering consultant . that sand was there for a reason . once you start nourishing a beach , you can never stoptremendous amounts of ocean sand gets used for land reclamation and construction . countries use it to extend their borders , like singapore and china , which has built seven new islands in the south china sea . billions of tons of sand gets poured into concrete . a united nations report on sand shortages found that up to billion tons of sand and gravel are mined each year , more than twice the amount moved by all the rivers in the world , which the report notes makes humankind the largest of the planet s transforming agents with respect to aggregates . the united states has lined its coasts with over a billion cubic yards of sand , at a cost of . billion , according to a database maintained by andy coburn at western carolina university s program for the study of developed shorelines . all that sand inevitably washes back into the sea . sometimes waves bring it back , but for the most part , it s lost to us if it s sucked out past a certain depth , it s scattered along the continental shelf , too dispersed to be gathered back . with sea levels rising , demand for beach sand is only going to grow . about percent of the coast in the lower states is already eroding , according to the usgs . every single coastal erosion problem we have right now is only going to get worse , not better , young says . it s only going to erode faster , not slower , require more sand , not less . gradually now , but soon overwhelmingly , every coastline is going to want to move inland . young foresees a future of rising costs and conflict over diminishing sand . if you want to invest , buy a dredge . no state requires more sand than florida , which sits in the middle of hurricane alley and has the longest coastline after alaska . half of the miles of beaches monitored by the state s department of environmental protection are designated as critically eroding , from daytona beach to the kennedy space center on cape canaveral to the shore in front of mar a lago , the palm beach estate of president elect donald trump . on july st , , the army corps released a plan for patching eroding sections of miami beach . miami dade s sand resources had been exhausted , the corps wrote , and some of the best alternatives lay to the north , offshore of martin and st . lucie counties . though the shoals were in federal waters and the northern counties had no greater right to them than anyone else , they viewed the sand as theirs , and with the corps announcement began the latest skirmish in what local officials call the sand wars . state senator joe negron , whose district includes parts of martin and st . lucie , swore that miami dade wouldn t get a single grain . frannie hutchinson , a st . lucie commissioner , demanded the corps take its shovels and buckets and go home . she filed public comments on the corps proposal , saying that it failed to address sea level rise and would rob st . lucie of needed sand . the county erosion chair for years , hutchinson says that she cringes every time she sweeps dirt out of her house . do you know how much sand is in there ? you can t replace sand . there was a sense , in council meetings and public statements , that miami beach was reaping what it sowed , and that with the sea rising , it was every county for itself . they ve squandered their sand , they ve overdeveloped , they ve depleted their resources and now they want to come and take ours , says sarah heard , a martin county commissioner . we need to protect that offshore site , we need to guard it very carefully . we don t know exactly how sea level rise is going to impact us , but we know it s accelerating rapidly , we know there s going to be inundation . they ve squandered their sand . heard is a republican , but laments her party s denial of climate change . last year , the florida center for investigative reporting found that the state s governor , rick scott , forbid state officials from using the term in emails or reports . jacqui thurlow lippisch , another martin county commissioner who objected to the corps plan , is also a republican , and also clear eyed about what rising seas will do to her community . just as there are proverbially no atheists in foxholes , it s increasingly difficult to be a local politician in coastal florida and deny the sea is rising . yet what to do about it at a local level is a conundrum . right now , the answer is to keep piling on more sand . thurlow lippisch describes nourishment as a loop her town is trapped in the most expensive property is on the beach , she says , and letting it fall into the sea would rob her county of percent of its tax base , making it impossible to fund schools , run buses , and provide lunches for children in need . though she wonders whether she s doing the right thing , she continues to fight for the sand that her community will eventually have to put on its shore . we all have to look ourselves in the mirror and ask , is this a sustainable life ? what are we doing here ? but right now , we re in it , we re doing it . as the northern counties lobbed angry missives at the corps , one alternative kept coming up the bahamas . the nearest bahamian islands are just miles east of miami . the sand grains there aren t rock , but orbs of calcium carbonate called aragonite , which some scientists believe is formed by bacteria as deep ocean water moves into the warm , shallow banks of the caribbean . the exact process that produces the sand is poorly understood , says lisa robbins , an oceanographer who studies it , and occurs in only a few other places in the world , such as the arabian gulf . one thing is clear it s premium stuff . they re not only mysterious , they re gorgeous , and wonderful to step on , robbins says of the grains , which she likens to little pearls . the sand is so white that when coastal engineer kevin bodge brought in a barge s worth in the early s for fisher island , a wealthy community willing to pay for it , the customs official looked on incredulously . it was , bodge recalls , the height of the miami vice thing , so we had to clear customs , and it came in on a barge and when the sun hit that thing coming over the horizon in the early morning light , it was the most incredible pile of gleaming white powder i ve ever seen . the customs agent just looked at me and said , you gotta be kidding me . the bahamian government had been ambivalent about selling sand to nourish foreign beaches , says anthony myers , whose company holds a lease on a shoal near bimini why let tourists visit bahamian sand beaches elsewhere ? but in , it relented . i ve helped them understand the science , myers says . if you don t sell this , you re just watching your money disappear into the chasms of the ocean . it was the most incredible pile of gleaming white powder i ve ever seen . myers sells sand for plastics , agriculture , and other purposes , but to his great frustration , he has been unable to get his sand on florida s beaches . the federal government often pays half the cost of beach nourishment , with states and cities splitting the rest . but an amendment to the water resources development act prohibits federal funds from going toward foreign sand if domestic sources are available , which means anyone who wants bahamian aragonite would have to pay the tab themselves . his consultant on the mainland , jayson meyers no relation , shares his frustration . sitting in a concrete and glass tower in downtown miami , meyers pulled out a plastic vial of bahamian sand from his leather briefcase and placed it on the table . it was white as chalk . he s shown it to mayors and councilmembers and any number of officials , and he says everyone wants some , but until they can get federal assistance , or decide to pay for it themselves , there s nothing to be done . it s great that they want it , he said , laughing bitterly . it doesn t do shit for getting it on the beach . that may change eventually in september the house passed an amendment proposed by florida representative lois frankel that would allow federal funds to go toward foreign sand , and miami beach is planning a small test project next year . but in the meantime , spurned by its neighbors and unable to buy sand abroad , miami beach turned inland , to a mine a hundred miles north . the sand from the northern counties was too dark and full of shells anyway , says an official with the county . they ll be back , says heard , the martin county commissioner . and they ll receive spirited opposition next time they try it . the mine is called witherspoon and sits amid flat fields of pasture and scrub near the southwest shore of lake okeechobee . the water table is so high there that you strike it as soon as you dig , so in effect the mine is a pond , with a gray dredge floating in the middle sucking up sand from the bottom . on that late september day , the pond was still , mirroring the bright blue sky and high clouds , masking its foot depth . the workers call it simply the pit . in a shed on the pit s shore , jacob dampier scooped a small mound of sand onto a metal plate . with a spackling blade , deft and intent , sweating in the staggering heat , he cut it into four equal segments , squared their sides , leveled the top , and quartered them again . one brick he slid onto a scale , weighing out grams , and slipped it into a ziploc bag . he pulled out a booklet , munsell s soil color , basically the pantone chart for dirt , and found a match value seven , chroma one , eggshell white . sometimes it s a little gray , sometimes it has an orange tint , dampier said . it depends where you are in the pit . but if it s white , they love it . and you see how white that is ? it ll blind ya . for years dampier has tested sand of an astonishing range and specificity chunky sand for asphalt , finer sand for concrete , finest for masonry and glass . there s a strict standard for volleyball courts , approved by an expert in ontario , canada , and a whole menu for golf courses one blend for bunkers another for topdressing another , dyed green , for divot repair . since june , the mine had been running day and night producing sand for miami beach . white drifts lay beneath the tower where a machine sorts slurry from the dredge to fit exacting recipes of grain size . tall hourglass cones lined the pit , and a dune stretched along the road where trucks sat idling , waiting to be waved out by a man standing under a rainbow beach umbrella . from here , three hundred trucks would drive , tons of sand to the parking lot of the fontainebleau that day , and do it again the next , until over , tons have been placed on the shore . in all , it s projected to cost just under million to patch , feet of miami beach s waterfront . sand prices have risen sharply since , to an average of about a cubic yard , according to coburn s database . mined sand , sorted to bespoke criteria and requiring convoys of trucks , is more expensive still . laurel reichold , the corps engineer managing the project , says at a cubic yard , it costs twice what dredged sand would have . yellow all terrain trucks complete the final leg of the journey , ferrying sand from the parking lot to the beach , escorted by men on atvs wearing goggles and bandanas pulled over their faces . they turn onto a peninsula of fresh beach jutting out from the eroded shore and dump the sand into the sea . bulldozers follow , grading the sand down to a gentle slope . the new beach , uniform and flat , is disorienting to be on , without markers for perspective or scale . but once the trucks leave and the waves get to work , it will seem as natural as the rest of the shore , covered in sunbathers and umbrellas . it s gorgeous , said elizabeth wheaton , the city s environment and sustainability director , picking up a handful of sand and letting it run through her fingers . you just want to make snow angels in it . miami beach has already begun to flood at high tide , and saltwater is pushing into the region s aquifer . the city , like all south florida , is doomed , says hal wanless , chair of the geological sciences department at the university of miami . the state s bedrock of porous limestone means that walls won t stop the water it ll just seep up from below . evidence of just how radically changes in sea level can reshape florida s coast is everywhere , written in the sand . one of the sand deposits the corps was eyeing offshore of martin county was a beach about , years ago , when the sea was feet lower . the witherspoon mine was a beach , years ago , when the sea was feet higher . a recent study of antarctic ice melt predicted that if carbon emissions aren t curtailed , by the end of the century the sea could rise by just over six feet , the high end of noaa s forecast , and the average elevation of miami dade county . in years it could rise as high as feet . well before then , the witherspoon mine would become a beach once again . the city , like all south florida , is doomed . the inertia of the climate system means that even if carbon emissions were halted tomorrow , the sea would continue to rise for centuries . with a republican party in denial about climate change , and a president elect who once called it a hoax perpetrated by china , we will likely lock in higher and faster rates of rise in the years to come . for cities on the coast it will be a slow catastrophe , involving myriad difficult decisions whether to build infrastructure in an attempt to keep the water out , or whether to retreat from the coast , and if so , how to retreat without upending lives , economies , communities . one of the first decisions cities will face , one they re already facing , is what to do about a shore that s falling into the sea . it will probably always be worth it for miami beach to go to absurd lengths in order to maintain its shore , right up until the moment the city sinks beneath the sea . mayor philip levine , one of the first florida politicians to raise the alarm about climate change , has spent million building pumps and raising roads and plans to spend hundreds of millions more . but florida has no income tax , so if cities are going to pay for the infrastructure needed to adapt , property values need to keep rising and tourists need to keep coming . without a beach , why come to miami beach ? the irony is , in miami beach and south florida , the way to deal with rising sea levels is to build more condos , says peter zalewski , who tracks development through his site condo vultures . just under , new units are planned or currently being built in miami dade county , a region that already has more assets vulnerable to rising seas than anywhere in the world after guangzhou , china . as long as florida is trying to build its way out of climate change , the beach will need to be maintained , as a lure and a defense . you can have buildings or you can have beaches , but you can t have both . it won t be worth it for other cities , however , especially if the federal government stops helping cover the cost of nourishment . the army corps mandate , reichold says , is to protect property on the coast , and while recreation revenue is factored into the corps cost benefit analysis , that wouldn t preclude building seawalls instead of nourishment if sand gets too expensive . cities will face a choice retreat , or build walls to keep the water out , destroying the beach . you can have buildings or you can have beaches , but you can t have both , says orrin pilkey , founder of the program for the study of developed shorelines . he thinks buildings will win that calculation , and there will be a rush to build seawalls . it happened on a small scale after hurricane sandy , as billionaires erected metal plates and piled up boulders to defend their hamptons mansions . as the water rises , more and more of the coast will become armored , the sand will wash away , and the shoreline will resemble a fortress of concrete and rock . the beaches that remain would be amusement parks maintained at great expense , in cities like miami beach , myrtle beach , or virginia beach , perpetually rebuilt with sand from farther and farther out on the continental shelf , or inland from a once and future coast . in late october , geologists from five east coast states gathered at a lab in palisades , new york , on the cliffs of the hudson river . they were there to mark the opening of what is essentially a library of sand . for the two previous summers , a ship , the ms thunderforce , had sailed from miami to boston , taking samples of the ocean floor , and now those samples had arrived at columbia s lamont doherty earth observatory . the survey was commissioned by the bureau of ocean energy management , which handles resources in federal waters , farther than most states have traditionally gone for sand . but as states have begun to run low on sand nearby , they ve started turning to boem for help , says jeff reidenauer , the bureau s marine minerals branch chief . with rising seas and stronger storms , it s only a matter of time before states along the eastern seaboard are scrambling for sand to repair their shores , and the bureau wanted to know where to go . the survey began in the aftermath of hurricane sandy and goes by the apt acronym of asap , for atlantic sand assessment project . in the lab , long tubes of sediment taken from the ocean floor lay displayed on tables . researchers use the cores as time capsules , testing the stripes of clay and sand laid down over thousands of years to figure out what the planet was doing at the time . the people gathered in the lab that day , however , were mostly interested in the sand itself its grain size , mineral type , how much of it there was and where . the cores from the thunderforce filled rack after rack inside a refrigerated warehouse adjoining the lab . each plastic case was labeled by state , almost a wall for each massachusetts , new york , new jersey , north carolina , georgia , florida cores in all , with hundreds more on the way . the shore crumbled as matthew passedthe library was opening just in time . three weeks before , a low pressure disturbance that began off the coast of africa reached the caribbean , strengthened unusually rapidly , and slammed into haiti as hurricane matthew , category . it was headed for a direct hit on southeast florida but bent to the east , skimming the coast , and flooding north carolina . the storm sent powerful waves into the coast as it passed , washing away large sections of the shore in georgia and south carolina . in florida waves washed over more than miles of dunes . beaches in st . lucie county retreated dozens of feet , turning into cliffs . brevard county had to rush sand onto the beach to protect homes left teetering over the sea . jacksonville , in the middle of putting over , tons of sand on its beach , saw just as much wash away overnight . near st . augustine , waves punched through a dune and created a new inlet joining the matanzas river with the atlantic , while to the south , waves washed away dunes and concrete armor and chewed through a mile and a half of highway a a . senator bill nelson promised the highway would be rebuilt and a new beach installed to protect it . the damage is still being assessed , and where the sand to replace it will come from is unclear . maybe it will be brought from a prehistoric beach by convoys of trucks , or from a bahamian shoal , or maybe the counties will fall into another sand war . or maybe it will come from one of the new deposits deep out on the continental shelf , mapped , catalogued , and archived in a walk in refrigerator on the hudson river . back at miami beach , work has paused for the winter . sections of the new shore crumbled as matthew passed but were soon repaired . art basel begins in a few weeks , and the completed beach in front of the fontainebleau is ready to receive the dealers and collectors and partiers who will soon descend . work will resume in the spring , with hundreds of trucks ferrying sand from the middle of the state to the shore , patching holes in a beach to postpone the day when it will inevitably vanish . editor michael zelenko and elizabeth lopatto	 last saturday , fans of minimal government gathered for the new york libertarian party convention , which was held in the ballroom of a decidedly unflashy ukrainian restaurant in manhattan s east village . the attendees , who ranged from shiny shoed businessmen to scruffy survivalist looking types , were there to vote for the presidential delegates who will travel to the party s national gathering in orlando later this month . but nick spanos had arrived on a slightly different mission . a former ron paul campaign consultant , he s now the ceo of blockchain technologies corp . , a new company that seeks to replace america s voting system with bitcoin derived blockchain technology , and which had been selected to run the convention s vote that day . though the convention was small , encompassing just several dozen voters , for spanos it represented a chance to demonstrate his vision for the future of elections administration , one where votes are recorded on a blockchain database subject to full public scrutiny . around in the afternoon , word began spreading that anti virus software pioneer john mcafee who was recently deported from guatemala and is now back in the us , vying for the libertarian party s presidential nomination had entered the premises . spanos spared no time in introducing me to the aspiring politician . nick spanos had arrived on a slightly different missionbut mcafee , with fading green highlights in his hair and an intense stare , quickly dismissed the core mission of spano s company , proceeding to stump against larger evils . the problem has nothing to do with technology . it has nothing to do with purity and truth . it has to do with power , and we have a system in america that controls the voting process , mcafee told me . we can talk about the technology all day long , but it means nothing unless you have a plan for usurping that control . as mcafee spoke , i noticed that spanos and i were both wearing gold colored admission wristbands , which convention organizers had given to guests they could not afford to feed during the day s events at the budget ukrainian restaurant and ballroom . given how widely the party s ideas have influenced powerful republicans , the convention s modesty lent the libertarians an underdog air . and , in this backdrop , mcafee s call for revolution felt a bit ambitious . seeming to prefer a more gradualist approach , spanos was visibly amused by mcafee s indictment . he s also eager to expand beyond the libertarian community , saying that his products are on the verge of being adopted by customers that would dwarf the spendthrift third party convention . he claims to be in talks with multiple domestic and foreign governments about running their elections on his software . it has nothing to do with purity and truth . having grown up entertaining himself with elaborate circuitry projects in long island , spanos has spent the last few decades focusing on the more technical aspects of campaign consulting and election logistics . he says the inspiration for blockchain technologies came partly from frustrations with the opacity of florida s voting machines during the presidential election , when he was working for republicans . i asked them , let me see the source code , spanos told me , saying that he was denied at every turn . when you don t know what the hell any of the machines do , how are you supposed to have a transparent election ? they could be counting digital unicorns . the principles that underlie blockchain technologies proposed solution are fairly simple . in the system spanos deployed over the weekend , a voter fills out a paper ballot that s marked with three qr codes , that assign it a unique blockchain identity . once scanned , the company s system routes the digitized vote to the candidate s wallet , and the blockchain record begins to expand . after voting , public versions of the blockchains are released for open inspection although , as in traditional elections , voter s identities are not tied to ballots . all that the company s technology requires is a computer , a printer , a screen , and a scanner which spanos says should be kept disconnected from the internet ensure security . blockchain s technology can be adapted to all varieties of voting , spanos says , including electronic voting machines . yet spanos emphasized that he prefers to have voters mark their choices on paper ballots . this is meant to not only add a layer of accountability to the system by leaving a paper trail , but also to put voters minds at ease . humans need the paper ballot , spanos told me . it s going to be a long time before a human trusts a computer . instead , spanos argues that his technology can essentially improve analog paper balloting by locking results into the blockchain , creating an obstacle to manipulating any tabulation after the fact . they could be counting digital unicorns . spanos leans libertarian , but says he has worked for both democrats and republicans and appears at home in the company of all manner of politician . as his team diligently set up their polling operation on two dining tables in a half lit corner of the restaurant , spanos pushed aside silverware at a nearby table and opened his laptop . using wi fi from an adjacent diner , spanos showed me several chunks of inscrutable blockchain code before pulling up photographs of his work involving foreign politicians . he had shots of him posing with former soviet head of state mikhail gorbachev , photos of him shaking hands with a somali politician , and something he was particularly excited to show me a choppy video of him boldly propping his feet on a coffee table within eyeshot of fidel castro at a formal dinner . spanos says he also specializes in event planning and logistics of high profile public figures . spanos argues that the beauty of blockchain lies in how difficult it makes manipulating the system , even for a biased administrator . this here , i can t change any of this shit , spanos said , pointing to an unused ballot , the type that his colleagues had just been frantically printing off on . x office paper . even if i wanted to , there s no way i could change this person s ballot . this is here forever and the whole world can see it . even if i wanted to , there s no way i could change this person s ballot . spanos pitch has been enough to convince an initial round of clients . in february , his company worked with rand paul s campaign during the iowa caucuses , according to a press release , and last month it administered voting at the texas libertarian convention . spanos says that he is also in talks with several foreign governments about helping to administer their elections . citing political sensitivity and competitive concerns , he declined to name any country in particular . he also says that he is speaking to numerous us governmental jurisdictions which he also declined to name , including a school board in texas , that he says is looking like a particularly hopeful candidate for his first ever official government election . as the voting commenced saturday , spanos circled the faux wood ballroom collecting ballots with a wire mesh basket he paraded above his head . as spanos delivered the votes to his team s processing table in the adjoining dining room , a crowd began to form around the operation . after striking up a few conversations with the gawkers , i realized that they were official election observers who had been dispatched by candidates to guard against counting shenanigans . what did stalin say ? it s not who votes , but who counts the votes ? this shouldn t have been a surprise like american conservatives at large , those i spoke with at the libertarian convention professed deep mistrust of election administration . this is something that blockchain technologies could no doubt capitalize on . it s possible to imagine that , among red state governments staffed by officials with similar sentiments , blockchain technologies could find receptive ears for its sales pitch of protecting against ostensibly ubiquitous election fraud . the day after the libertarian vote , spanos sent me a video of republicans including former arizona governor jan brewer alleging that electronic voting machines seemed to have been rigged at the party s convention , which had also taken place on saturday . it could have happened , they could have done that in arizona , spanos told me , emphasizing that his company s system can leave a paper trail . but even if nothing happened , if no one got robbed , people still need to feel confident in the results . what did stalin say ? it s not who votes , but who counts the votes ? spanos mused . but if you count them openly , it s back to who votes . 	 by any standard , the past year has been hard on evernote . phil libin , who led the company to million registered users and a billion valuation , ampnbspabruptly quit the ceo post last july , triggering an exodus of top executives who had led the company since . complaints about ampnbspthe increasingly bloated core product mounted , just as ampnbspthe bottom began to drop out of the market for consumer productivity software . soon , some critics were calling evernote the first dead unicorn , using the silicon valley term for startups valued at billion or more . into this mix came chris o neill , who previously spent a decade at google . he once served as the managing director of the company s business in canada , and later ran the business side of google glass . he had less experience building products , though . given other the ampnbsphigh level departures and layoffs at evernote , it has been easy to be skeptical about the company s prospects . if i wanted to do something easy , i d go somewhere else . but after nine months of rebuilding , o neill is ready to present his vision for evernote . in a chat at the company s headquarters in redwood city , ca , he described a leaner , more focused operation dedicated to building the best home for your notes and other documents . it s considering giving up on underused features , including its ampnbspwork chat messaging system , and plans to simplify its interfaces on every platform . in a wide ranging conversation , we talked about the company s critics , its business prospects , and evernote s plan for the future . i m not going for a second to suggest that scaling this company , or this transition , is going to be easy ampnbspit s not , o neill said . that s why i m here . if i wanted to do something easy , i d be somewhere else . but i love challenges . i grew up in small town canada , and i love to be underestimated . i m a fierce competitor . this is the stuff that gets me out of bed in the morning . this interview has been edited and condensed . casey newton so you ve been ceo for months now . what have you been focused on ? chris o neill i announced early on i was going to focus on three things building a great team building on a great team getting us on a path to sustainability . and the last is getting back to the core , the essence , of the product . what people don t understand about the company is that we re in a very solid financial position . we re on the path to sustainability . we don t have to raise more money . we had a cash flow positive month in march . these are really important things at a time when the funding environment is so volatile . so i think that s important for people to understand . companies go through transitions . it s not a story . second , companies go through transitions . it s not a story . companies go from startups to more mature companies that are more interested in things like scale i think that s healthy that we go through that . there are bumps in the road , but i am quite pleased with the team we have in place . it s a world class team that has experience in navigating precisely these kinds of transitions . last , the core stuff is interesting . i think it s great that companies place bets and take risks , and that s what we did . we made bets on things like work chat , we made bets on ampnbspthe market , we made bets on lifestyle things like ampnbspfood and ampnbsphello . that s a sign of strength , not weakness . but it s also a sign of discipline to look back and say , did it pan out the way we thought . and more important , is it distracting from our ability to deliver against the promise we made to our users ? that promise , and that market , is enormous the potential is still there . so i think it s early for us to see some of the results , but they re very promising . i want to dive in to all of these subjects . but i also want to ask , at a high level , how you see evernote s place in the world ? is it different than what it maybe was a couple years ago ? i m here because i love evernote . i ve used it for many years . i connect deeply to the brand , the purpose , the mission , the product itself . i use it as a super power to get shit done to basically help me curate all the stuff that bombards me every day . we re all bombarded with knowledge all day long . you need a safe space to capture ideas and come back and cultivate them , to then bring them to action . evernote is , in many ways , the tool that helps you determine the signal in a very noisy world . our place is as relevant today as it was when ampnbspstepan pachikov ampnbspstarted the company years ago . our market s growing . the globalization of the economy has led to more knowledge workers that s good for us . smartphone penetration continues to grow , albeit at a lower rate . that s good for us , too . and the other thing , which may sound counterintuitive , is that it isn t just information overload it s collaboration overload . it s good that we re working across borders and functions , and silos are coming down . the bad part is that it s crowding out to time to actually think , and do what some people call deep work the ability to focus on a task for more than , minutes at a time . deep work is the killer app of the knowledge economy , and evernote is the killer app for deep work . it allows you to capture your ideas and cultivate them . evernote is the killer app for deep work . that rings true for me . we need one great place to capture the knowledge in our lives , and then i think there s a lot of opportunity in helping people easily manipulate that and turn it into other things . whether it s turning numbers into charts , or turning text into html . there needs to be a central repository . and it s not email , or dropbox , or slack . it s interesting forrester or idc , they don t have a category for note taking . but we intuitively know , you have groups like students and knowledge workers that basically take notes for a living . so we think the market is real , and we think it s big . and we think there s an opportunity , to your point , to connect it to action . one of the things we re excited about is moving from more of a service to a platform . to play well with others . we ve done some of these things ampnbspwe announced an integration with microsoft outlook recently . these are small things , but they speak to a larger strategy . we need to remove friction we sometimes say capture at the speed at which you think . to that point over the years , evernote s core product has gotten a reputation for being bloated . yep . it has that microsoft office problem where it looks like most of the features are only used by percent of users who would all scream bloody murder if they ever went away . is there a simpler evernote in our future ? and if so , how will you get there ? it s one of the biggest challenges we have as a company . but it s also an opportunity for us . the fact that the product is so versatile , obviously that s awesome . why we re coming back to the core first principles is to say , what is it we re really trying to accomplish ? let s remove distractions . without going into all the details of which features will come and go , yes you can expect to see a more simplified , cleaner experience , powered by more intelligent software . we have , people sign up for the product every day . we have , people sign up for the product every day . that s kind of crazy . to this day , we don t do paid marketing , we don t have a sales force . it s organic . so one of the things we re obsessed with is engagement in the first seven days of all these people who come in . when you re at million plus registered users , you re not talking to early adopters . you re talking to the early majority , or the late majority . they need some guidance , and we need to provide that guidance . the trickier part which i think will rely on more intelligent software will basically use cues and artificial intelligence to do a progressive reveal . you don t need to throw everything at someone all at once . we re experimenting with those kinds of things . along with dropbox , evernote was once a poster child for consumer productivity software . now it seems more doubtful that a huge audience of people is willing to spend or even a year on note taking software . what happened with the consumer market ? and does evernote have a future in it ? listen , markets go through evolutions . it s very classical , what s happening . i think dropbox is a particularly interesting case it s in the crosshairs of google , microsoft , apple , and so on . it has some unique characteristics i won t comment on . but with note taking you have a whole series of low end competitors , simple note taking apps , and there s tons of those in the app store . they do one thing reasonably well you kinda get what you pay for . and then you have larger players who are basically bundling things into suites that s business . for us to survive and thrive , we need to think through where we are unique . we need to think through where we are unique . this single place , this trusted independent place , we think it s a logical place to start . we do really , really well at acquiring people through word of mouth . the challenge for us is that point you made how do i translate that into value for a new person ? that s where we re obsessing . once people find a way to bring it into their lives , we do above average in terms of paying . the other thing , too , is if you look at the long arc of time who cares the most about productivity ? companies do . the economy is fueled by productivity . that s the story of america ! so i think there can be a way that companies contribute to our monetization efforts . so let s talk about business . evernote invested significantly in a feature called work chat , which allows for collaboration around individual notes . but it doesn t seem like the company has gotten much of a foothold . how will you tackle the business market ? should we expect the company will orient itself more toward collaboration uses ? it s important not to try to be all things to all people . no . it s important to not try to be all things to all people . you have slack , you have hipchat . that s a well served market . let s just politely say , collaboration and chat is well served . so i don t see it as , we need to try to do everything . if we do well with frictionless capture of ideas , and world class search and retrieval , i think we can partner with a lot of other players . collaboration is a fact , but it doesn t necessarily mean we have to carry all the water . i d just as soon do some integrations and partnerships to fill out that part of it . two or three years from now , do you expect the bulk of your revenues will still come from individuals buying subscriptions ? it s too early for me to tell . but it s a good question . i think you can see the balance between the individual paying and a company paying it will become more balanced . but time will tell . evernote has taken lots of different approaches to growth over the years making business software , acquiring companies , launching a marketplace of branded goods . are you saying now that your plan is to go back to basics ? it s not quite the basics i think we ve done that already . now we need to evolve from that . it s been liberating to understand that this thing is really frickin powerful , and arguably more relevant today than when it started . so i don t want to say the basics that s underselling it a little bit . it s going back to the essence of what evernote means this home where you store your thoughts , your ideas , which then get moved along to action . companies like apple and microsoft seem to smell blood in the water , and are showily promoting tools they built for you to import your notes for evernote . so if i m a frustrated evernote user thinking of switching , what s your message to me ? every day we wake up and do something . we ll do some big things over the long arc , and every day we ll do some small things . that s really the answer . if we re not delivering what you want ampnbsp shame on us . it s very interesting , the microsoft stuff . we ve had an importer for onenote for six or seven years . people are asking , what s my response ? first of all , they re a partner . but also , we ve always been about open access to information . one of our laws is that your data is your data take it ! if we re not delivering what you want shame on us . we should be listening and doing a better job . but if people want to take their stuff elsewhere , they should be able to . so i think it was a little bit of poor form on their part , but i m not too concerned about that . i guess i m just looking for a little harder sell for the concerned user . we re on the right path . we re self sustaining . we ve got what we need . we ve got the team in place that s going to make this transition happen . it s already happening . and i think this going back to our essence is being well received , and i think it s going to allow us to play in a much larger market . we haven t even talked about adjacencies like education and evernote for business . but i m not going to oversell this . the proof will be in the pudding . 	 late on friday night , intel snuck out the news that it s bailing on the smartphone market . despite being the world s best known processor maker , intel was only a bit player in the mobile space dominated by qualcomm , apple , and samsung , and it finally chose to cut its losses and cancel its next planned chip , broxton . this followed downbeat quarterly earnings , , job cuts , and a major restructuring at a company that s had a very busy april . intel is still one of the giants of the global tech industry , but it s no longer as healthy and sprightly as it used to be . the bane of intel s existence for the past decade or so has been the transition to mobile computing . it wasn t supposed to be that way . having secured a commanding lead as the premier provider of desktop pc processors , intel had a clear eyed strategy for extending its dominance into the mobile realm . a series of ignominious failures has left intel reelingwith the help of microsoft in , intel inaugurated the category of ultra mobile pcs umpcs , which were the stylus and touch friendly precursors to today s ultra versatile tablets . they combined low voltage celeron and pentium m chips with windows vista , and like everything else touched by vista , they flopped . unattainable pricing and inadequate battery life consigned the umpc to the status of a historical footnote . the same fate befell intel s mobile internet device mid initiative , which saw the chipmaker pushing and incentivizing its hardware partners to build mini internet tablets like the nokia n . pervasive problems with affordability , battery life , clunky design , and ill suited software prevented mids from ever becoming a mass market success . on the software front , intel recognized the need for a tailored operating system to make the most of mobile pcs and sought to develop its own linux variant titled moblin . moblin never convinced anyone outside of intel , and was eventually merged with nokia s maemo to produce meego , which in turn merged with samsung s bada and is now known as tizen . well , it s only barely known , even by owners of its most successful product , the gear s smartwatch . the series of post moblin software mergers has been merely the consolidation of repeated mobile failures . read more intel spent more than billion to catch up in mobile , then it gave upintel s ventures into mobile hardware and software development show that even a great idea is only as good as its execution . the mids and umpcs of yesteryear were aimed at the same usage scenarios as the phablets and pro tablets of today but they were compromised and premature , and therefore rejected by the market . this has cost intel dearly , with the company lavishing billions on developing suitable processors and modems to put into its various mobile undertakings . the multibillion dollar mobile costs have spiraled in recent years a loss of . billion in was followed by a loss of . billion in which eventually forced intel to combine its mobile and pc earnings reports in order to disguise its unproductive spending . the tragedy of intel s mobile failure is that the company foresaw all the threats to its business and acted to preempt them . it just didn t do so very well . that being said , intel s the victim of its bad decision making almost as much as its poor execution . favoring wimax over lte was a historically bad decisionone of the fateful choices that intel made around was to commit itself to wimax as the g standard of the future . qualcomm went the other way , prioritizing lte instead , and now the latter has a significant lead in designing and integrating lte modems , while the former is scrambling and struggling to catch up . the total defeat of wimax almost wiped out sprint , its biggest us purveyor and advocate , and it put intel on the backfoot in adopting the true g standard of the future , which turned out to be lte . at this point , even if intel were to double its already vast spending , bridging the gap of years of research , development , and experience would be practically impossible . in spite of its unhappy mobile history , intel persisted in trying to compete because it knew how central mobile devices were becoming to our lives . last year , its atom processors even looked like they had a shot at denting qualcomm s market dominance , thanks in large part to the qualcomm snapdragon chip s power and heat issues . there was a small opening , but this year s snapdragon is an absolute beast that conclusively shuts the door on any further intel incursions . read more intel sees itself as a communications and connectivity company the top three smartphone vendors apple , samsung , and huawei each produce their own processors . at mobile world congress this year , xiaomi , another large scale smartphone maker , co branded its launch event with qualcomm . and global names like lg , htc , and sony basically only shop at the snapdragon aisle for their flagship phones . intel s most loyal hardware partner is asus , which makes a habit of announcing interesting new devices at computex in june and not shipping them until the end of the year . the most feted intel atom powered smartphone to date is probably the zenfone , a distinction that speaks for itself . without any unique advantages to its atom cpu line and no captive market like it has on the desktop , intel is right to bow out of the smartphone processor race . it s a merciless competition that has already ousted big names like nvidia and texas instruments , and intel will be better off figuring out different parts of the mobile computing world where it can participate profitably . ceo brian krzanich put the cloud and data center first atop a list of intel s new priorities in a recent blog post , reiterating the idea that the company will transition to facilitating connectivity as its main area of competence . discrete intel lte modems will still be around , and the company seems to think it can recapture its mobile competitiveness by being a leader in the adoption of the incoming g wireless standards . to that end , intel doesn t intend to kill off atom entirely , and still plans to offer a chip for tablets later this year , codenamed apollo lake . even moore s law is hitting a wallto its credit , intel has always operated under the assumption that mobile computing will eventually supplant the desktop and consign the old pc boxes to niche use status . we email on our phones , ideate on our phablets , and write and create on our tablets as steven sinofsky , former boss of windows , recently articulated with respect to the ipad pro . the primary form of personal computer is changing , which is why ultrabooks and hybrid laptops are so prominent in intel s marketing and development efforts . the low power core m , intel told me last year , was the most important variant of the skylake processor family , and the company s ongoing mission is to move with its users to more portable form factors . intel remains a diverse and strongly profitable company . there will always be pc gamers and video producers looking for the latest and fastest cpu . but while the core business that s kept intel going for so many years isn t disappearing , its importance and primacy are being steadily eroded by the insatiable growth of mobile computing . even moore s law , the intel co founder s prediction about the constant growth of processing power in chips , is hitting a wall now . intel s desktop cpus are being pushed further back on the roadmap while some of its mobile ones are being deleted entirely . it s an uncertain future for what used to be one of the most assured companies in tech . 	 when he was a kid , michael butcher s dad took him to an army base where the government had flown in refugees from a natural disaster in asia . it was a time when governments would just do that kind of thing , without worrying about the politics much , he recalled . butcher grew up playing with those kids , developing an empathy towards them . when i saw the events of last summer , the kids dying in the sea , i knew i had to do more than just give to charity , he said . amidst chronic food , shelter and medication shortages , technology was the last concern on everyone s minds except butcher s . i figured i could bring the tech community together , at least in europe , to address this situation in the creative ways i know they are capable of , said butcher , a techcrunch editor at large . in september , butcher set up a facebook group and a twitter feed for ampnbsptechfugees , a new movement to do exactly that . the next day , it had members on facebook . the day after , . today , it s approaching , members . within the first few months , the not for profit organization arranged conferences and hackathons , a way for the tech community to come together and start to think about how it could help . ampnbspit soon attracted speakers from agencies like unhcr , unicef , and the red cross . tech companies came forward to sponsor the events to make them free for attendees . london the first stepthe first conference was held in london in october and attracted over people from london s tech scene . many diverse ideas took flight an ampnbspairbnb for refugees , a group messaging service for refugees without smartphones or internet , and apps to connect refugees to locals for advice and support . the most recent hackathon ampnbsptook place this weekend on the other side of the world in melbourne , australia . in some ways , you can see techfugees events are opening the doors of tech support to ngos and charities , and in the long term , we want these events to result in incubations of those projects at ngos and deployment of technology on the ground , not just cool meetups , said jos phine goube , techfugees chief operating officer . butcher and his team started by conducting research into what projects were out there as part of their techfugeeslive day , where they did ampnbspan eight hour live stream of interviews with technologists working on refugee related tech . they also get feedback through a weekly newsletter about scalable technology related to refugees and refugee agencies , which goes out to over subscribers . the group s model is based on proximity and problem identification . techfugees must stay close to people who have visibility into relevant issues . that might be the big formal ngos but it can also apply to the many informal groups and of course the refugees themselves , ampnbspthe website states . stemming from such interactions , butcher believes the group has identified ways tech can not only address problems related to cell phone connectivity and wifi access , but also education , health , and cultural integration into host countries . seeking volunteers for refugee initiativesat techfugees events , entrepreneurs have sketched out ideas for deploying wifi in the field and a location based app for directing refugees to the nearest centers of help or aid . the meetups work to create new tools , but also help to source volunteers for startups involved with refugee initiatives , such as ampnbspmigreat , an online legal assistant to the asylum application providing immigration advice . ampnbsprefugees on rails and ampnbspkizcode , two startups teaching refugees to code , came to look for people willing to found local chapters and teach coding . mujde esin , founder of kizcode , hails from turkey . growing up , she was deprived of education for years because of ampnbsprudimentary educational infrastructure . after she learnt to code , she got a scholarship and earned a master s degree in the uk . it changed my life , esin said at the london techfugees conference . i would like to change other people s lives and i believe coding is going to change many girls lives in underprivileged communities . refugees can have special privacy needsas each hackathon goes by , it becomes apparent that there are no tailor made solutions for the crisis . while syrians might come armed with smartphones and working knowledge of english , some asylum seekers may arrive ampnbspnot knowing how to operate a cell phone or speak any language other than their native tongues . on the other side of the world , countries are not experiencing similar volumes of refugees , nor do they have the same history of refugee influx . but the australian chapter has pitched in by training hackers through webinars to understand the special needs of refugees , for example what it might mean in term of privacy settings on an app when trying to aid someone fleeing a repressive government . scaling solutions to the refugee crisisas the size and scope of the organization expands , the team is working to create an open sourced database that will track all projects for everyone to see . that way , existing ideas can be built upon and entrepreneurs can avoid duplication . the goal is improved coordination and efficiency across all sectors , be it delivering aid , sharing data , or facilitating emergency response . this is what tech is all about says butcher scaling of a solution . as the organization continues to grow techfugees is looking to launch defined working groups out of local chapters . each chapter will decide on an area of expertise in technology delivered to refugees housing , integration , education . eventually , the techfugees founders want these events to result in the widespread deployment of technology on the ground , but they have to be careful . you can t just deploy an alpha or beta . if you get it wrong , you don t just lose users . a faulty or badly thought out product could turn into a matter of life or death , says butcher . 	 going into this year s cinemacon , the annual las vegas trade show for movie exhibitors , studios , and vendors , the biggest question wasn t whether some company was going to pull a blockbuster announcement out of its hat . it was what kind of impact the screening room , sean parker s recently revealed service that will stream first run movies to the home , would have on the proceedings . it was directly mentioned by name only once during the main studio presentations , but that didn t really matter from the tenor of the conference , it was clear the screening room s threat of technological disruption is poised to change the movie business forever . word first broke about the screening room back in march , and parker s pitch is said to be relatively simple consumers buy a box that lets them watch first run movies , starting the same day they appear in theaters , for each . it would effectively collapse the theatrical window the period of time in which new films are available only in movie theaters and to compensate for fears over lost revenue , exhibitors would get up to of that rental price . parker had already lined up some heavy hitters before the news went public , with j . j . abrams , steven spielberg , peter jackson , and ron howard all proponents of the system , seeing it as an opportunity to grow the movie business . other heavyweights like james cameron , christopher nolan , and todd phillips not to mention most theater chains , were less than enthusiastic . given that the screening room planned to hold closed door meetings at cinemacon traditionally a show that plays directly to the wants and needs of theater chains the stage was set for an ideological war . every studio at cinemacon critiqued the serviceevery single studio that presented to exhibitors during cinemacon took time to proclaim their love and commitment to the theatrical window , and while none mentioned parker s service by name , the implication was clear . warner bros . ceo kevin tsujihara , for example , told the audience that we are not going to let a third party or middle man come between us . it wasn t until cameron above came onstage during fox s presentation that the screening room was directly name checked , with the writer director stating that i think it s absolutely essential for movies to be offered exclusively in theaters on their initial release . the audiences cheered , of course , but that s what you d expect them to do . cinemacon is a trade show for exhibitors , and when cameron made his statements , he was talking directly to the people whose financial interests would be threatened by an exodus to at home viewing . but if you drilled down in the comments a little further , most were less hard line stances than gentle reassurances . after his initial statement , tsujihara went on to tell exhibitors that when new services emerged , we will explore them with each of you more of let s see , than a hell no , we won t go . the ambiguity makes sense ultimately studios have to chase the money , whether that means defiantly sticking with theaters or supporting some hybrid option . what they know they can t do is stick their heads in the sand the same way the music business did , and for that reason alone it was j . j . abrams who delivered the most honest comments of the conference . receiving cinemacon s showman of the year award at the opening night presentation , he took the stage clearly knowing that his support for the screening room needed to be addressed . and while he celebrated the benefits of the theatrical experience there is nothing better than going to the movies , and there never will be he also nodded to the inevitability of technological progress , stating that we have to adapt if the industry at large was going to remain viable . j . j . abrams delivered the most honest comments of the showperhaps not coincidentally , during cinemacon abrams production company announced that it was going to be releasing star trek beyond in the new high end barco escape format , which uses three separate screens to create one massive , ultra widescreen image . it s yet another example of the many new theatrical technologies that are being used to help differentiate movie theaters from home viewing , but it also underscored the problematic dynamic that s facing the industry the same one that will make the success of services like the screening room inevitable . according to the national association of theater owners , movie theater attendance peaked in , and while there have been periodic bumps they ve been steadily declining ever since . to compensate , theaters have rolled out new technologies like d , imax , and more recently , premium large format theaters all of which command a more expensive ticket price . as a result , box office grosses are growing year over year , but it s actually just less people paying more money . the whole system has turned into a feedback loop d and imax prices make up for declines in attendance , but those same prices make watching at home more attractive , so theaters roll out even more new formats that cost more , and so on . the system has turned into a price raising feedback loopthe end game is all too easy to see , and it s something that george lucas was predicting years ago . what you re going to end up with is fewer theaters , he said during a panel at the university of southern california in . bigger theaters , with a lot of nice things . going to the movies is going to cost you bucks , maybe . it will take time to get there , to be sure , but things like the hateful eight s recent roadshow presentation , or the gourmet dining from the ipic theater chain are already laying the groundwork that will help transform movies into more of an exclusive , high end experience . but all of these advances are ultimately defensive measures meant to stop the bleeding , and none address the needs of people that simply aren t going out to the movies as much these days . those potential customers , put off by mediocre theaters and expensive tickets , are the ideal market for the screening room . but like the music labels before them , most major theater chains are stubbornly holding on to their traditional model , convinced that as long as they keep any reasonably priced service from launching , options like prima cinema already do this for the comically wealthy that they ll be able to bend consumers to their will . but technological progress doesn t stop out of respect for existing business models , no matter how disruptive the consequences , and on the surface , the applause from exhibitors at cinemacon this year reeked of one thing arrogance . the kind of arrogance that keeps an industry from realizing that its rising prices are encouraging people to watch things at home that its over reliance on tentpole franchises have already trained millions that , unless they like one specific type of film , theaters aren t for them and that an entirely new generation of movie lovers are growing up watching movies on computers , tablets , and smartphones , and don t feel nearly as compelled to trek out to a multiplex . beneath the arrogance was something even more palpable fearbut beneath that arrogance was something even more palpable fear . chains know the above numbers as well as anyone , and despite all the theatrics the screening room still gave its closed door demos and met with mpaa chairman chris dodd . when everyone in a business is spending their time addressing a new player , it s clear who is setting the agenda , and by the end of the show it seemed obvious that the emergence of a first run rental service wasn t a matter of if , but when . if movie theaters and the industry at large act , they may be able to assist in the way the screening room develops . they could ensure it s something that complements traditional theatrical viewing , as part of a holistic first run movie ecosystem that everyone profits from . if they don t , either because of ignorance or because they refuse to face competition , the current cycle will continue . theater attendance will continue to slowly decline , despite the influx of new marvel , dc , and star wars movies , until they lose the commanding power they currently hold . with the screening room , parker is giving movie theaters the opportunity that record stores never had , but it s up to them to take it . 	 like most newly published authors , andrew groen has spent a lot of time lately doing talks and trying to get the word out about his new project . he s travelled to popular destinations , and done his best to convince people to buy his history book . the difference is that groen isn t traveling the real world instead , he s piloting a ship inside the online game eve online , venturing to bustling trade hubs and using the in game chat to spread the news . his book , empires of eve , chronicles the formative years of the sci fi virtual world and the book tour is befitting its subject . flying around and doing it in eve space is very futuristic , says groen . eve online is a relatively niche game , but one that often makes headlines thanks to its massive battles , which can involve thousands of real people piloting thousands of spaceships . damages from these virtual wars can often cost the equivalent of thousands of real world dollars . unlike most massively multiplayer online games mmos , eve online is largely shaped by its players , not the developers . its inhabitants create their own alliances and governments , even religions , and this in turn leads to strife , conflict , and eventually warfare . for groen , this sense of permanence unlike most online games , eve players can build and destroy things that impact the rest of the community is what made the game an ideal fit for a history book . we can look at eve , and we can say this looks just like human history . human history is playing out inside of this virtual world , he explains . we re seeing all of these real , amazing aspects of humanity revenge and greed and friendship and love inside of this virtual space . that to me is a harbinger of things to come . his book empires of eve , which released earlier this month after a successful kickstarter campaign in , isn t a complete history of the game , but instead puts into context a cataclysmic battle known as the great war , an event that spanned nearly two years from to . though it s a book about a video game , it reads more like a sci fi game of thrones , with iconic leaders , shocking betrayals , and devastating battles . the book does a fantastic job of putting events into context , letting you understand the bigger picture , while focusing on the key personalities . by the end , tens of thousands of people from the miners gathering materials to build new ships to the leaders spouting propaganda on the game s forums have been involved in the virtual conflict in some form . and the outcome ultimately shaped the future of eve online s power structure . two years ago nobody was even intending to write these stories down . groen , a former journalist who has written for places like wired and ars technica , spent the past two years researching the book . that included talking to more than players , poring over forum posts , and analyzing data from sites like dotlan , which tracks things like the number of ships destroyed in a battle or which corporations owned which star systems on which dates . now that the book is out , he s found that outside of a few outliers unhappy with how they were portrayed the eve community has largely embraced the book . it s easy to forget now that there is a history book . two years ago nobody was even intending to write these stories down , he says . they were going to be lost . hardcore players in the eve community understand that , and i think are pretty thankful for that . he adds that eve is in the unfortunate position where there is only one historian right now , so there s not that many people to have debates with . one of the most fascinating things about reading empires of eve is the various ways the barriers between the real world and eve online can blur . sometimes the results of a large scale battle involving thousands of people will come down to a technical error , as one side experiences more lag than the other , thus dooming them to defeat . other times , a huge influx of players will occur simply because another online game shut down , resulting in a shift in the game s power structure . groen found found that the real and virtual world can blur when it comes to the players , too . though people often played as characters very different from their real personalities , they d often slip back into the role they used to play , becoming a mixture of the two . that s particularly true of the book s main character , groen says , a controversial figure known as sirmolle . he s very nice , very kind , he says of his time interviewing him , but every once in awhile he ll dip into that space dictator character , known as sirmolle , and suddenly he s a very formidable person . he s a little bit mean , he has mean things to say about his enemies , things like that . when the emotion takes over , that kind of teleports people back into that moment . he wouldn t talk to me because my in game character was not the right race . it wasn t easy to find all of the key figures in the story . it s an incredibly difficult reporting challenge to get in touch with somebody when the only thing that you know about them is the alias with which they played a video game years ago , groen notes . but for the most part he says people were more than willing to talk . in some cases , the emotion was still raw from those who were defeated and still hold grudges . a few people wanted to keep their identities secret , because they didn t want to be associated with their virtual life . and in one instance a player refused to talk to groen simply because he had the wrong avatar . he wouldn t talk to me because my in game character was not the right race , and his in game character was racist against my in game character , groen says . this was a guy who was so deeply into his role play character that he refused to talk to a historian because our in game characters were racist against each other . eve online is sometimes described by critics as boring . despite the grand stories told within its virtual space , the actual act of playing isn t all that exciting it s filled with complicated menus and a lot of busy work . for this reason the game seems to attract a certain kind of player . if there s one thing that i really took away from talking to a lot of eve players , it s that they are uncommonly intelligent , groen says . it is disturbingly common to be talking to an eve online player who is a famous fleet commander , or a grand leader of men , and you say well , what do you do in the real world ? and they ll say oh , i run a nuclear reactor up in portland just nonchalantly , or i run an international logistics company or i used to be a dc attorney . a well placed source has told groen there s a corporation in the game made up entirely of fortune ceos , though he hasn t been able to confirm this for himself . the biggest takeaway from reading empires of eve is that , while the events are set in a video game , they re still real in a lot of ways especially for those who experienced them firsthand . the emotions are real , and years after the events took place people still feel strongly about them , whether it s the thrill of victory or the despair of loss . it s not quite as significant as something that happens in the real world , but it s friggin close . groen says . the things that you re able to achieve within this game are staggeringly large . when you are a human being who can rise to a level in eve where , people will do what you say , that s not a digital accomplishment . these accomplishments don t really need to have an asterisk beside them to be interesting . 	 the tiny girl in the cloud city is shivering . her patched dress and leggings are stiff in the snow flecked wind that s blowing over her temporary shelter , located at the base of a floating stone bridge . moving with the slight staccato of a stop motion clay figurine , she looks real enough to touch , strangely convincing for a cartoon character who only exists inside a virtual reality headset . this is allumette , the orphan girl that vr film studio ampnbsppenrose ampnbsphopes will win audiences hearts at this week s tribeca film festival . allumette , which premieres today in full , was first previewed ampnbspat the sundance film festival earlier this year . even half finished , it was one of the most artistically complex works we saw at the show , a miniature animated film that could be walked through like a diorama . now , it s a roughly minute experience loosely based on hans christian andersen s the little match girl . as allumette whose name translates to match in french tries to keep warm on a winter night , the story flashes back through vignettes from her life , leading to a somber conclusion that anyone who read the source material will probably foresee . using an htc vive or oculus rift headset , participants can also move around several feet of real world space , looking inside buildings and seeing what other people in the city are doing . spoilers for allumette ahead . while virtual reality has become increasingly popular in the last few years , many of the experiences made for it have been simple and short , designed for cheap headsets that don t track body motion and use the limited processing power of mobile phones . for penrose founder eugene chung , these small experiments are comparable to ampnbspthe arrival of a train at la ciotat station a minute long , non narrative film that engrossed audiences in . allumette , he hopes , is moving us closer to vr s version of ampnbspthe great train robbery , a later breakthrough in narrative cinema . we learned a lot by having the full structured story , where you have a true beginning , middle , and end where there s a story arc and the character goes through a certain set of experiences , says chung . i guess we re always wondering does that work in vr ? released last year , ampnbsppenrose s first feature was a short vr experience called ampnbspthe rose and i , inspired by the little prince . ampnbspthe rose and i has a story of sorts , but allumette has a much more formal three act narrative that expands andersen s original tale . the little match girl doesn t have choices being made by people . it s just the little match girl getting frozen to death , right ? says chung . allumette s story ampnbspbegins with the titular character arriving with her mother on a floating ship , but when the ship catches fire , her mother sacrifices herself to save allumette and many of the townspeople from harm . finally , allumette makes her own sacrifice , giving up her last match to help an old man . the ideas that are in there were from some deeply personal experiences . the ideas that are in there were from some deeply personal experiences , says chung . since sundance , he s been gratified by the response to penrose s latest work . one of the times we screened it recently , i remember taking the headset off and the person was in tears , he says . you can get people to laugh in vr you can get people to become afraid in vr . i would say fear is kind of the easiest emotion to evoke . but can you evoke an emotional response ? can you really connect to these creatures that are this big ? he asks , using two fingers to indicate allumette s small form . i think we get impressed by people s honest reactions , and their emotional response to it . one of the other big changes since sundance , though , is that high end vr is no longer found only in trade shows , art galleries , and limited public tours . since the rift and vive both launched in the last few weeks , developers have started releasing complex and substantive virtual reality games and experiences , with more on the way . few of these can match the meticulous beauty of allumette its designers boast that each fluffy cloud was individually created using a vr based art tool . but the games have proven that people can spend hours at a time in headsets , suggesting that we may already be ready for longer and more involved experiences . a gritty vr sci fi game ampnbspmight not have the light artistry of an animated short from penrose or the similarly focused oculus story studio , but it can be narratively complex in its own way . still , there are clear moments of epiphany watching allumette . among other things , it features the most effective example i ve seen of someone using vr s interactive elements here , the ability to peer inside objects to see hidden details for dramatic tension . when allumette s ship catches fire , it s possible to see the danger long before she does by sticking your face inside the hull , undercutting an apparently innocent scene . and however it uses vr , allumette is also a widely appealing piece of fiction , told without text or dialogue . our belief is that augmented and virtual reality will eventually be the next major computing platform , and right now the most obvious first step is toward the gaming demographic , says chung . but he hopes allumette is something you want to show everybody , whether it s your grandmother , your child , or anyone around the world . while allumette s own story appears over by the end of her short , penrose doesn t think it s done with the floating city , and chung won t call even the version of allumette i see finished . ampnbsp we ve always thought of ourselves as creating worlds , not just the stories and characters within them , he later elaborates . the story s sort of the beginning , sort of that first step into it . at the very end of the short , participants are given their own matchstick in the form of a motion controller , allowing them to run their hands over the city s contours and feel vibrations in response . it s an interesting move past the visual , and a hint at how vr could change in the future a future that nobody , at penrose or anywhere else , can begin to predict . 	 thanks to a brain implant , ian burkhart can use his hand to play video games for the first time since the accident that broke his neck six years ago . the finding , published today in nature , is the first instance of a person living with paralysis regaining the ability to move simply by thinking . burkhart was years old when he dove into unexpectedly shallow waters while vacationing with friends . the impact severely damaged his spinal cord and left him paralyzed from the chest down . but a chip placed in the left side of his brain now lets the year old relay signals from his brain down to his right arm . the technology , which isn t yet available to other patients , has allowed burkhart to grasp cups and even move his fingers independently from each other to play a game that resembles guitar hero . because of burkhart s success , the researchers think the technology might one day help people who are quadriplegic regain some autonomy . i know firsthand what was taken away from me after my injury . i know firsthand what was taken away from me after my injury , burkhart told reporters during a press conference yesterday . so the first time when i was able to open and close my hand , it really gave me that sense of hope for the future . about . million people in the us have some form of paralysis . this means that about out of every americans has trouble moving their arms or legs , which can make living independently difficult . in burkhart s case , the injury to his spine left him unable to walk and move his arm below the bicep . from a neurological standpoint , this means that when he tries to move a finger , the signals that his brain sends down to his hand are blocked . for researchers who study paralysis , that disconnect is hard to fix . that s why some scientists think it might actually be easier to reroute those signals and bypass paralyzing injuries altogether . now , scientists have done just that using an implant the size of a pencil eraser . the system that allows burkhart to move his fingers consists of three main parts the tiny brain chip , a computer , and a sleeve full of electrodes placed on his forearm . when burkhart thinks of a hand motion , the implant detects the signals in his brain and send them to a computer . then , the computer deciphers them and relays the information to the sleeve wrapped around his right arm . from there , the sleeve uses electrical impulses to trigger muscle contractions that allow burkhart to accomplish the hand movement he s thinking of . so , in a way , the computer acts like a translator that relays information from the brain to burkhart s muscles . ohio state university battelle memorial institute perfecting the technology was a years long process that started even before burkhart received the implant . in the very first stages , three years ago , the researchers spent a lot of time imaging burkhart s brain as he visualized performing hand motions that the researchers projected on a screen . during these sessions , the scientists recorded his brain signals and tried to match them to corresponding hand motions . in april , burkhart underwent a three hour long surgery to place the implant in his brain . two months later , he moved his fingers for the first time , although at the time , the movements didn t help him to do much . now , burkhart can pick up a phone and hold spoon in his hand . to practice moving his fingers , burkhart plays frets on fire , a video game that resembles guitar hero but that has been modified for one handed play . it s the first time this has been done and it s a very big step forward in this field . he s not only picking up objects , but he s manipulating the objects . he can switch between a power grasp such as picking up a glass and then he can switch to a fine pinch grasp to pick up a small object such as a stir stick , and actually manipulate that and a few finer motor skills , says chad bouton , a neuroscientist at the feinstein institute for medical research who co authored the study the technology was invented at batelle memorial institute , bouton s previous employer . this is a first it s the first time this has been done and it s a very big step forward in this field . even though burkhart can perform some complex tasks , he still can t spread his fingers to type on a keyboard , for instance , and he has very little control over the force that his fingers currently apply on a given object . that s because the chip in his brain only contains electrodes , which isn t enough to translate precise hand movements . to fix that , the researchers want to increase the number of electrodes to a couple thousand . they would also like to compress the computer to make it fit entirely inside the implant and get rid of the wires by using wireless technology . if they can do all that , people living with paralysis might actually be able to use the system on the go , bouton says . and it might be possible to use the technology to help people regain some motion in their legs as well . we think it can stay in the brain for five years . that said , the system is still experimental . bouton declined to tell the verge how much the current system costs , but it s pretty clear that improving it isn t going to come cheap . there s also some questions surrounding how long the implant might be able to remain inside the brain without being rejected . to be honest there just haven t been enough people that have had it in their brain to know how long truly this will last , says nick anetta , an engineer at battelle memorial institute and another study co author . but we think it can stay in the brain for five years . because of this , the system probably won t be ready for use outside the lab any time soon . but that doesn t mean burkhart is going to be first and last person to use the implant a second patient is scheduled to being the study this summer the researchers say . right now , it s just in the clinical setting , but with enough people working on this and with enough attention , it s something that i will be able to use at my home , burkhart said . this is something that s working i will be able to use my hand again . video by miriam nielsen . 	 it s a little after am on a monday morning and i m in the front seat of a black mercedes , cruising around a brussels neighborhood that has become known in the media as jihad central . it was here , in molenbeek , that isis affiliated terrorists hatched plans to attack paris in november and brussels last month . and it was here that salah abdeslam , recently regarded as europe s most wanted man , was captured by security forces in a march raid . but on this bright morning , as i drive around with ibrahim ouassari , a year old lifelong molenbeek resident , the neighborhood seems entirely calm . veiled women walk along narrow streets and colorful storefronts , returning home after dropping their kids off at school elderly moroccan men drink mint tea at a corner cafe . and at one point , an older man flags our car down , asks for a ride to his doctor s appointment , and hops in the back seat . after we drop him off , i find out that he and ouassari didn t know one another . it s not very jihadist , is it ? ouassari says . it s not baghdad or syria . parts of molenbeek hardly feel like europe , either . the municipality covers a sprawling area of about , residents , with large immigrant populations from morocco , turkey , pakistan , and africa . it s not far from central brussels , home to soaring bureaucratic buildings and pristine tourist attractions , though it faces a very different set of problems . high unemployment and crime have plagued molenbeek for years , and many young residents have struggled to find new opportunities conditions that may help explain the neighborhood s connections to terrorist attacks . ouassari wants to change that . last year , he launched molengeek , a working space and pre incubator for young entrepreneurs in the neighborhood . located in a converted office building on a quiet cobblestone square , the space is open seven days a week , and regularly filled with young people hunched over laptops or sipping tea . there s no entrance fee or application process , and participants cover a wide range of ages and skill levels . some come to work on their own projects others come to collaborate or attend workshops . a dedicated coding school is in the works . the converted office space that houses molengeek . amar toor in the working space , ouassari and his small team help participants to shape and market their ideas , before connecting them with incubators that would provide the resources needed to develop a startup . the aim , he says , is to help demystify the startup world for young people in molenbeek , and to open doors that would have otherwise remained shut . ouassari was born in molenbeek to moroccan parents , and he grew up a few doors down from the home of abdeslam , one of the paris attackers . he dropped out of high school at the age of it didn t interest me and worked in local social organizations until the age of , when he bought his first computer . he taught himself how to code , and eventually launched an it consultancy . later , he created a site called ampnbspcrowdfly , where job seekers can post their resumes without disclosing their gender or name an attempt to mitigate discrimination against women or applicants with muslim last names . we just want to give them the right tools . if i can do all this without any academic background , everybody in molenbeek can do this , he says . we just want to give them the right tools . ampnbsp molengeek has secured funding from microsoft s innovation center and other local groups , and has held a handful of events since launching last may , including a january ampnbspcompetition where participants presented their startup ideas to a jury of entrepreneurs , businesspeople , and politicians . one of the winning teams from that event , a startup that would allow people with different sized feet to purchase individual shoes , is now working to develop their idea with a brussels incubator . at the end of this month , molengeek will hold its first hackathon . announced a few days after last month s terrorist attacks on the brussels airport and a metro station , the event aims to develop new ways for the city s emergency services to coordinate and communicate with the public . co founders julie foulon and ibrahim ouassari . amar toor we really wanted to respond to the attacks with something positive from molenbeek , says julie foulon , who co founded molengeek with ouassari and continues to work at an incubator in brussels . she says young people from molenbeek are too often alienated from the startup scene because they don t see themselves in it . the tech community here is very closed off , it s very belgian , says foulon , who also created ampnbspgirleek , a tech and startup site for women . here in brussels , people of maghreb origin make up one third of the population , but they re sidelined . they are never part of the tech ecosystem . when i visited molengeek this week , the activity was limited to one room it will span the entire ground floor once renovations are completed , and the scene was pretty quiet . at one end of a long table , a veiled woman in her s worked diligently at a desktop computer next to a white man of about the same age . at the other end , a man in his late s , named charife , spoke with ouassari about his idea an app for organized races and other athletic competitions . it allows us to become vectors of change in society . hamza el mokhtari , a year old web developer , was in another corner of the room , finishing up the online delivery menu for a local halal fast food chain . el mokhtari has been working at the space since its launch , and was part of the team that won top honors at the first molengeek jury event . their pitch modular clothes . for him , molengeek has opened up a new perspective . when we re at school , we re taught to conform to try to be hired by a company or work at an office all day , says el mokhtari , who s originally from morocco and spent much of his life in molenbeek . but entrepreneurship is a different way of thinking , it allows us to become vectors of change in society . . . it really opens your eyes to new things . molenbeek is home to around , people , including a large population of moroccan immigrants . amar toor yet the outlook for many other youth in the neighborhood remains grim . unemployment among molenbeek residents aged to is at percent , compared to percent for all of brussels , and many muslims who make up between and percent of the neighborhood s population have struggled to integrate within mainstream belgian society . experts believe that may help explain why isis has been able to find so many recruits there . on a per capita basis , belgium has the highest number of citizens who have left to fight in iraq and syria , and molenbeek has had connections to several terrorist plots over the years the madrid train bombing in , a foiled attack on a jewish museum in brussels last year , and the most recent attacks in paris and brussels . even the mayor of the municipality , fran oise schepmans , has described it as a breeding ground for violence . johan leman , an anthropologist who has been working in the neighborhood for more than years , says that some of the blame can be laid at the feet of the government . here in molenbeek , clearly there has been a neglect of the education system , leman says , adding that the state continues to focus more on policing the neighborhood , rather than addressing more deeply rooted socio economic issues . following the attacks in brussels and paris , there has been no real response at the level of prevention or social initiatives . the neighborhood has been connected to several terrorist plots in recent years . amar toor leman acknowledges that molenbeek s chronic crime and poverty likely makes it easier for isis to recruit in the area , though he says it s difficult to draw generalizations based on those who have left for syria or iraq . a fundamental problem , he adds , is that young people in molenbeek often feel they have no chance to succeed because there are so few role models they can look up to . we need more models who are successful , and with whom the kids can identify , he says . molenbeek is too often a place where talented people are born , they grow up here , and then they leave . ouassari hopes that molengeek will give rise to a new generation of role models in his neighborhood , though he believes his efforts could energize the broader belgian tech industry , as well . sitting at a cafe terrace near the canal that separates molenbeek from the rest of brussels , he bemoans the lack of diversity at belgian incubators and startups , and the racial or gender based prejudices that have allowed it to persist . thanks to molengeek , we re introducing people who , you can tell , have all this energy they sparkle , he says . we re doing it for molenbeek , ok , but we re also doing it for the tech ecosystem . because right now things are going well , it s really hot . but if the industry doesn t continue to grow and bring in new perspectives , that s it , you re dead . 	 scientists have identified people who carry genetic mutations that should cause severe diseases , but who are surprisingly healthy . because of this , researchers think their dna , or the environment in which they live , might hold keys to treating conditions that are currently thought of as untreatable . these people were never diagnosedin ampnbspthe study , published today in nature biotechnology , researchers at mount sinai sifted through more than , genomes in search of people who are resistant to the effects of severe mutations , a characteristic that scientists refer to as resilience . they identified people who survived to adulthood despite displaying genetic mutations that are known to cause one of eight severe childhood diseases . among the diseases were cystic fibrosis a chronic lung disease that carries an average lifespan of years and smith lemli opitz syndrome , a disease that causes malformations and behaviors resembling autism . but , for reasons unknown , these individuals were never diagnosed . in recent years , researchers have discovered a number of genetic variants that allow people to remain healthy , despite being at a high risk for disease . ampnbspin , for example , researchers announced that they had identified a young woman with surprisingly low levels of cholesterol in her blood . these low levels were the result of two mutations on a gene called pcsk mutations that eliminated an important cholesterol regulating protein . since then , drug companies have studied the mutations to develop new ampnbspcholesterol lowering drugs . the knowledge that such resistant people exist inspired the researchers at mount sinai to perform a large genetic search to identify more of them . instead of looking for ways to fix the effects of a disease causing mutation , we came up with the idea of trying to identify those individuals who have the mutations , but didn t manifest the disease , says eric schadt , a biologist at icahn school of medicine at mount sinai who co authored the study . the long term goal of the research would be to mimic whatever s protecting those people in others who show symptoms . however nature overcame that defect , that becomes your therapeutic , schadt says . the search for resilient individuals started with gathering a ton of data . through various agreements , the researchers obtained medical and genetic information collected during previous studies including data gathered from the personal genomics company andme for a total of , genomes . then , the scientists used computer programs to search for people who are resilient to serious conditions that manifest in childhood and that can be caused by a single mutation , or illnesses known as childhood mendelian diseases . by weeding out bad and incomplete data , the scientists identified candidates that met their criteria . the group then parsed through their genome and medical files by hand . in the process , researchers found that some candidates had actually been misdiagnosed with other diseases . their illnesses would have been impossible to miss eventually the scientists settled on adults whose illnesses would have been impossible to miss , schadt says . all carried severe mutations for at least one of the following illnesses cystic fibrosis , atelosteogenesis , familial dysautonomia , epidermolysis bullosa simplex , pfeiffer syndrome , autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome , acampomelic campomelic dysplasia , and smith lemli opitz syndrome . schadt admits that people is not a large enough number to determine what s allowing each of them to remain healthy , but it s an important starting point . the study is sort of a wonderful reversal of the way we ve been looking at mendelian disease for the past years , says dietrich stephan , a human geneticist at the university of pittsburgh who wasn t involved in the project . the researchers went through this whole triage process to ensure that these people had mutations for really nasty diseases that are obvious in adulthood , and they built a very convincing case that says that if these people had these diseases , we would know about it . because of this , the study introduced the notion that there are other drug targets besides the disease causing mutations that scientists could use to treat people who are sick , he says . not everyone was impressed by the findings . andrew wilkie , a geneticist at the university of oxford who studies pfeiffer syndrome , says that scientists have already ampnbspdocumented cases where , despite having the mutation mentioned in the study , some members of the same family never develop symptoms . that means that the pfeiffer syndrome mutation doesn t meet the researchers requirement for a genetic variant that unambiguously causes a disease , he says . the implications for pfeiffer syndrome are quite clearly over hyped , he says . in response , schadt told the verge that his team was aware of the case wilkie mentioned . he also thinks the example is a good demonstration of why this type of search for resilient individuals is justified . for him , it highlights the search strategy we advocate in the paper , to search for resilient individuals in extended families with individuals that have the disease , he says . i am a bit surprised it got into nature biotechnology ! but that s not the only problem with the study , wilkie says . one of the biggest limitations is that the researchers couldn t verify their own findings by contacting the individuals . the reason for that has to do with the consent forms that each participant signed when their dna was collected . all consented to sharing their data with other research groups , but many had not given permission to be recontacted by those researchers . that means that there s no way to corroborate the scientists conclusions , wilkie says . sorry not to be more enthusiastic about this work i am a bit surprised it got into nature biotechnology ! david cutler , a population geneticist at emory university , also questions the importance of the findings . the study essentially points out that the disease risk associated with some of the mutations isn t as high as scientists thought , and that isn t surprising at all , he says . the original evidence supporting that each of these mutations always causes a disease was so weak that it would almost be improbable that the authors couldn t find evidence to the contrary , he says . it is a nice little paper , but perhaps more trivial than it sounds . the scientists will launch a researchkit study this yearschadt knows the study has its limitations . he worries , for example , that someone may have sent their sick child s dna to andme under their own name , likely for privacy concerns . if that happened , it would explain why someone would appear to have reached adulthood without becoming ill , he says . it s also possible that someone may be a genetic mosaic a term used to designate people who , by a genetic quirk , have different genetic information in different parts of their body . if that were the case , it s possible that someone s blood sample contained the mutation while the part of their body that should be affected by the resulting disease does not . but for schadt , the take home message of the study isn t that people who are resilient to these diseases exist . the real revelation is that finding resilient individuals by looking at healthy people is possible and it should be done again , he says . to that end , the mount sinai researchers will be launching a new genetic study this year . this time , the researchers will gather their own data using , in part , an app created using apple s researchkit , a software platform that aims to help researchers recruit ios users to participate in studies . people will be able to sign up for the study through the app and even electronically consent to having their dna collected the researchers hope to enroll one million people , schadt says . and this time , the consent process will include a clause about recontacting folks who might be resilient to severe childhood mutations . it s a positive thing your genome could hold the secret to a treatment for others , schadt says . 	 the verge in celebration of our th anniversary , this month we re publishing a series of interviews with innovative leaders about what the next five years hold . to read more about this series , read our editor nilay patel s introduction here . whether or not you play video games today , you will in the future . andrew wilson , ceo of electronic arts , believes games in will be more diverse , more accessible , and simply more inescapable . your smartphone and your game console will help you play with friends and strangers across the globe , but so might your virtual reality headset , your augmented reality glasses , or just the screen on your smart fridge . wilson has a knack for forecasting the future of the industry . in its years , the creative process at ea has expanded from a handful of coders producing games in a couple of months , to hundreds of designers , artists , writers , and actors collaborating for years on global facing blockbusters . but the past few years have been something of a unique inflection point . wilson took the executive role at ea in , the year the video game publisher won the consumerist s ignominious title of worst company in america for the second time in a row . under his leadership the company has shifted focus to what it calls player first , creating an internal committee to learn what fans said and continue to say across the internet , and to grow from that criticism . saw a return to form of ea s established sports franchises , a pair of critically acclaimed first person shooters , a suite of successful smartphone games , and a high profile flirtation with vr . all of which is to say , in the world of big budget game development , andrew wilson seems to understand what works now . but wilson is looking forward his ambitions involve a bigger , broader , and more inclusive future . that s why we chose to chat with him about the video games and interactive media of tomorrow . the interviewwhat is a day in the life of someone who enjoys video games in ? the biggest shift i think we ll see is games moving from being a discrete experience to an indiscrete experience . when i was years old i m kind of in my s now if i wanted to listen to music , i had a couple of choices . i could sit up all night and hope they d play what i liked on the radio , or i could go down to the record store . i could buy a cassette tape of bon jovi or poison or guns and roses or whatever it was i was listening to , go home , put it in my boom box , and sit down and listen . i really had to make a conscious decision . even that was an evolution from where we d been years before , where if i wanted to listen to music , i actually had to go and listen to an orchestra . i d get dressed up in my tuxedo , and i d go down and listen to music . today , by virtue of the fact that almost every device i own plays me music , and services like spotify curate and cultivate and personalize that music for me , music permeates almost every aspect of my life . it s moved from being something i have to make a conscious decision to engage with , to something that really surrounds every aspect of my life from the minute i get up in the morning to the minute i go to bed at night . subscribe to our newsletter so you don t miss the rest of the verge interviews . terms apply . subscribewhen we think about games today already we ve got more people playing more games on more platforms in more geographies around the world than ever before . it s not just a console business , or a pc business , or even a mobile business . we ve now got virtual reality and augmented reality and streaming , too . now fast forward that to the future , and you think about what the world looks like with a g network streaming latency free gaming to every device you own . it s really easy to imagine that games would permeate our lives much the way digital music does today . from the minute i get up in the morning , everything i do has an impact on my gaming life , both discrete and indiscrete . the amount of eggs i have in my internet enabled fridge might mean my sims are better off in my game . that length of distance i drive in my tesla on the way to work might mean that i get more juice in need for speed . if i go to soccer practice in the afternoon , by virtue of internet enabled soccer boots , that might give me juice or new cards in my fifa product . this world where games and life start to blend i think really comes into play in the not too distant future , and almost certainly by . in , what will i see on the shelf when i go into a store or on the front page of a digital storefront ? i think we re going to start to see games take on a really different proposition . one of the core reasons why we engage with games is for social interaction . maslow s hierarchy of needs once you get past air , food , water , shelter , you get to sense of belonging , which is really about socially interacting . you get to self esteem , which is really about overcoming challenges , and you get to self actualization , which is really about creating in a living world . games are going to give you all of those things . i think what we start to see is less about what the game is is it a shooter , is it a sports game , is it open world or closed world , is it a linear story or a forked story , is it multiplayer and more about this one , existing world where we all play a part . one of the core reasons why we engage with games is for social interaction . i think that entertainment will continue to be a really important part of our lives . we ll have moved from paintings on a cave wall and throwing bones into a circle to a global community interacting through games in a way that s truly positive and fulfills social connection and competition and creation and self esteem and overcoming challenges . i think it s going to be a really , really positive part of our lives . what you re describing sounds humongous , both as a virtual space and as a creative undertaking . how big are these virtual worlds ? and how many people will it take to create them ? what s really interesting is when i started making games , which was in , a big game team was about people . when i took on fifa in , , we had about people . now , i hear stories elsewhere in the industry of game teams that have a thousand people . the size of the worlds that are created are really directly proportionate to the amount of people on a team , and the amount of time they have to build . it s really architecture . it s building like any build is in the real world . think about a world where we aren t limited by the core team . think about a world where we as game developers build kind of a foundational tool set and unleash billion people on the planet to create whatever they think is amazing and what they believe will engage their friends , more than anything we could ever do . the world that we will create will be infinitely bigger than the earth that we live on , and likely bigger than the solar system that we live in . are you referring to something like minecraft that will allow players to create from within a game , or are you speaking about billions of people actually coding video games ? when i was a kid , i learned german at school . my school was really progressive , so we ultimately taught kids mandarin . i grew up in australia , so we re part of asia . china was a big trade partner with australia . progression got us to mandarin . now i have a four and a half year old daughter . my hope is that she learns computer code , because i truly believe that will be the universal language . fast forward years into a world where . . . we all speak the universal language of code . fast forward years into a world where we might speak french or german or chinese or japanese , but we all speak the universal language of code . think about what that means in the context of creating entertainment inside of a virtual world . it s profound . this concept of a game following you through your day to day life is fascinating , but there are so many hurdles . will we truly see the same game on each platform , or will the experience be unique depending on the hardware ? as you think about us putting the entire experience into the cloud , what then happens is the nature of the experience isn t governed by the platform that you choose to play on . the nature of the experience is governed purely by the screen size that you have access to , and the connected controller , and the amount of time you have to play . when you re playing on a playstation or or whatever is available at that point , it s going to look one way on your big screen tv . when you re looking at it through a mobile device , it s going to look a different way . when you re playing it on your internet enabled fridge screen while you re getting the eggs out in the morning , because you re just doing a few quick trades for madden ultimate team , it s going to take a different format . the most important thing is that none of that time is wasted . it s not throwaway time . everything accumulates to the value of who you are in that virtual world . that s really our vision to get to a point where we don t discern for you where you should play or how you should play , only that every minute of play that you invest in the experiences that we create adds value to who you are in that virtual world . you re not throwing things away from one device to another or one experience to another . that goes from device to device . it also goes from game to game , because again , we as human beings are the sum total of our experience . that s what makes us who we are . that s what gives us our character . we want to replicate that in the virtual space . but how do you produce those games across all of those platforms ? what we re trying to do is prepare the company for a world where truly there are more devices capable of playing games , and players are refreshing them more often and likely refreshing them asynchronously . you might refresh your mobile device at a different time than i do . you might buy the k , i might stick with a k . you might go down the oculus vr route , i might go down the psvr route . what i ve got to do as a creator is try and keep you together with your friends inside experiences that you love , and the only way we can do that is at a core engine level . what i ve got to do as a creator is try and keep you together with your friends inside experiences that you love . we talk a lot about our single engine in frostbite . it will scale up graphics on a bigger device and scale them down on a smaller device , so that we can build once and publish to many devices . it s a world where we re no longer having to make a decision like , do we build for the xbox or the playstation or both ? there s literally or or different devices , and we have to be able to build for all devices that are meaningful for players . we ve been investing heavily on that front for the last four or five years . and we think now , by virtue of that transition , we get more games on the ps and xbox one than any other publisher . you see us now starting to really grow our mobile install base . you see us get to the psvr and google vr in the same time frame . that s the only path forward for us . in a world in which we have to build incrementally for every device , forget the cost implications of that , we literally just couldn t do it from a person power point of view . representation is an ongoing issue with video games . for decades , we ve had this generic protagonist the joyless , bald , muscular white guy . it feels as if indie creators rapidly expanded beyond that hero , and aaa is gradually following suit . what is being done to improve representation in big budget games going forward ? representation is really important . again , when i started playing games , we could squint and see million players . many of those players were year old boys playing in their mother s basements . that was really what gamers were . there was this negative connotation about what being a gamer meant . today the average age of a gamer , i think , is about . nearly percent of them are female , and certainly gaming transcends all forms of culture and gender and background , both socioeconomic and ethnic background . as we think about representation inside games , what is the most important thing for us , like it is in movies and books and tv and all other forms of entertainment , is to really capture the true nature of the community that s engaging in that content . when you look at some of our games today , you see that we have strong female leads , we have strong black leads , we have strong latino leads , we have young leads to older leads . it s really important as we design games , and that wasn t really any mandate that we made as a company , and it won t be any mandate that we make going forward . it s really just the creators inside of our organization saying , hey , i m looking at who s playing our games . we know that they want to look into the games that we make and see people like them so that they can better relate to those games . we want to capture that . the diversity that we live in today is amazing . it s what is driving us as humanity forward is this real true understanding of who we are as a global community . we actually have probably more than any other community the ability to do that at the most profound level . we really want to capture that in our games . let s talk about e sports and competitive games . are you concerned about the gap expanding between pro and amateur players that newcomers will be too intimidated ? i think e sports looks like just about every other sport . again , i spent the last , years of my life working in sport . there s always the pinnacle of the sport . that s a really important part , and that s aspirational for us . we watch a bunch of basketball , baseball , football , and soccer . do we think the elite leagues are really important ? absolutely . but the thing for me as a dad that is the single most important game that i m ever going to watch will be my daughter s soccer game , because that s the thing i m most involved in . i love what s happening in the premier league , but that game that my daughter plays in is as important . that s our vision for what competitive gaming is . in all honesty , that s how we think about the world . do we think the elite leagues are really important ? absolutely . are we investing there ? yes . but the thing that we think is going to have the most powerful impact on the world of competitive gaming is making everybody feel like they re a star . at some point we realize that we re never going to play in the big leagues . that doesn t mean we can t play . we want to make sure that as the infancy of e sports kind of grows and cultivates over time , that we don t lose all those other players , that players don t wake up one day and say , well , i m not going to be able to play in the big leagues in a big stadium , so i m going to stop playing . that would be really bad because then millions and millions and millions of people would lose out on the opportunity to compete , would lose out on the greatness , the thrill of victory , would lose out on what it s like to overcome the agony of defeat . we think that s as much about what sport is as playing in the elite leagues . we re investing as heavily there at a grassroots level as we are at the elite level . you mentioned virtual reality earlier . i sense a reluctance from aaa publishers to appear bullish about vr . what is your best case scenario for the future of virtual reality ? think about the laserdisc and the dvd . you can see kind of a strand of dna that went through those things , but it required a couple of turns of the innovation cycle to get to a point where we had truly amassed consumer ready media . i think the same is going to be true for vr . for any consumer entertainment product to take off , it really needs three things . it needs to be innovative technology . vr has that . you just can t take fifa from the playstation straight into vr without making some fairly fundamental shifts . what you then need is a profound user experience . you need the best games . you need the best experience with those games . we re not there yet . the three biggest categories in games are action adventure , shooters , and sports . all require you to run around in a virtual space . that , for many people inside vr , creates all kinds of nauseating symptoms . we , as designers and the hardware manufacturers , have to solve for that . refresh rate and frame rate have to increase , the way we design games is going to have to change . you just can t take fifa from the playstation straight into vr without making some fairly fundamental shifts at a design level . we ve got some work to do on the profound user experience . the last thing you need is low barrier to entry . for many people that means cost . right now , all of the frontline vr opportunities , notwithstanding the google option , which has a different challenge , but all the frontline things , they re pretty expensive . when you think about what has happened in our space when one platform , whether it s sony or microsoft , launches at a more expensive price than the other , and you look at history , you see the cheaper one that was almost as good or equally as good usually won . gamers are very price sensitive . i think we ve got some turns of the cycle to happen to get a price point to a place where it becomes a no brainer for people . we ve got the innovative technology . now we have work to do on the user proposition , and we ve got to bring the price down . i think all of those things are very doable , so i m bullish on it . i really am . earlier , you mentioned this group of millions of young white men playing games in their basement in the past . a lot of those people have grown up to become game developers , and created an industry largely of white men . are there steps or opportunities in place now to improve diversity among the ranks of game makers not just at the entry level for the games of the future ? there has to be . diversity is such an important part of this . again , if you re going to make games for a community , you have to have a true representation of that community . for the longest time our industry , like every other industry , was very white male dominated . we re seeing real change to that now . some of our greatest creative leaders are women . i think two out of the three biggest games we launched last year were led by really strong , creative women . we re seeing lots of people come out of very different backgrounds and very different communities . part of the reason our fifa product is so great and captures the essence of what football means or soccer means to people around the globe . we had different nationalities on that team , all of whom loved soccer , but soccer meant something different to them if they come from argentina versus brazil , or if they come from the uk versus germany , or france versus the us . things mean different things to people from different places . that doesn t mean they love them any less . it just means they look at it through a different lens . we believe it s really important to capture that . i can tell you right now there is a very big push from us , whether it s to engage with girls who code to make sure we re getting year old girls into engineering . they love games , but have been scared off by this concept of engineering or computer engineering , which has been a white male dominated world . we re investing there . we re investing in schools in different ethnic communities . we re trying to recruit from around the globe , because again , what we have the opportunity to do is capture the true essence of a global community , of a global tribe inside of a virtual space . the only way we do that properly is to truly be representative of that community . this interview has been edited and condensed	 theranos is more likely than conventional labs to return blood work with unusual numbers , according to the first ampnbspcomparison study between the silicon valley start up and two well known commercial labs . the results suggest that doctors who use blood tests from theranos may decide to treat patients for conditions they don t have or fail to treat patients who need their help . theranos results were compared to those from labcorp and quest diagnostics , in the report from mount sinai , which was published in the journal of clinical investigations . for multiple tests , theranos results were more likely to fall outside the range that s considered normal for a healthy adult compared with results from the other companies . theranos results didn t match those from the other labsin addition , theranos results from certain tests often didn t match up to those from quest diagnostics and labcorp . for instance , the results on cholesterol tests which doctors use to check up on heart health were systematically lower than results returned by the other two labs , says eric schadt , a biologist at icahn school of medicine at mount sinai and a co author of the study . so a doctor who uses theranos tests might choose not to treat a patient for high cholesterol or recommend an inadequate treatment plan . theranos , a blood testing startup that s been valued at billion , is known for its fingerprick blood tests , which it says can generate results for hundreds of tests using only tiny samples of blood . until recently , the startup was thought of as a huge success story , both because of its technology and its charismatic ceo , elizabeth holmes . but reports from the wall street journal published last year cast doubts about the accuracy of theranos technology . then , in january , federal officials announced that theranos newark , california , laboratory posed immediate jeopardy to patient safety . because of this , theranos biggest partner , the drugstore chain walgreens , shut down one of theranos clinics now , the drugstore giant is reportedly trying terminate its agreement with the startup . but it s worth remembering that the controversy surrounding the company didn t start last october . from the start , theranos dodged opportunities to validate its findings in peer reviewed journals even after claiming that it would do so last october . today s comparison study was conducted without theranos s cooperation . researchers attempted to contact theranos through linkedin after receiving results from all three companies for each participant , but were unsuccessful , schadt says . so the researchers say they aren t sure theranos inventions were used to return results for blood samples drawn from patient s fingers it s possible that commercial machines were used instead . theranos told the verge that all of the tests were run on theranos technology . so today s report represents the public s first look at theranos real life performance . the scientists used linkedin to contact theranosin response to the study , theranos wrote a letter to the journal of clinical investigation saying the company was disappointed that a flawed study was published . theranos told the verge that the study s authors misrepresented some of theranos results and that the methodology they employed was wrong . the authors have responded to these allegations in a document they shared with the verge . in it , they state that they had limited resources , but that they stand by their work . we think our study results are of interest , and we hope will motivate others in the scientific community to conduct additional research to validate our findings and address any limitations of our approach , they write . this is indeed the scientific approach . theranos also denies that the researchers attempted to contact the company before the study s publication . the authors are making false claims to the media to inappropriately bolster their credibility and that of their study , the letter states . in a phone call , theranos spokesperson brooke buchanan said theranos staff searched for emails and voicemails from the researchers , but could find nothing . they didn t know the researchers used linkedin until today . it s unfortunate that they chose to use that , rather than just call us directly , she said . the authors are making false claims . to compare theranos tests to those conducted by commercial labs , all blood samples were taken on a single day , within a few hours , from participants . the first blood samples were taken from participants arms at an outpatient clinic . then , researchers drove participants to two different theranos walgreens wellness centers in phoenix , arizona , before taking venous samples from them again . once the experiment was complete , the team wrote to theranos ceo elizabeth holmes on linkedin . they also used linkedin to contact sunny balwani , theranos president and patrick o neill , theranos chief creative officer , to ask about the procedures the company used . these failed attempts were made on december th , schadt says . two screenshots of the messages can be viewed ampnbsphere and ampnbsphere they show that the messages were never read . the researchers found that there was a significant degree of variability between quest and labcorp as well not just between those two and theranos . but theranos returned abnormal results more often than quest diagnostics or labcorp . these problems are likely fixable , schadt says . as it stands , theranos results may mean doctors will make bad decisions , says eleftherios diamandis , head of clinical biochemistry at the university of toronto . results that vary as much as these could mean doctors will treat a patient who doesn t need care or miss a health condition that needs treatment . the finding suggests that theranos fingerprick collection isn t as good as a standard vein draw . what would i do if i were a patient ? he says . i will leave the choice to the patients but for me , the choice is obvious . in its letter to the journal , theranos says that taking a blood sample from a person s arm before doing a fingerprick may make the fingerprick tests less reliable . the company also reprimands the researchers on their methodology the study doesn t say if more than one draw was conducted on each finger , for instance . these fundamental problems problems with the conduct of the study reflect the lack of understanding of the study investigators concerning basic sample collection procedures . . . the company states . in addition , theranos lab director daniel young told the verge that theranos didn t report abnormal results as often as the researchers claim in the study . not at all clear why theranos would ever list us as a potential competitor . theranos also claims that a conflict of interest wasn t disclosed in the study . two of the study s authors , schadt and joel dudley , have ties to a bioinformatics company called numedii that works in drug discovery , the company states in its letter to the journal , and that qualifies it as potential competitor . we are not currently working on drug discovery , but ampnbspwe have in the past and could again in the future , young told the verge on the phone . numeddii , for its part , told the verge that the two companies have distinct and different business models , so it is not at all clear why theranos would ever list us as a potential competitor . the researchers give a similar response in the document they shared with the verge . schadt says the biggest problem the researchers faced while conducting this study was that they weren t sure which machines theranos used . all the theranos samples were taken from participants fingers , so it seems likely that the tests were conducted using theranos inventions , which is what the company says happened . but a wsj report which suggested last year that theranos has diluted blood samples so they could be analyzed on commercial machines , cast doubt in the researchers minds . if today s study is representative of theranos usual performance , it raises some significant questions about federal lab certification processes and inspections that are already in place , says richard horowitz , an emeritus professor of pathology at ucla . testing disparities do occur , he says . but this study shows that there s a need for more investigation of the factors that contribute to test variability . the us government cited theranos newark lab for putting patients at risk in january . theranos says it has performed nearly six million tests in the past two years . the company could put qualms about its methods to rest if it were to publish its data until then , studies like today s represent the best information available about theranos accuracy . in an email , buchanan told the verge that theranos plans to publish data in the near future . stay tuned ! 	 overwatch isn t just a brand new franchise for blizzard it s a new way of thinking about story . the company is known for building huge franchises , from diablo to warcraft , and overwatch represents its first new property in close to two decades . in the past , when blizzard created a new world , it started from a high level , figuring out the overarching themes and game ideas before it filled in the details , by adding characters , places , and more . instead of starting , feet up , overwatch is starting at the ground and moving upwards , says chris metzen , blizzard s svp of story and franchise development , and creative director on the game . overwatch is primarily defined by its characters . it s a shooter where players can choose from different heroes , each with their own personality and history . and it s those personalities and histories that have come to define its near future world . overwatch takes place at an unspecified point in the future , and stars former members of the titular group , a one time peacekeeping organization that has since disbanded following accusations of corruption . the game s version of earth is recognizable , but also fantastical . we definitely wanted to do a near future franchise that wasn t , years in the future on the far side of an alien galaxy , metzen says . the roster includes a talking , cybernetic gorilla named winston , a nature obsessed robot called bastion , and tracer , a former overwatch agent with the ability to travel through time . metzen describes the setting as a recognizable earth that was near enough that we could inject sci fi hooks , fantastical hooks , and just be able to conjure whatever heroes we wanted , but had more of a tether to the familiar world we share . it has a bit of an avengers vibe , with all of the world s most powerful heroes joining together for battle . the game itself is team based , similar to games like team fortress or the upcoming battleborn . but unlike many games , the genre had little influence on the story of overwatch blizzard has big plans for overwatch and this shooter is just the first introduction to this new universe . we decided to try to do it another way . overwatch is currently two different things , metzen explains . overwatch is not a group based shooter by itself . that is simply the first video game expression of what overwatch really is , which is a big , breathing , mighty , compelling franchise . i say all of that in hopes that we achieve that . but that s what we re aiming for . warcraft is not world of warcraft . it s a big , sprawling idea that s comprised of something like distinct video games . warcraft is not an rts , it s not a mmorpg . soon it ll be a movie . that s how blizzard thinks about its franchises . that s a big shift from previous franchises , where the initial game helped define the world around it . starcraft , for instance , features three distinct races because the game s designers wanted three different types of armies for players to control . they wanted one with weird aliens , and one with psychic powers , and so the narrative team built out the story based around those constraints , crafting the zerg and the protoss to give more depth and interest to the races and their abilities . with overwatch , we decided to try to do it another way , says metzen . which was , don t start with this huge backstory and all of this specificity we wanted overwatch to really be achieved through these characters . so as a new character idea comes up whether it came from a drawing or a design instinct senior story designer michael chu and i have tried to stay on our toes relative to letting the world be shaped by these characters . that s part of the reason why overwatch even has a story . multiplayer focused games , whether it s a shooter like tf or a strategy game like dota , aren t exactly heavy on narrative exposition . few people play league of legends for the story . but because blizzard views overwatch as one part of a bigger universe , it s adding in narrative elements to help tie it to all of the other versions of overwatch that do and could exist . there might not be another game in the works or at least announced just yet , but blizzard is still fleshing out the universe in other ways . last week it released the first in a series of pixar like animated shorts detailing individual characters , and later this year blizzard will launch a graphic novel called first strikesince the game will largely only hint at the bigger universe it takes place in , these supplemental materials are meant to appease those looking to learn more . the idea is to appeal to multiple kinds of players . for those that really don t care about a lot of narrative context in their game , they can jump into overwatch and not be burdened at all by needing to know who is who , or the intricacies of the relationships , or the history of the world , metzen says . at its most conservative , the game does not demand that you know much of anything in terms of lore . the key to making all of those elements , whether it s a game or an animated video , work together is consistency . for instance , in the first overwatch short , which tells winston s backstory , there s a battle during which some glass in his lab is smashed . when that moment was first created by the animators , the developers went back to the in game version of winston s lab and smashed the same bit of glass . we try to make sure that all the details sing together , says metzen . chu keeps a constantly updated spreadsheet full of dates and other key details , to make sure they keep everything straight . overwatch s near future setting gives the team a lot of leeway when it comes to adding in new features based on crazy technology or science , but it also provides an extra set of challenges , one that blizzard hasn t really had to face before . each of blizzard s three big franchises fits snugly into an existing category of genre fiction , whether it s fantasy or sci fi , which means that this is blizzard s first time tackling characters derived from the real world . overwatch features a diverse cast , with heroes based everywhere from russia to india to egypt , and designing those characters is very different from creating a new orc in azeroth . it s a little intimidating for us . with overwatch characters , we definitely wanted to have a cast of heroes that are from different nationalities and places around the world , so we strive to be very responsible with how we develop the ideas and how we are even fictionally portraying people around the world , metzen says . sometimes it definitely puts the pressure on us to be aware of cultural sensitivities and just people s feelings . sometimes we re educated enough , sometimes we aren t , but we certainly want to build this near earth experience with respect and love . chu adds that we do a lot of research , the team actually comes from a lot of backgrounds , so we draw inspiration from the different team members . given the success of blizzard s past games , it may be surprising to see the company trying to fix what isn t broken . warcraft , for instance , is still going strong , with an upcoming duncan jones directed film adaptation and the incredibly popular digital card game spin off hearthstone . but metzen believes that this is exactly the reason why the developer needs to do something different . it s a little intimidating for us to step out and do something that we ve never tried before , he says , but that s why , for a company that s years old , overwatch was so important for us , to test ourselves and climb another mountain and see what we could do . it keeps us sharp and it s an important challenge . whether the game succeeds or fails , says metzen , having attempted it is so important for blizzard . overwatch launches may th on pc , ps , and xbox one . 	 shortly after cassie duran s son was born , he began to suffer from symptoms of drug withdrawal . the newborn s tiny body shook and shivered and he often cried inconsolably . she blamed herself duran had taken methadone during pregnancy . i felt so bad , the boston native says , i was like i can t believe i put my baby through this . you just feel so guilty and you beat yourself up . i can t believe i put my baby through this . cassie was on methadone to treat her heroin addiction and the drug was prescribed by her doctor . still , it s hard to avoid the impulse to punish mothers who expose their infants to drugs and related withdrawal many people instinctively want to whisk these babies away to a brand new presumably better family . but that punitive approach has not been effective in preventing drug exposed pregnancies . in fact , studies show that states with the harshest laws tend to drive women like cassie underground and away from prenatal care . and that puts both mother and baby at greater risk , not less . if past drug epidemics are any predictor , sensational media coverage of babies drug withdrawal will lead to more moms like cassie losing child custody . however , there is little evidence that this saves lives in fact , research suggests a change of custody often leaves children even worse off . while the child welfare system is intended to protect children , in far too many cases , it exposes them to more trauma , neglect and abuse . and that s not the end of it states are also prosecuting mothers who are taking their medication as prescribed by their doctors . prenatal drug exposure isn t always a sign of child abusethe problem is urgent . with the sharp rise in heroin and prescription pain reliever addiction , the number of infants showing symptoms of opioid withdrawal after birth has quintupled since , with nearly , cases in alone , according to the most recent data available . unfortunately , the public ampnbspand even many court and government officials who should know better are often unaware of what works best to help these families . for one , prenatal drug exposure by itself isn t always a sign of child abuse . in cassie s case , she was enrolled in a maintenance program the best studied and most effective addiction treatment for heroin or other opioid addictions during pregnancy . that s according to every medical authority that has examined the data , from the national institute on drug abuse to the world health organization . cassie was following doctor s orders and had not taken any illegal drugs . i was doing really well , she says . cassie s doctor prescribed methadone for a simple reason if an expectant mother is already addicted to opioids , withdrawal can harm or even kill the developing child . prescribing a legal opioid either methadone or a newer drug , buprenorphine ampnbspminimizes this risk . it also reduces the mother s risk of overdose death by percent or more . while watching a baby go through withdrawal is unpleasant , there s no evidence that infants who experience it suffer lasting harm . but many child welfare agencies don t know that or refuse to recognize the data . many social workers see maintenance therapy as the equivalent of taking street drugs despite the overwhelming medical consensus and the fact that once patients are stabilized , they are not emotionally or cognitively impaired and can successfully parent , drive , and even work high level jobs . worse , because family court judges are also often ill informed about maintenance therapy , women are increasingly losing custody of their children for taking their medication exactly as prescribed . many social workers see maintenance therapy as the equivalent of street drugs even the federal law aimed at protecting prenatally exposed children fails to distinguish between babies who suffer withdrawal because their mothers took street drugs and those who are only taking medications that are legitimately prescribed . the statute mandates that all babies with what s technically known as neonatal abstinence syndrome be reported to state child welfare agencies , regardless of whether the mother is in treatment or still misusing drugs . for example , jenessa moman , an ohio mom , became addicted to painkillers after her younger sister froze to death following a car crash . moman blamed herself for her sister s death she had helped search for her sister , but didn t find her in time . when moman became pregnant , she sought help for her addiction immediately . following the best medical advice , she was given buprenorphine maintenance and stopped taking any unprescribed drugs . but since her daughter suffered withdrawal after she was born in july , a child welfare investigation was opened . even though moman had been doing exactly what her doctor had asked of her and even though she had no history of abusing or neglecting her children she was accused of child abuse . as a result , she faced frequent , unannounced home inspections by social workers , which terrified her older child , who feared she would be taken away from her mother . that fear was not unfounded , given the prejudice against maintenance treatment that exists in child welfare agencies . one ohio child welfare official proclaimed his ignorance when asked to comment by nbc on these cases . he said some doctors , some clinics , feel that buprenorphine is almost like a therapeutic drug . it is not almost like a therapeutic drug . it is one buprenorphine is an fda approved therapy for opioid addiction , and widely supported by experts for use in pregnancy . susan lucas hoffman flickr it s also important to remember that foster care is often not the safe respite that it should be . between a third and half of children who grow up in foster care report at least one experience of abuse or neglect in their placements , a study published in december found . for instance , foster homes increase a child s risk of sexual abuse one study found that children in foster care had a risk of rape or sexual molestation that was four times higher than in other families . it also may raise the likelihood that a child will be mistreated in other ways rates of neglect and physical and emotional abuse ampnbspin foster homes were three times higher than in other , similar families . frighteningly , the rate for physical abuse was increased sevenfold . we don t have a child welfare system , we have a parent punishment system . when mothers use drugs , however , this tends to outweigh all other considerations about their suitability as parents , regardless of whether it is actually in the best interest of the children to put them in foster care . pregnant women who endanger their children in this way are often seen as monsters simply because they didn t abstain while carrying their babies . we don t have a child welfare system , we have a parent punishment system , says richard wexler , executive director of the national coalition for child protection reform , explaining that prejudices about illegal drug users tend to trump rational considerations of risk . if we really believe all the rhetoric about putting children s needs first , we have to put them ahead of everything , including how we may feel about their mothers . and losing custody is often only the beginning of the punishment women like cassie duran can face . some are criminally prosecuted for using the maintenance treatment for opioid addiction that is the standard of care . how does that accomplish anything ? asks elisha wachman , a neonatologist at boston medical center and assistant professor of pediatrics at boston university school of medicine , who works with infants born to addicted mothers and treated cassie and her children . it doesn t make any sense . it doesn t make any sense . alabama , south carolina , tennessee , and wisconsin all have laws on the books that allow prosecution of women for assaulting or chemically endangering , their children with drugs . infants withdrawal can be used as evidence , regardless of whether the drug was legally prescribed , according to national advocates for pregnant women , a civil rights group . tennessee had one of the worst of these laws , but it was allowed to expire this week , a hopeful sign . the nation documented two cases in alone where women who desperately sought treatment or were on maintenance faced arrest , despite having tried repeatedly to follow the best medical advice . and it s not only opioids that put moms at risk of arrest either in many cases , the only drug exposure reported is marijuana or , in one notorious case , taking a single unprescribed valium . still , what about the dangers of drug exposure during pregnancy ? though using illicit drugs while pregnant is obviously potentially dangerous and best avoided , the most common recreational drugs that have been studied like marijuana and cocaine are not typically linked with irreparable damage . while studies often find some measurable differences between children born to women who use cocaine , opioids or marijuana during pregnancy and non users , no consistent pattern of lasting defects like that associated with alcohol has been found and the damage attributable to cocaine including crack is comparable to that seen with cigarettes . since most women who take drugs while pregnant take multiple drugs and have serious life stress , it s very difficult to untangle causality . see drug endangered children related to crack cocaine in the s and early s found that the level of drug exposure in utero wasn t what predicted how these children would do . instead , what led to poor outcomes was poverty , exposure to domestic violence and being raised by someone who was actively addicted after birth not how much cocaine was taken during pregnancy . simply labeling infants as crack babies was enough to do harm moreover , research from the crack years also showed that simply labeling cocaine exposed infants as crack babies often did harm . in one notorious example , authorities ignored years of evidence that four brothers were being selectively starved they believed the adoptive parents claims that prenatal drug exposure had caused anorexia . the year old weighed pounds when the state finally took action and he rapidly gained weight when he was finally fed appropriately . that wasn t just an isolated incident , either . it turns out that the label crack baby can pathologize ordinary childhood behavior . a study published in the journal of developmental and behavioral pediatrics in for example , found that most researchers who did not know whether a child had been exposed to cocaine before birth couldn t tell even when they believed that they could . also , when they were shown a video of a toddler , the same actions were seen very differently if the child was said to be a crack baby . in that case , normal crankiness was seen as much more troubling and the child was given lower scores on ratings of skills like speaking and manipulating objects . simply labeling a child a crack baby was enough to lower expectations of these children and make caregivers more likely to dole out punishment . that s why experts warned the public and media against stirring up fear about methamphetamine babies and why doctors are similarly concerned about opioid related labels now . ironically , the only drug known to create an irreversible syndrome of brain damage is a legal one alcohol . frankieleon flickr while proponents of drug endangerment laws and criminal penalties claim that they seek to protect children , there s another motive at play , too . as is clear from their supporters arguments , a critical goal is to develop a legal case for fetal personhood in order to outlaw abortion . for example , the head of personhood alabama told the new york times , i think it would be unequal protection to give the woman a pass when anyone else who injects drugs into a child would be prosecuted . there s another motive developing a legal case for fetal personhood in order to outlaw abortionif women can be prosecuted for drug dealing via umbilical cord , eventually , fetuses will be seen as equivalent to children . that allows the personhood movement to frame abortion as murder . as a result of the abortion fight , the side effects of drug endangerment legislation are ignored or played down , and the media is instead flooded with stories of infant opioid withdrawal . regardless of motive , criminalizing pregnant women ignores an important truth about early childhood the bonding between parent and child during the first weeks of life is the foundation for lifelong mental health . the brain is rapidly developing in early infancy , and interactions with parents are crucial for how the brain s stress systems develop . how a person handles stress is vital it affects risk for everything from depression and addiction to obesity and cardiovascular disease . interruptions in early bonding , then , have the potential to do irreversible harm to the child . consequently , removing an infant from a parent s custody should be a last resort . the first couple of weeks is when babies need their parents the most , says wachman . for us , the most critical time is the first month . wachman has treated hundreds of cases of opioid withdrawal in infants percent of babies born to opioid dependent mothers go through it . she has seen the worst of what drug exposure can do to kids , particularly when mothers haven t received prenatal care . she s cared for premature babies who shake , who have eerie high pitched cries , who seem impossible to soothe . in these cases , the infants are given low doses of opioids and weaned off of them slowly as symptoms subside . what helps these babies is more exposure to their mothers not lessdespite her first hand encounters with opioid dependent infants , wachman strongly opposes separating mother and child simply due to drug exposure , unless there are other indications of risk for abuse and neglect . what helps these babies most is more exposure to their mothers not less , wachman says . encouraging breastfeeding and having the mother and newborn room in together reduces the baby s risk of needing medication by to percent , wachman says . she adds , the biggest thing we can do is keep the baby with the parents , more than anything else , she says . that skin to skin contact , holding , everything you do that calms the baby makes a difference . at boston medical center , the program for addicted mothers on maintenance treatment is called project respect . the central idea is that treating women with addiction with respect rather than contempt is both more likely to aid recovery and to empower them to care for their babies safely . for cassie , that respect was key to keeping her engaged in treatment . i already feel like a piece of shit , she says , i m not saying i want to walk in somewhere pregnant and all strung out using and have someone be like , oh good for you , that s great but i want someone to be like it s not okay , but i m here to help you . keeping families together also improves the mothers odds of kicking drugs . when mothers know how important they are to their children s health , that deters them from relapsing , wachman says . in fact , the better women feel about their prospects for helping their children and the less they reflect on the pain that drug withdrawal may have caused them , the more likely they are to successfully recover . says cassie of dr . wachman , she s like family to me . i love her so much . amy the nurse flickr the greater risk of abuse and neglect and the dangers of interrupting the initial bond between parent and child aren t the only problems with putting drug exposed infants in foster care . in many cases where babies are removed at birth , they will eventually be sent back home so even in the best case scenario , they will face two custody transitions . and each of these is wrenching , especially for the youngest children . infants and toddlers are too young to remember the experience consciously . that doesn t mean there are no consequences , however . these custody changes shape children s sense of whether the world is safe and people can be trusted . if every time you try to love and trust someone , that person is taken away , the trauma is compounded and the damage to that child s psyche becomes more severe , says wexler . just two transitions is the best case scenario , of course . of the foster kids who stay in care for more than two years , two thirds experience three or more shifts of custody . each is a separate potential trauma , raising the risk for mental illness , school failure , juvenile delinquency , and yes , addiction . it s always in the best interest of the child to keep them together . the trauma from so many transitions may explain why foster care outcomes are often bleak . indeed , in cases where authorities had a difficult time determining whether foster care or parental custody was best , the kids who stayed with their parents were better off on every measure from crime and employment to teen pregnancy . trying to keep children with their parents is not only best for those parents , but for the kids , according to most studies . that s not reflected in policy , though . when opioid withdrawal in infants itself is viewed as a crime , what s best for the child is bypassed in lieu of punishment . this is to say nothing of the policies that ignore the distinction between therapeutic maintenance treatment and illicit drug use . indeed , in project respect , only about five percent of mothers in the program lose custody of their infants , wachman says . for the typical opioid dependent mother , it is always in the best interest of the child to keep them together . cassie duran knows the risks of the child welfare system she herself was placed in foster care during her teens . that s because her mom also suffered from addiction first , alcoholism , then heroin addiction as well . both conditions were driven by underlying depression . her father also had alcoholism but cassie had only met him a few times before she learned , at age nine , that he d died in a car accident . cassie duran knows the risks of the child welfare systemduring cassie s childhood , her mother s mental illness was so severe that it left her on disability , frequently intoxicated and ill equipped to meet her daughter s needs . to cassie , her mom seemed cold and distant . my mother didn t show any affection , she says . but she did express rage cassie screamed so loudly during beatings that she believes the neighbors knew exactly what was going on . still , in a poor area of boston , few wanted to interfere , even though cassie sometimes had visible bruises when she went to elementary school . cassie started drinking at age ten or eleven . by thirteen or fourteen , someone in the system finally noticed she was being abused soon she was shuttling back and forth between foster care , home , placement with relatives , and group homes , where she says she had to fight to defend herself . by fifteen , she had dropped out of school and was addicted to heroin . in her twenties she added crack to the mix and was soon involved in prostitution . i had a really rough childhood , she says , i just had no chance . stories like cassie s are the rule , not the exception , among pregnant addicted women . no one uses drugs while pregnant if she isn t severely addicted and the more severe the addiction , the higher the odds that trauma and mental illness are both involved . among addicted pregnant women , for example , two thirds suffered sexual abuse as children themselves . i just had no chance . for families like cassie s , different approaches are needed . a few parenting classes and a brief bout of drug treatment usually isn t enough in most cases , all this will do is guarantee that children bounce in and out of foster care . then , the cycle will repeat itself in the next generation . relapse is the rule , not the exception with opioid addiction occurring at least percent of the time and mothers living in poverty with multiple psychiatric problems given short term treatment and no other support are even more likely to relapse . up to two thirds of children in the foster care system are there due to parental alcohol or drug problems . a pilot program tested in oregon tried a more comprehensive approach . families at risk were provided with secure , supportive housing . they also received drug treatment , parenting education and high quality child care for to months . afterwards , the program worked to ensure that the families moved on to safe , permanent homes . one hundred ninety six children whose parents were enrolled in the program were compared to similar children who had been removed from their parents care for drug related abuse and neglect . the children in regular foster care were twice as likely to be abused , neglected , or both a second time , compared to those in the program . the foster care group was also more than three times more likely to be taken back into foster care after having been returned once to their parents . in terms of the most important outcome whether the children remained in the foster system or were permanently placed back home the difference was just as stark . some percent of the children in the program ultimately stayed with their parents , compared to percent with usual treatment . more women need access to programs like project respect and comprehensive treatment like that found in the oregon project . the good news is that late last year , president obama signed into law an act that will create recommendations for best practices in prevention of and treatment for infants with opioid withdrawal . this should push law enforcement and child welfare agencies to accept maintenance treatment for pregnant mothers , which , given the data , will almost certainly be what is recommended . at the very least , it will provide a strong defense for such women . and there is also new legislation to provide for greater access to treatment . today , cassie has three years in recovery and her own apartment . richie , , her oldest son still lives with her aunt but is doing well in school and they visit frequently . she lost custody of her second son during the worst part of her addiction , but is raising all three daughters , who are now aged , , and almost two . she s in school , training to be an addiction counselor . and project respect has just offered her a job she ll be helping mentor other women . it s been a really long road , she says . i m so grateful . i m so blessed . this report was supported by the journalism nonprofit the economic hardship reporting project . 	 at around pm et on tuesday , javascript broke . more specifically , npm , the package manager used by most javascript developers to source , test , and prepare their code for release , began failing . for thousands of developers all over the world , the most essential tool in their workflow wouldn t work . soon after , a new issue , titled npmjs . org tells me that left pad is not available page , was opened on a little known github repository azer left pad . dozens of developers quickly piled into the issue , and within minutes they d identified the issue azer had unpublished his left pad code from npm . left pad is a minor bit of code , a sparse lines . basically , it s a javascript function which takes a string of characters and adds a padding string of your choice to the left . the most essential tool in their workflow wouldn t worknpm is all about packages built on other packages , which is how left pad ended up everywhere . according to npm stats , left pad has been installed , , times in the last month mostly as part of a package called line numbers , which adds line numbers to text . in addition to many other projects , line numbers was included in the babel package , which in turn broke thousands of javascript projects relying on babel . all azer ko ulu had to do was push the first domino . and , in the words of github user laurelnaiad who has received party hats , thumbs up , smiles , thumbs down , and hearts for her comment this kind of just broke the internet . what s an npm ? in many ways , javascript has always been the wild west of the software world . just like its sibling web technologies , css and html , javascript has been subject to the whims of the browser vendors , which has trained developers to code defensively . without a single source of truth about javascript , developers traditionally rely on third party libraries to smooth over the differences between browsers . javascript libraries also fill another void for the language the lack of a standard library . traditionally , functions like left pad are provided by the language author languages supported by big companies , like microsoft s c , google s go , mozilla s rust , and apple s swift , all have big fancy standard libraries full of commonly used functions so developers don t have to write everything from scratch . javascript developers never had any easy to access repository of code to rely on . . . until npm came along . npm allows developers to easily import blobs of code into their project . like , if i want to left pad something , i can just typenpm install left padinto the command line , and now i can left pad to my heart s content . in turn , if i think i ve written a bit of javascript that other people might find useful , i can stick it up on github and publish it on npm so now other people can use it easily in their own projects . talk about babelbabel is one of the most famous npm packages of recent years . by npm installing it on your development machine , you can write es also known as as es the latest and greatest version of javascript that s only partially supported by current browsers and have it transformed into compatible , run anywhere es . babel was written by sebastian mckenzie , who was a bored high schooler in australia when he started the project . he now works for facebook . babel has been installed , times in the past month , and has also been built into the core of react native , facebook s new framework for building mobile apps with javascript , so it s safe to say babel and its incarnations are primarily responsible for the wild popularity of line numbers and left pad . according to babel s own website , babel is used basically everywhere facebook , netflix , paypal , yahoo , spotify , reddit , slack , linkedin , godaddy , squarespace . . . it s very popular . with left pad gone , babel can t be installedi m not even sure what babel uses the line numbers function for , but that s not really important . what s important is that the babel package has declared the line numbers package as a dependency , which has declared left pad as a dependency . with left pad gone , babel can t be installed . so when this little line package broke babel , and babel kind of broke everything , people noticed . the author of left padazer ko ulu is a prolific author of open source software , most of it in the vein of left pad small , single serving npm packages that provide a simple javascript function . npm gives package names to authors on a first come first served basis , and azer has a bunch of them , to be exact . just to mention a few rnd , a random number generator strip , a function which strips out html tags and random color , which generates random rgb colors and , naturally , relies on rnd . he also inconspicuously owned the name kik , for a more elaborate open source project he was building to help developers start new projects simply and easily from the command line . and that s where all this drama began . you can read azer s side of the story here . basically , the messaging app company called kik contacted azer through a lawyer kik says it was actually a patent agent , telling him to remove his kik package from npm . he refused , and the company proceeded to contact npm , which complied with the request and transferred ownership of the kik package name . while npm is an open source project , it s primarily developed and maintained by a private company npm , inc . azer writes on medium emphasis his this situation made me realize that npm is someone s private land where corporate is more powerful than the people , and i do open source because , power to the people . azer s response was to unpublish or , liberate all his modules from npm . the aftermathit was only lines , after all . the same wild west ness of open source javascript that gave azer s act of unpublishing such wide implications allowed other developers to swoop in and fix the problem in hours . you can follow the action yourself in the very github thread that first raised the issue . babel removed its dependency on line numbers and published an updated version , and npm ended up republishing the left pad code in the same slot azer was occupying . npm is also camping all of azer s other npm module names to make sure no one can upload malicious code to them . if the reddit and hacker news comments are any indication , azer s actions have a lot of people questioning current javascript best practices . the classic follow up to the silicon valley mantra of move fast and break things is slow down and fix your shit . slow down and fix your shit . ironically , kik s own software build process was impacted by the unpublishing of left pad , which kik s head of messenger , mike roberts , explained the following day in his own medium post . mike attempted to give the kik side of the story , and published the entire email chain between azer , kik , and npm . mike calls it a polite request to get the kik name on npm in order to publish an open source project kik has been working on , but the emails he published do threaten lawyers . npm has also published its own blog post on the fiasco . it stands by its decision to transfer the kik name , since its name dispute policy prioritizes predictability for users . it s also looking into ways to make it harder to unpublish a package if it will break other packages . the comments on npm s post aren t favorable , however . most developers seem to feel azer was thrown under the bus , and many of them are already talking about finding an npm alternative . throughout this saga azer , kik , and npm , inc . proclaim a deep commitment to open source and javascript . they just each have a slightly different way of showing it . 	 five years ago , craig d . adams was riding a toronto streetcar home after a long day at work , when he looked up from his phone and was confused about where he was . that evening , adams an artist and game designer better known under the pseudonym superbrothers had just released his first game , a collaboration with local studio capy games and musician jim guthrie . it was called superbrothers sword ampamp sworcery ep , and it had a unique feature all of its dialog was chopped into snippets of characters or less , and a little button let you tweet any of those snippets along with the hashtag sworcery . as adams was commuting home , the game was just rolling out in the ipad s app store in new zealand , and the tweets were flowing in . i was so engrossed that i didn t just miss my stop , he says . i missed the next nine stops . sworcery went on to become a rare thing in mobile gaming . it was both a critical and commercial success , selling more than . million copies as of . it featured a distinctive pixel art style coupled with a dark , foreboding soundtrack and simple yet engrossing gameplay that brought together elements of point and click games and classic fantasy adventures like the legend of zelda . unlike most popular mobile games , it hasn t been cloned , because its appeal lies more in a mood than a specific game mechanic , and that s not easy to copy . even today it remains distinct . but its influence can still be seen in many games that followed , notably the hit monument valley , whose creators have cited sworcery as an inspiration . today marks the game s fifth anniversary , and since launch capy has gone on to create several games , including the upcoming below , while guthrie has scored a handful of movie and game soundtracks and even released a new solo indie rock album . adams , meanwhile , has largely receded out of public view . aside from a few projects , he has remained out of the public eye , quietly toiling away on a mysterious project that he s not quite ready to announce yet . i think i ll just be lucky if anybody remembers the superbrothers name when i have something new to show , adams says . how sworcery came to be involved a lot of happenstance . sometime around , guthrie received a postcard in the mail . it had some pixel art on it and a short note from adams , saying that he was a big fan of guthrie s music . as a response , the musician mailed back a burned cd featuring some unreleased tracks made using an original playstation . the two kept in touch over the years , and made a few short animated videos together . some of those songs eventually made it onto the sworcery soundtrack . an early guthrie superbrothers collaborationat the time , guthrie was trying to make it as a more traditional singer songwriter . he also had dreams of doing soundtracks , but didn t know how to get his foot into that world . i was a mostly uninformed , low tech indie rocker guy who always wanted to do soundtracks for film and tv , he says . games were never something he d really thought of so it was a bit of a surprise when adams asked him to score sworcery . it was never on my radar , because it seemed so far away and unattainable on a practical level , guthrie says . i didn t know anybody who could make games . i knew people who play drums and play guitar and stuff . around that time , adams was working as an artist at the now closed toronto branch of japanese game developer koei . in the evenings he had created the superbrothers moniker it had a nice ring to it he says of the name and did some pixel art projects , including low fi illustrations for magazines . in he hatched a plan , one that seems far fetched in retrospect . he republished some of his old work online in an attempt to reignite interest , and then he headed down to san francisco for the game developers conference , in hopes of meeting someone who would want to make a game that looked like his distinct pixelated paintings . the plan worked . while at a gdc party , adams met nathan vella , president of a then relatively unknown toronto studio called capy games . it turns out that one of adams former koei co workers had gone on to work at capy , and introduced vella to his work . it didn t take long for the collaboration to start . fifteen seconds after meeting nathan he said let s make a game together , says adams . that was in march , and adams eventually started working in the capy studio full time on the game the following october . the time in between was filled with tying up some loose ends , including the process of receiving a grant from the ontario government . by this point , indie games were becoming a phenomenon . in jonathan blow released the seminal braid on the xbox , a game that showed it was possible for a small team to create a big hit . it made blow a millionaire he then funneled the money into making his next game , the witness , which launched earlier this year and showed the potential for new digital platforms like xbox live arcade and the app store . this is the thing i had been imagining would exist for kind of my whole life , adams says of the indie gaming movement , and when it actually happened i was busy . sworcery bluesto celebrate the five year anniversary of the game , guthrie is going to be releasing a limited edition repressing of the game s soundtrack on vinyl . when it first released in , the soundtrack was dubbed the ballad of the space babies , and the new version is being released on space baby blue vinyl . you ll be able to buy the record sometime in early april on guthrie s bandcamp page . but the timing turned out to be fortuitous . by the time work on sworcery started , the app store , and mobile gaming in general , were still in an early stage of maturation , and twitter despite being five years old was a bit of a wild west where a small game could still make a considerable impact . it was kind of a perfect storm , says guthrie . the ipad which was ultimately the launch platform for the game came out in the midst of sworcery s creation . there were already some hit mobile games , but adams felt that there was room for something more engaging than a time killing puzzle game . it felt like a bit of a blank canvas , he says . it seemed like there was a thirst there . like the game s origin story , the development of sworcery was very organic . while adams handled the art , writing , and some of the design , capy creative director kris piotrowski served as designer , while co workers jon maur and frankie leung handled the technical side , and guthrie provided the music . there was no real structure to how we did it , recalls guthrie . it was kind of a mess , to be honest , at times . sometimes adams would share a new piece of art , and guthrie would compose a song to fit the vibe other times it was the exact opposite , with the team building new sections of the game inspired by a new track . i remember thinking that there should be some kind of explosion at some point . guthrie wasn t always sure what to think . given his relatively limited history with games , the slow pace of sworcery which often involves just walking around an area , listening to music , and tapping the screen was surprising . i remember thinking that there should be some kind of explosion at some point , guthrie says . i remember being uncomfortable with the pace , though i wasn t uncomfortable with a pace like that in a song or in a film . vella similarly had doubts at certain points . sworcery was originally expected to take around a year to make , but ended up taking nearly twice that long , increasing the budget . as it became clear the project was going to run longer than our estimates , i definitely started doubting it , vella says . i think craig did , too . we talked about options for the project , and honestly my brain was telling me to scope it way down and figure out how to just ship something . that very easily could have been the end of sworcery . but as i remember it , kris really fought for the game he wouldn t let me sell it short and he wouldn t let craig lose faith . the slow pace that worried guthrie wasn t the only unique thing about sworcery . it also featured incredibly cryptic dialog which was part of why it was so fun to tweet and a structure that used the iphone s built in clock to encourage players to play at specific times certain events would only trigger during the appropriate lunar phase . because of its distinct and often strange nature , it s hard to pinpoint what exactly made sworcery so successful even for the creators . i think we created a design that had a pace and a space where interesting thoughts could percolate and jim s music could work its magic , says adams . i don t know what to make of it exactly , but it s just really heartening to see . it gave us a lot of confidence to keep pushing and making games we believe in . when i look back after five years , i am most surprised by how such a huge audience was willing to embrace something like sworcery , adds vella . it s such a slow , meandering game built to be a music box for jim s beautiful soundtrack . you fight shapes , lose health over time , read a book that collects thoughts . you are meant to just stand and look at moody pixel art . all of it seems really damn strange . but millions of people did it . they meandered and fought shapes and stood and looked . they listened to jim s music . thinking about it like that kind of floors me . that success has had a profound impact on its developers . combined with its other games like the adorable puzzler critter crunch and strategy game might and magic clash of heroes , sworcery helped to turn capy into one of the most respected independent studios in the industry , and the focal point of the vibrant indie game scene in toronto . the studio has since released acclaimed games like the time travelling shoot em up super time force and is working on the much anticipated below , due to launch this summer . it gave us a lot of confidence to keep pushing and making games we believe in , says vella . the slog through development takes a toll , but having so many people understand what we were trying to do is invigorating . guthrie , meanwhile , credits most of his subsequent success to sworcery . it really changed everything , he says . i had been making music my whole life up until that point , and had a little bit of success . honestly , i was still super broke and didn t have any money . and i didn t have anybody who wanted to hire me to do music for film or tv or games or anything . it really changed everything . adams took the opportunity to largely go quiet and focus on what was coming next . he has pulled back from the industry in a lot of ways . the last time he attended gdc was in , a year after the release of sworcery . once he realized the game was likely to be a success , he proposed to jori baldwin , his longtime girlfriend and the inspiration for sworcery s lead character , the scythian . a few months later the two were married in her hometown in quebec , surrounded by friends , family , and wilderness . eventually they left the hectic life of the big city and bought a small house in the woods in quebec , just along the border with vermont . in they had a little girl . adams calls her a little sylvan sprite . during that time he s been working on a follow up to sworcery , though he s not ready to show it just yet . like his first project , it ll be a collaboration adams is working alongside an as of yet unnamed partner and much of the focus will be on creating a specific mood and vibe . the pair don t have a release date in mind , but the game is being designed for traditional game consoles , not mobile , and will feature d graphics in place of adams distinctive pixels . while many game developers struggle with the idea of following a big hit , especially when it s their first release , adams doesn t appear phased by sworcery s success . my challenge the last few years has been can i create this thing that i want to create ? and that keeps me busy enough , and until that s finished i don t have too many worries outside of that , he says . as for sworcery , he says there isn t really anything he would change about the game in retrospect . that includes the tweet button , a feature which was actually made more prominent after playtesting showed people would often miss it . we were worried that the button would never get used , he says . 	 it s still early in , but oxenfree is already one of the most striking games of the year . while it looks like a traditional point and click adventure game , with its d world and painterly visuals , it s actually an inventive twist on interactive storytelling that puts dialog at the forefront . as you explore the story , a twisted yet charming tale of teens trapped on a haunted island , you re able to engage in deep conversations with other characters , and the action never stops while you chat . it s an integral part of the experience , and it gives the game a distinct feel . oxenfree is the first game from new studio night school , formed by veterans of disney and telltale games , and it could one day become a movie or television show with a little help from the creator of the walking dead . when you think of skybound , you probably think of comic books . the entertainment company was founded in by walking dead creator robert kirkman as a way to help creators bring their comics to a larger audience . it has since expanded in multiple directions , dabbling in television and film , and even helping pewdiepie launch a new show on youtube . the company has a knack for taking a property most notably the walking dead and successfully translating it to multiple mediums . now , it s turning its attention to video games by partnering with small studios like night school . we re looking for something that feels very authentic , and also very new and fresh and innovative in a very specific way , says dan murray , president of skybound s interactive division . murray joined the company in early with the goal of expanding further into games . by that point skybound had already seen quite a bit of success with telltale games adaptation of the walking dead , one of the rare video games adapted from another medium to be both a critical and commercial success . the series is still ongoing a spin off game starring series fan favorite michonne just launched and it helped turn telltale into one of the preeminent names in interactive storytelling . but for skybound , the company also wanted to do in video games what it had already done in comics help other creators bring their visions to life . one of the things that most people notice about skybound is that it s a company built around creators , murray says . one of the big things we ve been focused on the last couple of years is finding some new voices from the gaming space and bringing those into the fold . the fruits of that work have only recently started to show . this year skybound has partnered with two different game studios , taking an almost publisher like role in the process . those games include both oxenfree and labyrinth , a collectible card game rpg hybrid that just hit steam this week as an early access title . we weren t in a spot where we needed a traditional publisher . though the partnership between skybound and oxenfree developer night school studio was only formally announced in january , it s been in the works for some time . murray and night school co founder sean krankel had known each other dating back several years , and were looking into ways to work together . we just had a similar outlook on how games could be transferred into various other media , says krankel . when the first trailer for oxenfree was released last year at the game developers conference in san francisco , it piqued the interest of none other than robert kirkman , who reached out to murray about potentially working with the game s developers . the game was fully funded , we weren t in a spot where we needed a traditional publisher , says krankel . but skybound was able to offer something else a chance to expand oxenfree beyond just gaming . they have shown that they know how to take an intellectual property and put it into various other media and do it in a way that isn t overly opportunistic , but a way that s really true to the original vision , explains krankel . we re in the very early process of developing oxenfree as something that can make its way into film or tv , and we work so closely with the tv and film guys at skybound who have no interest in taking it and co opting it and chopping it up . they re very vested in making an actual extension of what makes the game special . skybound also helps with promotion , using its clout to show off the game at events like comic con and placing print ads in the walking dead magazine . but for krankel , it s the potential expansion of the franchise that s really attractive , and it s something no one else really offers . to be honest , if the skybound thing hadn t come around , none of this other stuff would be happening , because the other potential film partnerships just didn t feel all that right and we , being so tiny , don t have the bandwidth to focus heavily on that , he says . for other game studios , the partnership is a bit different . in the case of labyrinth developer free range games , skybound is serving more of an advisory role . it s not a traditional publisher developer relationship , says free range president chris scholz . there are a lot of things that skybound can do . honestly , one of the most useful things has just been advice and mentoring . all of those guys have such huge experience creating original ip , that just having weekly meetings with them has been very insightful . skybound is helping refine the branding around the game , while also handling community focused promotions on services like twitch . they ve got the muscle of a big company . many game developers including both krankel and scholz go the independent route in an attempt to get away from the often stifling world of big studios . so the idea of working with a large publisher isn t particularly appealing . that s the reason why small , boutique publishers like devolver digital have popped up , operating more like a punk rock music label than a traditional game publisher . they re able to give game developers more of a personal connection , and skybound has a similar appeal but with the added bonus of its experience and connections in various worlds of media . they ve got the muscle of a big company , but none of the layers of management that make actually getting anything done difficult , says scholz . the gaming initiative is still a very new thing , and both projects so far happened relatively organically , with murray reaching out to developers he already knew . whether or not that s something that can scale as skybound expands its work in gaming is unclear , and will likely depend on the success of these early partnerships . but even at this formative stage , the company is already setting itself apart from the stereotypical monolithic image many have of a game publisher . they just get it , says krankel . 	 deepmind s dramatic victory over legendary go player lee se dol earlier today is a huge moment in the history of artificial intelligence , and something many predicted would be decades away . i was very surprised , says lee . i didn t expect to lose . i didn t think alphago would play the game in such a perfect manner . but why is it so impressive that deepmind s alphago program backed by the might of google has beaten one of the game s most celebrated figures ? to understand that , you have to understand the game s roots , and how the deepmind team has built alphago to uproot them . go , known as weiqi in china , igo in japan , and baduk in korea , is an abstract board game that dates back nearly , years . it s a game of strategy played across a x grid players take turns placing black and white stones to surround points on the grid and capture their opponent s territory . although the ruleset is very small , it creates a challenge of extraordinary depth and nuance . sam byford it s one of the great intellectual mind sports of the world , says toby manning , treasurer of the british go association and referee of alphago s victory over european champion fan hui last year . it s got extremely simple rules , but these rules give rise to an awful lot of complexity . manning cites a classic quote from noted th century chess and go player edward lasker while the baroque rules of chess could only have been created by humans , the rules of go are so elegant , organic , and rigorously logical that if intelligent life forms exist elsewhere in the universe , they almost certainly play go . go is one of the great intellectual mind sports of the world because of go s deep intricacy , human players become experts through years of practice , honing their intuition and learning to recognize gameplay patterns . the immediate appeal is that the rules are simple and easy to understand , but then the long term appeal is that you can t get tired of this game because there is such a depth , says korea baduk association secretary general lee ha jin above . although you are spending so much time , there is always something new to learn and you feel that you can get better and stronger . after starting to play the game at five years old , lee ha jin displayed such a level of talent that her parents decided to send her to a private go school in seoul . she lived with her teacher , went to regular school in the daytime , then came back and played go for several hours every night . lee eventually turned professional at the age of . a visit to her current workplace , the korea baduk association , illustrates the game s stature in this country . members of the korea women baduk league play out matches in stoic silence on one floor . another floor hosts a room stacked with storied trophies , many of which are slightly creepy disembodied hands . one old metaphorical name for the game translates as hand talk . and in the basement , there s a full fledged operating center for baduk tv , a cable channel dedicated to go . one of its studios has a mock up stage for the alphago showdown , where the channel can reenact the matches and provide extra analysis . sam byford every go player i ve spoken to says the same thing about the game its appeal lies in depth through simplicity . and that also gets to the heart of why it s so difficult for computers to master . there s limited data available just from looking at the board , and choosing a good move demands a great deal of intuition . alphago gets better by playing itself chess and checkers do not need sophisticated evaluation functions , says jonathan schaeffer , a computer scientist at the university of alberta who wrote chinook , the first program to solve checkers . simple heuristics get most of what you need . for example , in chess and checkers the value of material dominates other pieces of knowledge if i have a rook more than you in chess , then i am almost always winning . go has no dominant heuristics . from the human s point of view , the knowledge is pattern based , complex , and hard to program . until alphago , no one had been able to build an effective evaluation function . so how did deepmind do it ? alphago uses deep learning and neural networks to essentially teach itself to play . just as google photos lets you search for all your pictures with a cat in them because it holds the memory of countless cat images that have been processed down to the pixel level , alphago s intelligence is based on it having been shown millions of go positions and moves from human played games . the twist is that deepmind continually reinforces and improves the system s ability by making it play millions of games against tweaked versions of itself . this trains a policy network to help alphago predict the next moves , which in turn trains a value network to ascertain and evaluate those positions . alphago looks ahead at possible moves and permutations , going through various eventualities before selecting the one it deems most likely to succeed . the combined neural nets save alphago from doing excess work the policy network helps reduce the breadth of moves to search , while the value network saves it from having to internally play out the entirety of each match to come to a conclusion . sam byford this reinforced learning system makes alphago a lot more human like and , well , artificially intelligent than something like ibm s deep blue , which beat chess grandmaster garry kasparov by using brute force computing power to search for the best moves something that just isn t practical with go . it s also why deepmind can t tweak alphago in between matches this week , and since the system only improves by teaching itself , the single match each day isn t going to make a dent in its learning . deepmind founder demis hassabis says that although alphago has improved since beating fan hui in october , it s using roughly the same computing power for the lee se dol matches , having already hit a point of diminishing returns in that regard . deepmind wants to apply machine learning to smartphones , healthcare , and robotsthat s not to say that alphago as it exists today would be a better system for chess , according to one of deep blue s creators . i suspect that it could perhaps produce a program that is superior to all human grandmasters , says ibm research scientist murray campbell , who describes alphago as a very impressive program . but i don t think it would be state of the art , and why i say that is that chess is a qualitatively different game on the search side search is much more important in chess than it is in go . there are certainly parts of go that require very deep search but it s more a game about intuition and evaluation of features and seeing how they interact . in chess there s really no substitute for search , and modern programs the best program i know is a program called komodo it s incredibly efficient at searching through the many possible moves and searching incredibly deeply as well . i think it would be difficult for a general mechanism had it been created in alphago and applied to chess , i just don t think it d be able to recreate that search and it d need another breakthrough . deepmind , however , believes that the principles it uses in alphago have broader applications than just go . hassabis makes a distinction between narrow ais like deep blue and artificial general intelligence agi , the latter being more flexible and adaptive . ultimately the google unit thinks its machine learning techniques will be useful in robotics , smartphone assistant systems , and healthcare last month deepmind announced that it had struck a deal with the uk s national health service . sam byford today , though , the focus is on go , and with good reason the first victory over lee se dol is major news even if alphago loses the next four matches . go would lose one big weapon , lee ha jin told me last week when asked about what defeat for lee se dol would mean for the game at large . we were always so proud that go was the only game that can not be defeated by computers , but we wouldn t be able to say that any more , so that would be a little disappointing . we re absolutely in shock . but alphago could also open up new avenues for the game . members of the go community are as stunned with the inventive , aggressive way alphago won as the fact that it did at all . there were some moves at the beginning what would you say about those three moves on the right on the fifth line ? american go association president andy okun asked vp of operations andrew jackson , who also happens to be a google software engineer , at the venue following the match . as it pushes from behind ? jackson replied . if i made those same moves okun continued . our teachers would slap our wrists , jackson agreed . they d smack me ! says okun . you don t push from behind on the fifth line ! we re absolutely in shock , said jackson . there s a real question , though . we ve got this established go orthodoxy , so what s this going to reveal to us next ? is it going to shake things up ? are we going to find these things that we thought were true these things you think you know and they just ain t so ? the verge is in seoul for the entire google deepmind challenge match series follow our coverage at this dedicated hub , and watch the matches live on youtube . 	 feminist critic anita sarkeesian has risen to fame by dissecting pop culture . her series tropes vs . women in video games , which breaks down gender based gaming cliches ranging from kidnapped princesses to women as prizes , has become both a successful youtube channel and a linchpin in the video game world s culture wars . but her latest project involves talking about fact instead of fiction . ordinary women daring to defy history created by sarkeesian , former offworld writer and editor laura hudson , and producer elisabeth aultman is a biographical web series profiling influential women throughout history . the project will focus on women who defied gender stereotypes but often found themselves pushed to the sidelines or erased from history books while their male contemporaries were venerated . the first five episode season features th century pirate ching shih anarchist emma goldman mathematician ada lovelace journalist ida b . wells and murasaki shikibu , author of the first modern novel . the crowdfunding pitch for ordinary women , with its , goal , is far more ambitious than that of sarkeesian s last campaign . in , her site feminist frequency asked for a mere , to make tropes vs . women in video games , an outgrowth of her existing youtube video work . the response both positive and negative was overwhelming . backers pledged nearly , toward the project , leading feminist frequency to add several more videos as stretch goals . at the same time , the project drew unexpected ire from a wave of online anti feminists , who launched a dedicated campaign of violent threats and abuse that has continued for nearly four years . in , online reactionary movement gamergate deemed sarkeesian one of its greatest enemies , accusing her of scamming backers by releasing videos too slowly or of attempting to censor video games with her criticism . today , feminist frequency has broadened its scope significantly . sarkeesian has so far put out tropes vs . women videos covering both negative gaming tropes and positive examples of female characters , along with reviews of new games and movies . now registered as a nonprofit , feminist frequency was chosen as one of intel s partners for a diversity initiative in , and it s one of the roughly organizations twitter has tapped for advice on handling harassment . last week , it partnered with game developers zoe quinn and alex lifschitz s anti abuse project crash override , allowing the group to receive tax deductible donations . and there s still a year left of tropes vs . women , a project that sarkeesian readily admits has left her exhausted . it felt like writing a master s thesis in three months with every episode . with tropes , it was supposed to be five episodes that were like minutes each , with a few examples . the international attention and the hate campaign against me really changed the way that we approached the project , says sarkeesian . each installment is packed with offhand references to dozens of games , constructed to carefully anticipate the counter arguments of her most fervent critics , who analyze the to minute videos with the intensity of conspiracy theorists poring over the zapruder film . it felt like writing a master s thesis in three months with every episode , she says . in january , feminist frequency announced that the remaining topics would be divided into more specific tropes split across shorter videos , drawing to a close later this year . i love tropes . i think i m really proud of that work , and we re still continuing to do it , says sarkeesian . but i did get really burnt out , and i m really looking forward to doing something new . each episode of ordinary women will be devoted to a single woman , aimed more at depth than breadth . and sarkeesian says that unlike tropes vs . women , which became increasingly large and amorphous as funding grew , the series will have a set first season that s researched and filmed before the first episode comes out . its creators are also aiming for something more complex and visually compelling than tropes vs . women s straightforward editing . for ordinary women , the team will create animations and music based on art from the subject s time period , and sarkeesian will host wearing outfits loosely inspired by the era . nearly half the total budget including crowdfunding campaign fees and the cost of backer rewards is intended for animation and post production . if everything goes right , sarkeesian , hudson , and aultman plan to release their first video in september . series creators laura hudson left , elisabeth aultman , and anita sarkeesian . among other things , sarkeesian sees ordinary women as a positive antidote to the hackneyed representations of women in fiction many of them driven by a piecemeal or selectively edited version of history . i often hear comments like , we don t know how to write women , or of course women are oppressed and relegated to these degrading roles in games that take place in the past , because that s what women were back then ! she says . i want this to act as inspiration for creative folks to write more engaging women . we want to show that there were real women that you can tell the stories of or base stories on that have done extraordinary , incredible things . i want this to act as inspiration for creative folks to write more engaging women . if there s a problem at the core of ordinary women , though , it s that the first season arguably doesn t deliver on its promise to profile important women we ve forgotten . ada lovelace is one of relatively few women who is frequently cited in popular histories , often credited as the first computer programmer . emma goldman and ida b . wells are less prominent figures , but they re still familiar names , and ching shih had the dubious honor of inspiring a pirates of the caribbean franchise character . i first encountered murasaki shikibu as a child , when she appeared in a s carmen sandiego game . the counter argument is that these women still don t have the same iconic status as male historical figures , especially in the bare bones curricula of primary and secondary schools . while the videos will be released on youtube for everyone , ordinary women is primarily aimed at girls and young women growing up on a diet of textbooks that give all marginalized groups short shrift . i want to help inspire a new generation of girls to be excited about their ancestors , and also inspire them to challenge the status quo and do amazing things , says sarkeesian . and while famous historical figures of any gender were often free to pursue groundbreaking work because they were born to wealth and other privileges , ordinary women s creators are trying to avoid making woman seem synonymous with rich white woman . especially post gamergate , anything related to sarkeesian s work can take on bizarrely epic proportions . it s difficult to logically square the furor over tropes vs . women , for example , with the videos mild tone . sarkeesian says people who hear about the series through her detractors regularly send her confused emails after actually watching an installment . but if you forget the online controversy , tropes vs . women isn t advanced gender theory or radical feminism , but a series of videos about recognizing common narrative themes and archetypes . and ordinary women feels like a similar project . if the series succeeds , it will concisely introduce young audiences to some of the women who have shaped world history while encouraging the rest of us learn a little more about them . 	 even in an era when social networks are constantly pushing us to share more of ourselves , paul davison s projects stand out for their pushiness . davison s first foray into social apps was highlight , which broadcast your profile to everyone in your immediate surroundings . davison s idea was that if enough people passively shared their basic personal details , it would allow for all sorts of serendipitous real world connections . in late , when so called people discovery apps like highlight were on the wane , i met with davison to see a redesigned version of highlight . it took the oversharing premise of the original app and doubled down on it , broadcasting your motion state sitting , running , biking , or driving and even what song you were listening to . as with the first version , highlight . landed with a thud the company never disclosed user numbers , but it recorded fewer than , downloads on android . but one feature of highlight did resonate , davison says today photos . the most popular behavior on highlight was to open the profile of someone on the network and flip through the profile photos they had uploaded . but people didn t upload new photos every often , so the app s most popular behavior came to feel like a dead end . and so davison being davison , he took a flying leap to to a new question what if your friends could see every photo you took ? what if your friends could see every photo you took ? if you ve ever taken an unflattering photo , or a naked one , few ideas sound more terrifying . but plenty of successful social networks once sounded like terrible ideas , davison points out . if you look at the most interesting and loved and useful social products over the last years , you ll find that lots of them have pushed us to share a little more openly than perhaps we felt comfortable doing , he says . before linkedin you would never put your resume online that was a taboo . your employer wouldn t like it . but now of course that s the norm , and it s so useful to be able to see people s backgrounds . before facebook came out it was strange to put photos of your kids online who knows who s out there on the internet ? but now of course you can do that . this line of thinking led to today s release of shorts , a social camera roll for ios . you do control which photos on your camera roll your friends see , but davison says his goal is to get people to share as close to percent of the photos they take as possible . when we build products , we enjoy thinking about places where we could push people a little bit , and give them a really good experience , he says . and what we ve found is that when people first hear about the concept , it might sound a little bit more than what they re used to doing . . . . but once they feel comfortable with that , they realize what a benefit it is to be able to be see what your friends are doing throughout the day , to be able to see so much more about their lives . most photos are buried on our camera rollsdavison argues that most of the photos we take on our phones are effectively useless , because they get buried on our camera rolls and are never shared with anyone . and it s a shame , he says , because those photos contain the moments that show us as we truly are lounging around the house , playing with our kids , shopping for groceries . share those moments with friends , he says , and we ll all feel more connected . open up shorts and you can add friends via their usernames or phone numbers . when you open the app , it presents you with the latest photos from your camera roll . swipe up to share the pictures or down to keep them private . an activity feed shows you your friends tap them and you ll see their last pictures and videos . all of your own photos and videos remain visible to yourself on your profile . swipe up to like friends photos , or down to skip them . you can also tap the photos to add comments . in keeping with highlight s oversharing roots , there s also a discover feed friends of friends and other people shorts thinks you might know . by default , their last photos are visible to everyone . you can make your feed private if you like via the app s settings . within minutes of joining shorts , i received several requests to view my camera roll from strangers and even though i had carefully selected which photos i wanted to share , i still found the requests unnerving and ignored them . if the idea of sharing life s more intimate moments with a small group of friends sounds familiar , it s likely because you ve already used snapchat and its stories feature . a set of rolling photos and videos that are visible for only hours after they re posted , stories is snapchat s best feature and , by all accounts , its most popular . people feel more comfortable sharing knowing that it s all going to disappear , and the result is a network that often feels more lively and authentic than its peers . shorts can feel like a choresnapchat requires you to post photos and videos using the in app camera . with shorts , there s a clumsy extra step after you take the photos , you have to open the app , then go through every photo to decide what you want to share . if you take a lot of photos every day or just use burst mode once or twice this process can feel like a chore . and the delay between taking photos and posting them means that not everything you share is going to be in real time , robbing shorts of snapchat s live action appeal . the first version of shorts , which was never publicly released , omitted the swipe to share mechanic and simply broadcast your camera roll to friends . the problem , as you might imagine , was it was scary , davison says . you don t want to be edgy in the wrong way . you want people to use the product . the public version of shorts may be less scary , but it still strikes me as totalitarian a bid to turn one of our last private digital spaces into yet another forum for likes and comments . snapchat gets us to share more of ourselves because we fundamentally feel safe there . shorts , by contrast , feels like a high wire act . couples or families might find it to be a cute app for keeping in touch . but i d rather keep my camera roll to myself . 	 the champion entered the room to the machine gun clicking of camera shutters . he locked eyes with his opponent s entourage , one of whom was one of the most prominent billionaires on the planet and had just made lofty pronouncements about the importance of the upcoming clash . he looked out at the assembled audience and , in a soft but firm voice , explained why he was confident of vanquishing his rival and securing the million in prize money . his reputation , as well as that of his discipline and his entire species , is at stake . the champion s name is lee se dol , and tomorrow he will play a board game against a computer program from google . it s not just any board game . this is go , an ancient , abstract game that originated in china nearly , years ago , and a game of such staggering depth , nuance , and complexity that it s long been considered impossible for computers to master . but google thinks it may have finally cracked go . its deepmind artificial intelligence unit has been developing a deep learning program called alphago , which has already taken down fan hui , the european go champion , in a series of five matches last october . now it faces lee se dol , a year old south korean considered the game s greatest st century practitioner , earning millions of dollars a year through his prowess . if alphago prevails in this week s series , it will be a significant milestone in the history of ai with broad implications for the future of the technology , emulating ibm s historic victory with its deep blue computer over chess grandmaster garry kasparov almost years ago . the winner here , no matter what happens , is humanity , said alphabet chairman eric schmidt on stage in seoul this morning . that s unlikely to take the pressure off . deepmind approached lee se dol to be alphago s next opponent for a simple reason there can be no better way to test and stretch the system s limits . nicknamed ssen dol strong stone at home , where he s as much national hero as celebrity , lee became a pro go player at the age of and won the first of his world titles five years later . fan hui was a strong opponent , but he s nowhere close to lee se dol s level , korea baduk go association secretary general lee ha jin no relation told me last week . today , she described lee se dol s style as intuitive , unpredictable , creative , intensive , wild , complicated , deep , quick , chaotic in a presentation , which is not the kind of language you tend to associate with players of abstract board games . or computers , for that matter . there is a beauty to the game of go and i don t think machines understand that beauty . lee se dol says he was surprised to receive alphago s challenge , as he hadn t expected ai to reach the level of top players for another decade or so . there is a beauty to the game of go and i don t think machines understand that beauty , he says . but he was instantly curious , and he took less than five minutes to accept the invitation . on stage today , lee se dol expressed confidence that he d beat alphago . i believe human intuition is too advanced for ai to have caught up yet , he said , but noted that since learning more about alphago s capabilities he s gotten slightly more nervous and is no longer convinced he ll win the series . i don t make mistakes often , he said , but if i make any single mistake as a human being i might lose . even a victory for lee se dol would represent a major achievement for deepmind , a british company acquired by google for a reported million in . the unit s ultimate mission is no less than to solve intelligence , with potential uses ranging from healthcare to robotics , but attaining the long sought computer science dream of a world beating go program would catapult deepmind to the forefront of ai research . go is probably the most elegant game that humanity has invented , says deepmind founder demis hassabis , a former child prodigy in chess himself . there are more possible go positions than there are atoms in the universe . hassabis notes that while chess has an average of around possible moves for a given position , go gives the player about ten times as many options , resulting in a massively higher branching factor that is far harder for any ai to deal with . they ve clearly advanced the state of the art . appropriately enough given deepmind s parent company , the solution requires a more efficient search algorithm . but this isn t much use for go without an improved ability to evaluate the game itself , which is the biggest challenge for computers it s much harder for them to work out who s winning than it is with a game like chess , for example . alphago is powered by two deep neural networks that guide its machine learning and search techniques , arriving at the best move by narrowing and shortening the tree diagram of possibilities . and while the program initially learned to play go by being fed data from historical real world matches , it s since been trained further by playing thousands of matches against itself , continually reinforcing its ability . i think it s very impressive , says murray campbell , an ibm research scientist who was one of the principal creators of deep blue . they ve clearly advanced the state of the art . that s how alphago was able to shock the go community by beating fan hui last october , the first time any computer program had ever beaten a pro player without using a handicap . i expected fan hui to win , said toby manning , referee of that match and treasurer of the british go association . i was really surprised at how well alphago did . starting tomorrow , we ll find out just how much deepmind s ingenuity and alphago s self training has paid off . the five matches take place on wednesday march th , thursday march th , saturday march th , sunday march th , and finally tuesday march th all start at pm kst pm et the previous night and will be streamed live on youtube . the verge will be reporting on the series direct from seoul , exploring various aspects of go , artificial intelligence , and machine learning throughout the matches . you can keep track of our coverage in this dedicated hub . but what s going to happen ? really , the one thing i know is that no one knows for sure , whether they re hardcore go players or deep in the world of artificial intelligence . alphago learnt a lot from studying professional play , but it s very difficult to get better than professional , says manning . it s difficult to get better than your teacher just by listening to what your teacher tells you . personally i suspect that alphago will not beat lee se dol . i expect it ll be or in lee se dol s favour . but i ve been wrong before ! from one data point it s hard for me to tell , says ibm s campbell . lee se dol is clearly a couple of classes better at least than the european champion . if i have to put my neck out ? i d say that the computer will win but it will be close . on one hand , i believe that lee se dol has an advantage of experience , says the university of alberta s jonathan schaeffer , a computer scientist who wrote chinook , the first software program to solve checkers . lee knows a lot about go . alphago has only been learning for less than a year . it is possible that there are gaps in alphago that are not yet apparent they have not had enough time to learn well how to play all the scenarios that might arise in a game . on the other hand , never underestimate technology . i ve never seen or imagined a computer playing to lee se dol s level . i actually have no clue but i m very excited to see the game because alphago plays to the level of its opponent , says lee ha jin . when it plays lee se dol it means it has to play to the lee se dol level , and i ve never seen or imagined a computer playing to that level . maybe eric schmidt struck the right note , then , when he said that any result will be a victory for humanity . and hassabis is quick to note that deepmind has grander ambitions than games , planning to turn its attention to real world problems after alphago demonstrates how flexible and powerful learning algorithms can be . but with the result still very much in question , all eyes will be on seoul tomorrow to find out if one more game has fallen to the machines . 	 the verge in celebration of our th anniversary , this month we re publishing a series of interviews with innovative leaders about what the next five years hold . to read more about this series , read our editor nilay patel s introduction here . by , everyday software will be vastly more intelligent and powerful , replacing humans in more and more tasks . how will we keep up ? while some predict mass unemployment or all out war between humans and artificial intelligence , others foresee a less bleak future . professor manuela veloso , head of the machine learning department at carnegie mellon university , envisions a future in which humans and intelligent systems are inseparable , bound together in a continual exchange of information and goals that she calls symbiotic autonomy . in veloso s future , it will be hard to distinguish human agency from automated assistance but neither people nor software will be much use without the other . veloso is already testing out the idea on the cmu campus , building roving , segway shaped robots called cobots to autonomously escort guests from building to building and ask for human help when they fall short . it s a new way to think about artificial intelligence , and one that could have profound consequences in the next five years . we sat down with veloso in pittsburgh to talk about robots , programming spontaneity , and the challenge artificial intelligence poses for humanity . the interviewone of the big trends we ve seen over the last five years is automation . at the same time , we re also seeing more intelligence built into tools we already have , like phones and computers . where do you see this process in five years ? in the future , i believe that there will be a co existence between humans and artificial intelligence systems that will be hopefully of service to humanity . these ai systems will involve software systems that handle the digital world , and also systems that move around in physical space , like drones , and robots , and autonomous cars , and also systems that process the physical space , like the internet of things . you will have more intelligent systems in the physical world , too not just on your cell phone or computer , but physically present around us , processing and sensing information about the physical world and helping us with decisions that include knowing a lot about features of the physical world . as time goes by , we ll also see these ai systems having an impact on broader problems in society managing traffic in a big city , for instance making complex predictions about the climate supporting humans in the big decisions they have to make . right now , some of those systems can seem very ominous . when an algorithm or a robot makes a decision , we don t always know why it made that decision , which can make it hard to trust . how can technologists address that ? one of the things i m working on is that i would like these machines to be able to explain themselves to be accountable for the decisions they make , to be transparent . a lot of the research we do is letting humans or users query the system . when cobot , my robot , arrives to my office slightly late , i can say , why are you late ? or which route did you take ? so we are working on the ability for these ai systems to explain themselves , while they learn , while they improve , in order to provide explanations with different levels of detail . we want to interact with these robots in ways that make us humans eventually trust ai systems more . you would like to be able to say , why are you saying that ? or why are you recommending this ? providing that explanation is a lot of the research that i am doing now , and i believe robots being able to do that will lead to better understanding and trust in these ai systems . eventually , through these interactions , humans are also going to be able to correct the ai systems . so we re also doing research trying to incorporate these corrections and have the systems learn from instruction . i think that s a big part of our ability to coexist with these ai systems . why do you think these systems are improving so quickly now ? what was holding us back over the last years of ai research ? you have to understand , for an ai system to know what s a cell phone or what s a cup or whether a person is healthy , you need knowledge . a lot of ai research in the early days was actually acquiring that knowledge . we would have to ask humans . we would have to go to books and manually enter that information into the computer . it seems that the world reveals itself on the internet . magically , in the last few years , more and more of this information is digital . it seems that the world reveals itself on the internet . so ai systems are now about the data that s available and the ability to process that data and make sense of it , and we re still figuring out the best ways to do that . on the other hand , we are very optimistic because we know that the data is there . the question now becomes , how do we learn from it ? how do you use it ? how do you represent it ? how do you study the distributions the statistics of the data ? how do you put all these pieces together ? that s how you get deep learning and deep reinforcement learning and systems that do automatic translation and robots that play soccer . all these things are possible because we can process all this data so much more effectively and we don t have to take the enormous step of acquiring that knowledge and representing it . it s there . one of the big developments of the last five years has been personal assistants like siri and alexa , which are both powered by machine learning . i m curious how you see those systems changing over the next five years . you know , i m a big fan of alexa . i have one at home , and the amount of things i can talk with alexa about have become broader . at the beginning it was just , what s the weather like ? now i can ask , what is on my calendar ? alexa s learning but i m also learning what alexa can do . i m fascinated by how much better it becomes over time . i ll tell you one thing that is interesting when i leave the house , i tell alexa , alexa , stop . i want to stop whatever music it s playing , because i m leaving . but if i tell alexa , alexa , i m leaving , it doesn t understand that i m leaving means that it should stop . i have to explicitly say stop . so i would envision personal assistants becoming more aware of instructions like alexa , when i m leaving , that means that you should stop playing the music . that kind of instructive command is going to be on the research agenda . subscribe to our newsletter so you don t miss the rest of the verge interviews . terms apply . subscribe do you think we ll get to a point where we can ask personal assistants something like , oh , the check engine light turned on in my car , should i take it in ? or google , i just got this job offer , should i take it ? i think you might . these types of questions are decision making questions but suppose you had to decide between health insurance plans and you were confused about all the options . you might tell alexa as you were going to sleep , alexa , why don t you look at all these health insurance plans , or all these cars i can buy , or these schools my kid can go to , and it could compile a report for you overnight . why are you saying that i should buy that car ? and a lot of the relevant information is already available online . you can find all the features of the schools , and reviews of the schools by other people . you have blogs about the schools or about other options . you could have an ai system that would gather all the features of these schools , how far they are , what other reviewers they have , etc . . you could enter a profile of what you would like from an education , and ai systems can put that information together . they can look at the features , they can learn from past experience , they can process all that information , massage everything that s available and , with your guidance , with your questions , actually present that information in a way that may be easier for you to digest . because the information currently online is overwhelming and sometimes you cannot handle all that information in real time . eventually , you might also want to have the assistant tell you the reasons why it gave you those suggestions . you might ask , why are you saying that i should buy that car ? i really don t like that brand . i think it s a very important step , having ai systems support humans in decision making , trying to combine and learn from all the information and incorporate feedback you might give . what could those systems do beyond personal decisions ? you could imagine a version of the same system working on scientific papers . there are so many scientific papers published , and now they re all online . you can imagine an ai system that helps a researcher digest all that information and finds things that are related to their interests . the ai systems will still be a product of the information that s online . a lot of people are working on information text information , picture information , flow charts , tables trying to understand what s online and eventually infer needs from all that information . for example , there s an area of machine learning called active learning in which we infer that there are not enough images of some process and you might want to add more images of that nature . i envision ai systems capable of identifying what s missing , to connect the dots of all the information that s online and request more data when it s necessary . you could imagine it asking researchers , if you just tell me more about how these cells will interact with this chemical , i would have a much better model of what s happening . part of that picture is your idea of symbiotic autonomy we see in the cobots , right ? those robots are loose on the cmu campus right now , navigating through the computer science buildings with a combination of depth cameras , wi fi , and lidar . they don t have arms so they have trouble with a lot of simple navigation tasks , but you made them very good at asking for help . yes , it was kind of a discovery for us when we realized that these autonomous robots would have limitations . they would not be able to necessarily open all the doors of the world , they would not be able to understand all the spoken language . maybe they will become better over time , but i do believe that in the same way that humans have limitations i speak with an accent , i don t play squash as well as someone else that these robots will also have limitations . the robot proactively asks for help when there is something they can t do , they don t know , or they don t understand . it became clear for us that these robots , these ai systems , one of their main features would be to identify what they don t know , what they can t do , what they don t understand , and invoke help from humans . can you push the elevator button ? can you open the door ? can you put something in my basket ? this is what we call symbiotic autonomy . the robot proactively asks for help when there is something they can t do , they don t know , or they don t understand . that s a very new way of thinking , that we are going to have ai systems around us that are going to ask for our help for part of the tasks . as these systems scale up , that can happen in much more complex ways . systems already communicate wirelessly , drawing on data in the cloud , or are helped by remote teams . you can think of ai systems in constant symbiosis with everything else , with other information on the web , with other ai systems , with humans next to them , with remote humans . it becomes not a problem of developing self contained ai systems , but an ai system that can recognize when it does not know , or when it needs more information , or when it thinks something with some probability but it s not sure . it s not that it can solve all the problems up front , but it can rely on all these other sources around it . that s how i envision it . how do you see that symbiosis changing the ai systems we already use ? so let s go back to the scenario of asking an ai for help with decisions about the school or decisions about what health insurance to take . i imagine these ai systems might at some point need information that the human did not provide . the ai system might realize that if i had just known this additional feature , it might help in giving you a better decision . what s really interesting is when ai systems can recognize what they re missing . what s really interesting is when ai systems can recognize what they re missing by themselves . they recognize that if they just had more information , if they were able to do some specific action for instance , if they could just reserve a room in that hotel that s not bookable online , they could get you a hotel closer to your conference . i really think that ability is what s important , because i m not going to know all the things that the system needs to make a decision . currently we enter an address for the destination on uber or google maps or waze , and that s enough for the route to be planned . however , waze could come back to you and ask , are you in a hurry ? am i supposed to get you the shortest path ? would you like to just take a divergence and see that beautiful scenery there ? what if the assistant knows that i really love orchids , or that i really love some type of art ? if i had just diverged slightly , i could have visited this great museum . it does not know that in its route planning . if it knew that , it would have routed me through that museum path . a lot of our current ai systems are specialized in specific tasks like recognizing objects or optimizing routes but that s resulted in a very siloed kind of expertise . i m curious what you think is holding us back from a kind of more generalizable intelligence in software . the general ai problem is extremely challenging . i do think that we have techniques now deep learning , deep reinforcement learning that have a flavor of general intelligence . we are also doing a lot of research on trying to understand this concept of transfer learning . how do we have algorithms that , because they can address one particular task , also learn to do something else ? we are not done with understanding ai . we don t know how to do many things . we are still really in the infancy of ai in terms of algorithms and techniques , methods of making generalizations , methods of providing explanations , we re still waving our hands about a lot of these things . we are still really in the infancy of ai . . . we re still waving our hands about a lot of these things . i do think general ai could one day come out of an integration between specialized ai systems , merging them into this society of mind that minsky described . and you could have special purpose algorithms that solve problems of great complexity , as herb simon and allen newell predicted in the beginnings of ai research . so the research on general ai is extremely challenging , but it s also extremely exciting now because there s so much data . there are just so many people using digital devices and generating data . more and more , by using computers and cell phones and alexa and uber , all of these put us on a very good path to do research on these general ai problems . we still have a lot of research to do . we still don t know exactly what a general ai system will be , but we are on a good path . does that uncertainty ever worry you ? some worry that as soon as artificial intelligence outpaces human intelligence , humanity will be doomed . i am a complete optimist . i think that the research we re doing on autonomous systems autonomous cars , autonomous robots it s a call to humanity to be responsible . in some sense , it has nothing to do with the technology . the technology will be developed . it was invented by us by humans . it didn t come from the sky from aliens . it s our own discovery . it s the human mind that conceived such technology , and it s up to the human mind also to make good use of it . i have a lot of trust that this will happen . i m very optimistic because i really think that humanity is aware that they need to handle this technology carefully . and i am aware , too . but the best thing to do is invest in education . leave the robots alone . the robots will keep getting better , but focus on education , people knowing each other , caring for each other . caring for the advancement of society . caring for the advancement of earth , of nature , improving science . solve all these problems . cure cancer . end poverty . there are so many things we can get involved in as humankind that could make good use of this technology we re developing . in some sense , the humanism of ai will eventually be what brings us together . so , i m optimistic . this interview has been edited and condensed	 in the last four months , new albums and singles from adele , coldplay , future , drake , beyonc , rihanna , and kanye west haven t been available on spotify upon their release . this trend will likely continue with upcoming albums from drake and beyonc avoiding the most popular streaming service when they drop . spotify is still the top streaming service around , but the company has done little to address the lack of new music from a large collection of major artists when their albums are released . the projects eventually show up all of the aforementioned artists outside of adele , beyonc , and kanye west brought their projects over to spotify a week after they were released but that first week hype and those streams can never be recaptured . the big question for spotify will this absence start to hurt its user growth in an increasingly competitive market ? why doesn t spotify have the new kanye album ? michael marzzacco marswaggo february , it s not a new phenomenon this trend has dates back to when adele s was kept off spotify because the service wouldn t accommodate her request for the project to be available exclusively to paying subscribers . in , beyonc passed on putting her eponymous album on the platform , and coldplay followed up in , keeping ghost stories off spotify and all other streaming services for four months . arguably the biggest blow came when taylor swift pulled her entire catalog off the service . will the absence of exclusives start to hurt spotify s user growth ? the single biggest complaint from artists about spotify has been its free tier , which is ad supported and pays out a much lower per stream rate than its premium service . artists feel like they re giving away their music too cheaply . financially , million paid user streams on apple music is more valuable to an artist than million streams from spotify made up of both free and paid users . and the company has so far been unwilling to change its stance that any album put on the service must be available to all users , although there are reports that spotify is softening its stance on the issue . spotify won t sell out the majority of its user base , but if it was willing to pay artists for exclusives like apple and tidal , could it win these big names ? potentially , yes . spotify once had its own exclusives it had led zeppelin s catalog exclusively for two years beginning in , before the deal expired but the number of major artists avoiding spotify as a launch partner for their new projects is steadily growing , and the last notable exclusive spotify had was a prince single last summer . spotify spotify prince dropped a single just for spotify fans ! gtpic . twitter . com snlldvmsex prince eg prince eg july , artists would likely be happy to have both the income from an exclusive , a key revenue stream in an age of declining album sales , and also be on the world s most popular streaming service . spotify paying artists for the rights to exclusive albums or to windowed releases the industry term for a temporary exclusive release like drake did with summer sixteen on apple music could help close the payment gap between premium only albums and albums on both tiers , alleviating the main issues keeping major artists off the platform during their release weeks , while not betraying its philosophical beliefs . it won t help smaller artists , but you can t win everything . right now , however , spotify is betting on the loyalty of its users and a robust feature set that outpaces just about every other streaming service around . it has strong features like discover weekly and spotify running , and new additions like video content from major networks that it believes can keep users engaged in the service , despite the disruptions a missed album release may cause . and landing exclusives is not cheap . spotify is betting on the loyalty of its usersdrake reportedly got paid around million in his deal with apple music , and rihanna , kanye , beyonc , and coldplay each got percent equity stakes from tidal when they signed on to be owners in the service . spotify did raise million last june , but even if it was willing to pay , it would likely have to engage in a bidding war with apple , tidal , and perhaps in the near future amazon and google . if spotify starts targeting artists for exclusive deals , the fees to lock artists up will inevitably rise , and that s a fight spotify can t win against companies like apple , which has hundreds of billions in the bank . luckily for spotify , the influx of exclusive deals hasn t seemed to hurt its growth at all it s reportedly nearing million paid subscribers which would mean that the rate at which it s adding new customers , and more importantly paying customers , is actually increasing . for its part , spotify doesn t see these exclusives as an issue , and told the verge it has no plans to pay for exclusives . we re not really in the business of paying for exclusives , because we think they re bad for artists and they re bad for fans , jonathan prince , spotify s head of communications told me . artists want as many fans as possible to hear their music , and fans want to be able to hear whatever they re excited about or interested in exclusives get in the way of that for both sides . of course , we understand that short promotional exclusives are common and we don t have an absolute policy against them , but we definitely think the best practice for everybody is wide release . he isn t wrong , exclusives can and do cause issues for both artists and fans . drake ampnbspmissed out on his first number one record because his video for hotline bling was exclusive to apple music , and they don t share music videos streaming numbers with billboard or nielsen music . but exclusives are also a reality of the music industry in , and avoiding them altogether could have long term ramifications . what happens when people burn through free trials that apple and tidal are currently offering to new users ? we re not really in the business of paying for exclusives . right now if you want to hear kanye west s new album the life of pablo , you can just sign up for a trial on tidal and listen to it for free . but what happens if beyonc releases her album on tidal in a few months and that trial has expired ? or when drake releases views from the on apple music , and your trial has already expired when you used it the last time he released an album ? spotify may also be banking on user burnout around exclusives . does it make more sense to just stick with your favorite service , even if means waiting a week , instead of bouncing back and forth between different exclusives , or paying for more than one streaming service at a time ? of course the inverse is also true . will users pay for spotify and a second service , or will they just stick with whichever service offers up their favorite artists content first ? that s the question that should keep spotify up at night will its users keep paying for a service that requires them to hunt for new music from the world s biggest artists during the first week of a release ? not having exclusive content can go from an inconvenience to a serious problem very quickly if spotify s competitors start to lock down superstars to their platforms for the foreseeable future . so what do you think ? should spotify go after exclusive releases to please its users and potentially end up in a bidding contest with apple music it likely can t win ? or should it stand pat , and lean on its excellent feature set while users wait an extra week for projects from the world s biggest artists ? poll does spotify need exclusive content from major artists ? yes , i need new music as soon as it amp s available no , i amp m happy to wait on the music and stay with spotify wait , people pay for music ? ampnbsp votes results	 a month ago , after one of the worst weeks of his life , siqi chen received a message from an unlikely source . chen is the ceo of the company behind stolen , a controversial game that let users buy and sell twitter profiles like trading cards . each user started with virtual currency that could be used to buy others rapid buying and selling bidded up the price on popular profiles . after an initial surge in popularity , the game ampnbspcame under criticism for allowing people s profiles to be traded and commented on without their consent . facing a barrage of criticism over the game s potential to enable abuse , chen ampnbsppulled stolen from the app store on january th . three days later , the direct message arrived on twitter . it was from ampnbspzoe quinn , the game developer , writer , and activist . quinn was the original target of ampnbspgamergate , the campaign of harassment against women in the video game industry . the movement began in august after quinn s ex boyfriend wrote a long , acrimonious , and inaccurate blog post about her she subsequently became subject to doxxing and death threats . today she runs ampnbspcrash override , a network of experts who offer support to victims of abuse . i know how nasty backlash can be on the internet . early in stolen s life , quinn had sent the company a sharply worded note asking to have her profile removed from the game . it quickly complied . but quinn s message to chen that sunday morning was not accusatory . instead , seeing the furor directed at chen by stolen players , she offered her support . i know how nasty backlash can be on the internet , quinn says . i just reached out i was like , hey , i hope you guys are all right . i know you got a lot of backlash . if stuff gets scary or anything , i do run an anti harassment organization . let me know if there s anything i can do to help . what followed led to today s release of ampnbspfamous , an ampnbspios app that picks up where stolen left off . an android version is now in beta . like its predecessor , the game represents an effort to let people show off their fandom by collecting their favorite friends , celebrities , and brands on twitter . but the game differs in several crucial respects , which has earned it the support of quinn , who is now a paid consultant to the development team . famous is different from stolen in two important ways . one , the game is entirely opt in unless a person joins famous , you ll never see them in the game . second , the app has dropped its off putting language related to stealing and owning people . instead , you become their biggest fan . what used to feel uncomfortably like a slave auction is now depicted as a show of support . the result is a game that captures much of what made stolen appealing without creating the same avenues for abuse . this vision and this design are supposed to be about being a fan , says chen , who remains unreservedly apologetic for the problems surrounding stolen . the germ of famous , he says , was what if we made it about being a fan ? a sense of competition over who s the biggest fan . the game is explicitly positive . it s not like , ha ha , you re mine now . it s not like , ha ha you re mine now . another new feature is called top fans . it appears underneath your profile , and shows everyone who has competed to be your no . fan . it makes the gameplay feels a lot less ephemeral , which was probably the biggest problem with our old mechanic , chen says . and it s true stolen often felt pointless because someone could steal a person back instantly , without ever leaving a trace of your momentary possession . those changes aside , famous looks and feels a lot like stolen which in turn was based on friends for sale , a once popular facebook game chen released in that eventually ampnbspsold to zynga . with famous you still log in through twitter , and players are still represented by trading cards . instead of showing a price tag , the card now shows a numerical fame value . to become someone s biggest fan , you ll have to pay up . you can buy currency using real money . or you can use the currency you earn from your own , um fan transactions ? the language around stolen , while fatally creepy , was also much easier to grasp . there are currently no ways for users to communicate inside the app . you can add comments to your own profile , and people can like them , but that s it . chen is considering adding chat functions over time , but given the potential for abuse he s being cautious . however , he says building a community inside the app is the only way to make it a sustainable business . over time , he imagines creating lists of high profile users around topics like music , sports , and entertainment , and encouraging a friendly rivalry to determine who the biggest fans are . the gameplay is a great hook , and it s really , really engaging , chen says . but it s only going to last for so long . the reason why people stick around is for the community . the reason people stick around is the community . famous will roll out slowly for now , you ll need an invitation to start playing . the first , readers of this story can play by entering the code verge note the asterisk and that the code is case sensitive . in part , that s because the sense of exclusivity around stolen was useful in helping to generate buzz . in a clever move , all verified twitter users could begin playing stolen immediately , drawing lots of people with big followings to start playing and tweeting about it . but chen also wants to make sure the platform doesn t lead to abuse in some new , unforeseen ways . quinn says the company deserves credit for listening to criticism and taking it seriously . it s one thing to criticize stuff , which is super important and necessary , she says . but the other half of it is , how can we do better ? they re so invested in trying to do the right thing . they don t want to ignorantly blunder in there and accidentally make something that hurts people . it s really heartening . 	 it turns out the us is a hot spot for salamander smuggling last month , the us fish and wildlife service banned the interstate and international trade of about species of salamanders to protect them from a fungus ampnbspa move some experts fear will create a black market . the ban is intended to protect north american salamanders from a fungus called batrachochytrium salamandrivorans , or bsal , which has been wiping out salamander populations in europe . the ruling prohibits the importation and interstate trade of species of salamanders , dead or alive . enforcement agents at domestic shipping centers , at airports , and at ports who intercept a salamander will have to check its species . if the species is banned , the officer could confiscate the amphibian smugglers could be slapped with up to , in fines and six months in prison . the us is a hot spot for the illegal salamander tradethe illegal trade of endangered salamanders , especially the prettiest and most brightly colored species , has been going on for years ampnbspand the us is a hot spot for the illegal market , says christina m . meister , a spokeswoman from fws . the ban will push many small time vendors out of business since they will no longer be allowed to receive or ship salamanders across state lines and may give some an incentive to join illegal trade . so many suppliers and buyers are still interested in the banned species that some traders believe that the illegal trade will grow astronomically . anything illegal doubles in value all fws is doing is creating a black market , says felton willis , the owner of reptile city inc in honey grove , texas . sometime in the future , some kid will wake up and say , i want an eastern spotted newt , the parents will go searching online , and they ll have to tell their kids that buying a salamander is like buying a kilo of cocaine . the species covered in the new ban join other animals smuggled for the exotic pet trade . for example , over the past five years , pet traders in iran have been dipping into rivers in the zagros mountains to catch the luristan newt , also known as the kaiser s spotted newt , which sells online for . experts now estimate that less than , are left in the wild . frosted flatwoods salamander usgs then there s the laotian newt . immediately after it was discovered in , pet traders started selling it illegally all over the world . importers were even forging its paperwork , says joseph mendelson , a biologist at the georgia institute of technology . because bsal poses such a threat to native salamander populations , conservationists and ecologists have been pushing for a ban for years . but for mild mannered amphibian retailers who don t want to break the law , there s a very tangible economic impact . while amphibians make up a tiny portion of the estimated . billion americans spent on their pets in , fws acknowledges that the ban will lead to an estimated . million in lost sales from pet vendors . the losses will be felt most acutely by hobbyists and small time vendors that only trade domestic species fws estimates that about . million in losses , about percent of the overall estimate , will come from small businesses alone . and factoring in indirect losses for instance , people buying habitat items for their salamanders the total cost to pet stores will be about . million , the report says . the ban will lead to an estimated . million in lost sales green marbled newts michael shrom while distributors generally agree that limiting the import of salamanders is necessary to protect the amphibians , the ban on interstate shipping is what will hurt the small vendors the most , they say . that ban is essentially meant to prevent the spread of bsal if it arrives in the us , according to fws . distributors don t see it that way . they sell salamanders caught wild in nearly every state in the country along with hundreds of thousands bred in captivity , shipping them to individual pet owners or mom and pop pet stores in other states . if these small distributors disappear , people who would supply those companies would feel the loss of income , too . with thousands of salamanders at their disposal , some might look to sell the amphibians illegally , sending them across state lines themselves . for companies like ours , processing orders per week , percent of our business is done across state lines , willis says . that ban will take a big cut out of our revenue . peter lembcke , a science educator who breeds salamanders in kiddie pools in his backyard , says that the ban is going to stop him from selling the few hundred salamanders he ships per year which means he ll lose a fifth of his income . he used to make most of his sales online , he says , but finding buyers that way will be nearly impossible since he s restricted to selling salamanders within south carolina , where he lives . newts in microgravity michael shrom michael shrom , a machinist who provides salamanders to nasa and other research institutions experimenting with limb regrowth , says that the ban on interstate trade is going to drastically hinder research . while scientists can receive permits to ship or receive banned species of salamanders , shrom says he will no longer have enough economic incentive to keep breeding them . whenever something is banned , there s always the risk that customers will find other ways to get the product illegally . salamander smuggling is a concern . i have no idea if that ll happen , but i imagine that it could , says reid harris , a biology professor at james madison university . in the past , when the fws has listed a species as injurious to native wildlife , online distributors linking buyers and sellers of those species have disappeared . david hoskins , the assistant director of the fws fish and aquatic conservation program , says that fws doesn t believe an illegal salamander trade is imminent hundreds of species aren t known to transmit bsal , so they can still be traded , and hoskins hopes that customers will simply purchase one of those species if they don t want pet salamanders native to their home states . james lewis , the director of operations at the conservation nonprofit amphibian survival alliance , believes that illegal trade won t be much of an issue because the people who supply that industry know the risks of trading them illegally . the vast majority of salamander owners are passionate about their hobby and supportive of conservation . they understand the need to protect wild salamanders , and i think very few will be interested or support an illegal trade , he says . cheat mountain salamander us fws the vendors themselves , however , are less convinced . oh , the black market is going to be huge , willis says . a customer asked me if this ban is going to stop anything . i said , no , now you re just going to pay to for a salamander that someone got out of the creek . lembcke , the kiddie pool breeder , agrees that a black market is inevitable , though he s not sure it ll be quite so big . customers who have heard about the ban are buying up salamanders much more quickly than usual lembcke says he s sold more salamanders in the two weeks before the ban went into effect than he typically would have in several months . a customer asked me if this ban is going to stop anything . no , you re just going to pay to for a salamander that someone got out of the creek . lewis , of the conservation nonprofit , sees an additional risk in importing the species that were rarely traded before the ban . now these non prohibited species will be some of the few salamanders still freely sold as pets . many of them are hard to breed in captivity , he says , so the salamander pet trade might see an uptick in wild caught salamanders . that could reduce the numbers still found in the wild . the ban looks like it will be here to stay hoskins says the feedback on the initial ruling has been largely positive . but harris says that the ban didn t go far enough it didn t restrict one species of newt newts are a type of salamander that might be a carrier of bsal but simply hasn t been tested yet . even if the ban were airtight , experts know better than to think it can keep bsal out forever . but it might delay the fungus s arrival just long enough to develop strategies to quarantine and treat infected salamanders . after that point , the salamander trade might be able to resume again , though there s currently no sunset clause in the ban that might allow it to someday become defunct . the ban went into effect on january th , but the comment period is open until mid march . in that time , scientists and vendors will try to voice their concerns to make the ruling more or less restrictive accordingly . to the distributors , customers are the ones that suffer it will now be much harder for young kids geeked out on science to indulge their curiosity by owning a pet salamander . lots of people get into science because enjoy learning about the animals . and this ban is going to make it more difficult for people to interact with these animals because they won t find them the pet stores they know , lembcke says . for proponents of the ban , that s a small price to pay to save north america s diverse salamander populations without the arrival of bsal , kids can still go out to backyard streams and catch their own salamanders . 	 before netflix got into the business of producing its own programming , it spent a lot of time emphasizing its recommendation software , the algorithms that would learn your taste and suggest the perfect title from the company s catalog . over the last few years that feature faded into the background , overshadowed by original content , emmy nominations , and its ampnbsprapid global expansion . today , however , netflix recommendations step back into the spotlight . up until now the recommendations you got were based on where you lived . people in the us saw suggestions for action or comedy flicks based on what other people in north america enjoyed . going forward , an anime fan in sweden will see recommendations based on the viewing habits of anime fans from around the world , and the same principle will apply to every category of suggested films . this sounds like a relatively minor change , but it s actually a precarious shift for a core technology that the company has been putting off for some time , one that was a year in the making and involved a team of nearly engineers . the regional approach netflix had been using was a stop gap solution to prevent local catalog differences from throwing off the recommendation algorithm . we were very worried that running the algorithms we knew worked well when we pulled data from a single country and a single catalog , if we tried across places where the catalog differed , the recommendations would be pretty bad , says carlos gomez uribe , vice president of product innovation at netflix , and the leader of the recommendation redesign . a pair of netflix engineers explained the problem at length in a blog post published today the dystopian sci fi movie equilibrium might be available on netflix in the us but not in france . and the matrix might be available in france but not in the us . our recommendation models rely heavily on learning patterns from play data , particularly involving co occurrence or sequences of plays between videos . in particular , many algorithms assume that when something was not played it is a weak signal that someone may not like a video , because they chose not to play it . however , in this particular scenario we will never observe any members who played both equilibrium and the matrix . a basic recommendation model would then learn that these two movies do not appeal to the same kinds of people just because the audiences were constrained to be different . however , if these two movies were available to the same set of members , we would likely observe a similarity between the videos and between the members who watch them . from this example , it is clear that uneven video availability potentially interferes with the quality of our recommendations . the regional model , however , created a new set of issues . each time netflix launched in a new territory , it was trying to make suggestions without knowing anything about its customers . to work well , the software needed a massive data set to crunch . without that , recommendations would be heavily influenced by the handful of users who interacted with the service . if a few oddballs among the first dozen people who signed up in madagascar happened to watch the notebook one night and old boy the next , well , that nation s recommendation system would think the movies are a good match . to get around this , netflix s recommendation team basically had to do the work typically reserved for its machines . when we launched in new markets sweden , germany , france , any of our previous markets we had to spend a lot of time hand tuning the recommendations , says gomez uribe . once it became clear internally that ampnbspnetflix was going to vastly expand its territory , the recommendation team decided to bite the bullet and move off regional recommendations . the team spent a year creating a global recommendation system that leverages the taste graph of the entire subscriber base while simultaneously taking into account differences in regional catalogs . it was time to bite the bulletthe new system has actually been live since the global expansion rolled out at ces , although it wasn t publicly announced then . when the first dozen customers signed up in macao , for example , they were fed recommendations that weigh their initial selections against what customers around the world have already established . if they checked out documentaries on food , they were then directed to a feed of foodie films that reflects what culinary cineastes enjoy from miami to moscow . for regions that already have an established taste graph , netflix will now layer that local flavor on top of the global recommendations , and this will happen for every country once they generate enough data for the algorithms to produce accurate results . even when we launch on a tiny island , that first person who signs up , the moment they start browsing through movies , we can begin to offer them more personalized recommendations , says gomez uribe . the next big challenge for netflix is languagethe next big challenge for netflix is language . today netflix is available in languages , but doesn t specifically gather information from users on their native tongue . currently which languages a member understands and to what degree is not defined explicitly , so we need to infer it from ancillary data and viewing patterns , netflix engineers wrote in today s blog post . when ranking recommendations , should netflix show the best match , or the best match in the language that is most comfortable for that user ? today s announcement doesn t include any new recommendations based specifically around language , but netflix says that it does have live tests running in the field as it works on optimizing its algorithms for this problem . i asked gomez uribe if the new recommendation algorithm would make any attempts to tune its suggestions based on cultural differences . how would a comedy about hitler play in spain versus germany versus israel , for example , and how might that affect recommendations . he demurred , saying , we are very aware that different cultures perceive nudity and violence in different ways . part of our challenge is we don t want to be in the place of guessing how a culture will interpret something . netflix will probably offend a few customers and generate a few headlines when the algorithm runs awry . but those are problems borne of success . countries have different attitudes to what content is appropriate , said ceo reed hastings when ampnbspannouncing the expansion at ces this year . the global potential is both a joy and a challenge to fulfill . 	 when leap motion was announced in , it seemed like a solution looking for a problem . a little black box that plugged into a computer , it could recognize hand gestures and translate them into interface commands to let you do things on your computer just like you do them in real life . but the company was trying to sell people on something they d never asked for , for use with a machine they d already been interacting with for years . then came virtual reality . when people first started using headsets like the oculus rift , the mouse and keyboard suddenly became inadequate they were tough to find while effectively blindfolded , and they didn t take advantage of vr s unique feeling of d space . suddenly , tools like leap motion started to make a lot more sense . the company has shifted more and more toward vr in recent years . but today , it s making the move official with a project called orion a revamped tracking system tailored for vr motion , and a small sensor that can be built straight into virtual reality headsets . if things go according to plan , the sensor could start showing up in products as early as this fall . and while this hardware is meant for manufacturers only , the software is available today in beta for its current leap motion controllers . leap motion s creators say that as they spent more time in vr , they started feeling hemmed in by their original focus on desktop computers . there s a lot of things you want to do in virtual reality that you don t do on a pc , says co founder david holz . on a laptop , for example , users generally wouldn t move their hands more than a few inches . in a virtual landscape , they might stretch them all the way out to reach an object , something the leap motion wasn t prepared to handle . the new software attempts to broaden its scope while adding overall improvements , like identifying fingers more accurately and tracking them more quickly . holz and his co founder michael buckwald won t reveal exactly how many of the . leap motion controllers they ve shipped since launch in their site currently lists , developers and hosts free and paid apps . it s also supposed to be appearing in a special faceplate for the osvr headset , but that has yet to see release . we ve sold a lot , says buckwald . input is an almost existential threat to these companies . whatever the number , leap motion remains a relatively niche product even within the world of vr . so far , that s true of practically all input devices . the high end htc vive and oculus rift will eventually use sophisticated motion controllers , but those are still months away from release . smartphones will usually pair with a bluetooth gaming controller , but few users want to carry one around . so mobile headset makers often end up using the single button model of google cardboard , or no control system at all . input is an almost existential threat to these companies , says buckwald , and hand tracking is the solution . in the second half of , particularly during the holiday season , leap motion expects several vr companies to release headsets that incorporate its orion sensor . it s unclear which ones , but apparently not all of them are us companies , and some moved into vr after seeing facebook acquire oculus for billion . the biggest names in vr right now have already put significant work into motion tracking . google , which is expected to release at least one non cardboard headset this year , has already devoted years to its project tango augmented reality platform . oculus has bought multiple tracking tech companies , including the leap motion like nimble vr . but leap motion could be talking to indie headset makers like fove , or to chinese internet juggernaut tencent , which is supposed to launch a vr headset later this year . the bigger question is whether orion can deliver a reliable and natural input system . my past experience with leap motion has been a combination of excitement and frustration it s a great system when it works , but it fails just often enough to undercut its value as an interface , like a mouse button that misses every th click or a touchscreen that can t always find my finger . to its credit , the system has gotten consistently better over time , and i ve never used it long enough to really settle in . but the promise of a natural user interface is that it s supposed to adapt to your motion , not the other way around . the demo leap motion is showing off now is called blocks , a featureless landscape where you can conjure cubes as well as rectangular boxes and dodecahedrons out of thin air by pinching and pulling . the motion makes total sense , like stretching invisible putty . the tracker mimics your hand almost perfectly across a wide field of view i accidentally reached outside it only rarely . once the shapes are down , you can grab , throw , and push them , or turn off gravity altogether and bat them around . objects don t collide with your hands perfectly , but i could recognize and adapt to the quirks more quickly than in my earlier demos and the problem is potentially more in the blocks app itself than the underlying tracking system . it s still disorienting to grab at something you can t feelas we found out nearly three years ago , though , leap motion has a huge inherent weakness the lack of tactile feedback . no matter how good the tracker is , it s a little disorienting to grab something and get only a visual confirmation that you re actually holding it . the same is true of their first steps toward a minority report style floating interface . right now , turning your hand palm up in blocks brings up a three button shape selection menu . the idea is clever and well executed , but it s hard to get used to not feeling anything whether it s a computer key or a touchscreen to confirm that i ve interacted with a machine . controllers like oculus touch also let you grab , draw , and push things in mid air , but they add a layer of both abstraction and feedback . you don t expect a remote to literally act like your hand , and you get the reassuring feel of hitting real buttons , even if they represent a totally different action in vr . leap motion is in the uncanny valley of motion control it offers interaction that is sometimes strikingly realistic , but distinctly not real . despite its flaws , if leap motion makes it into mobile headsets , it will still be the best mobile vr interface i ve seen , from a simple bluetooth controller to microsoft s hololens air tap . whether that translates into real success depends largely on how well the headsets using it sell and what secret interface projects vr s biggest players , like oculus and sony , might have in the works . 	 portrait of a bloodsucker as a young bed bug the bed bug is hardy , nasty , and well adapted to our homes , new analysis of its genome confirms . the work also corroborates previous findings on how the bed bug has developed resistance to modern insecticides and may lead to new ways to control the pest . the bed bug s genome , published in two nature communications papers by two groups of researchers , includes relatively few genes associated with smell and sight . that s likely because it isn t hard for the bed bug to find us across our bedrooms . the insect is very highly adapted to being a small ectoparasitic pest that lives by its host , says josh benoit , an insect molecular biologist at the university of cincinnati and first author on one of the papers . gilles san martin flickr the research shows that the bed bug has genes that help it feed . examples include genes that make salivary proteins , which prevent blood from clotting , and digestive proteins , which may allow the bloodsucker to take multiple bites during a feeding . the bed bug also has an unusually high number of genes that make an elastic protein called reslin . reslin in the female bug s exoskeleton may provide protection during an intense mating ritual where the male stabs a needle like penis into the female s abdomen and ejaculates into her body cavity . the work is part of a trend toward an ambitious goal to sequence the dna of all known living thingsthe new papers represent a larger trend in genomic research . in the field s early days , scientists focused on model organisms species common across labs , such as the fruit fly , mouse , or zebrafish as well as those that are medically or economically important . now , the technology is cheap and fast enough to allow for non standard organisms . the work is part of a trend toward an even more ambitious goal to sequence the dna of all known living things , or at least as many as scientists can access . i think maybe it s time to start thinking about describing life on earth at the molecular level the same way that google maps will give you maps of everywhere on earth , says stephen richards , a genomicist at baylor university and head of a pilot study from the i k project , which eventually plans to sequence the genomes of , insect species the manhattan project of entomology , as it s sometimes called . whole genome sequences essentially all of an organism s dna provide blueprints for scientists and help to decipher the genetic origins of the organism s appearance , function , and how it responds to its environment . having this genetic map fundamentally changes the research questions you can ask , says jeffrey rosenfeld , a bioinformatics expert at rutgers university and the american museum of natural history and a first co author on the other paper . as for the bed bug , he adds it s a complicated genome . they re just weird creatures . the two teams decided to work on the bed bug genome for different reasons . the i k team decided to use bed bugs in a pilot project that started in , along with other recognizable urban pests such as the german cockroach , agricultural pests including the colorado potato beetle , and generally interesting insects such as the dragonfly and the dung beetle . the same year , the second group , led by scientists at amnh and weill cornell medicine , chose the bed bug as a pilot for sequencing full genomes at the museum . this group chose the bed bug because they consider it a living fossil , as it hasn t changed much over its long history , which may stretch back hundreds of thousands of years . it didn t hurt that bed bugs are also iconic new york city pests . at first , the two teams didn t know they were competing . at first , the two teams didn t know they were competing they usually hang in different scientific circles . once the rivalry was confirmed , the groups kept their projects separate , partly because they were both far along in the work and partly for the competition . we had this classic conflict . do we reach out and try to all publish a paper together ? or do we race ? says chris mason , a geneticist at weill cornell medicine . but last july , both teams realized their papers were finished and under consideration at the same journal , and so they decided to ask nature communications to publish the work simultaneously . while both teams sequenced the genome , they took slightly different tacks . the i k team had a more traditional approach , focusing on the genome and covering it as thoroughly as possible . to put a genome together , scientists take the dna from an organism s cells and use machines to analyze its chemical makeup . in some cases , the scientists may rely on a computer to put the genome together , automatically analyzing it . in other cases , experts may go into certain regions to manually analyze specific sections and double check the computer s work , which isn t always accurate . the i k group did quite a bit of manual annotation , focusing are regions such as those associated with sight and smell . they also annotated genes already known to be related to insecticide resistance which has particularly developed in response to a popular insecticide class called pyrethroids . some sets of genes protect the bug s nervous system against pyrethroids make proteins that help bed bugs metabolize and detoxify the chemicals and thicken the bed bug s exoskeleton so it s harder for the pesticides to penetrate . that group also found evidence that bacteria that live in the bed bug s body inserted dna into the bed bug s genome . most of these genes came from wolbachia , bacteria that live in the bed bug s gut . previous research shows wolbachia help the bug synthesize vitamins . only one of these genes may actually do anything in the bed bug . the protein this gene makes is similar to patatin , which is common to potatoes and helps store fats . if scientists confirm that this patatin like gene is active in the bug which is a big if it could eventually be a good candidate for insecticides that target specific genes . the team looked for evidence of bed bug dna from new york s subway systemswhile the amnh team also sequenced the bed bug s genome , they did fewer manual annotations , instead expanding their work to also look at how the genes function in the bug and how the bug interacts with its environment unusual for a genome paper . for example , they compared changes across six stages of the bed bug s life cycle and noted a flurry of genetic activity after the bug has its very first taste of blood . this activity is likely because the bed bug s body is reacting to the new and foreign materials the meal introduces . the team also tried to see how the bugs are distributed across the city . to do this , they looked for evidence of bed bug dna in data from a previous project , which collected a range of dna from stations in new york s subway system . don t panic this doesn t mean bed bugs have permanently infested the subway . instead , the authors say traces of bed bug dna may have come into the subway stations on straphangers shoes or other belongings . these dna fragments may show how different bed bug strains bed bugs with slightly different genetic makeup relate across a geographical region . the paper suggests that bed bugs in closer proximity to one another are more related , while populations are distinct between the city s boroughs . these results come with some caveats . for instance , the researchers aren t sure the dna fragments are actually from bed bugs they may may be detecting an entirely different , but related , species . it s also possible that the dna found in the subway stations isn t from an insect at all , cautions jonathan eisen , an evolutionary biologist at the university of california davis , who wasn t part of either research team . i think it s interesting if they really found bed bug sequences in their subway data . but i m not even remotely convinced from what they report here that is the case . as genomics researchers aim for increasingly obscure research subjects , it gets more difficult to put together the genomes , says george amato , the director of the amnh s sackler institute for comparative genomics . for model organisms , you get the sequences and you kind of back them onto your structure . mapping a whole genome of a non model organism , amato adds , is more like driving in the dark blind , and there are no guard rails and you ve got no headlights . mapping a whole genome of a non model organism is more like driving in the dark blind , and there are no guard rails and you ve got no headlights . the amnh group envisions something similar to richards google map like level of genomic sequencing . the museum s longtime mission is to collect and catalog and characterize every species on the planet , says mark siddall , a curator in amnh s division of invertebrate zoology and sackler institute for comparative genomics . eventually , one supposes that sequencing whole genomes will be not unlike taking photographs of the animals when they come in . i don t think we re there yet , but wouldn t that be awesome ? with limited money and resources , covering the same genome twice won t exactly help reach this goal , but the fact that the bed bug teams took different approaches is helpful . frankly , genomes are getting to be fairly routine . it takes an interesting hook to present a genome in a way that s really exciting and broadly appealing , and these guys just totally nailed it , says may berenbaum , an entomologist at the university of illinois at urbana champaign , who wasn t involved in the research . the papers are complementary , she adds , which is why they are both being published . next , the amnh and i k teams will collaborate on a new paper on the bed bug s mitochondrial genome , which , because it s passed only on the maternal side , can help trace population relationships through time . we used both groups data and we will publish it jointly , says amato . what could be nicer than another paper all ready to be submitted , but that s a combination of the two groups working together ? 	 a warning letter that the us centers for medicare and medicaid services sent to theranos last week could have serious consequences for the blood testing company , which has been valued at billion . theranos newark , california , laboratory poses immediate jeopardy to patient safety , the regulatory agency said . but even now , the details of the deficiencies found at theranos lab are uncertain , because cms has yet to release a full lab inspection report . so we asked some experts to explain what s going on and what theranos customers should do . theranos customers should see their doctorsthe cms letter outlined a number of problems flagged by surveyors at the newark lab during an inspection that ended in december . specifically , the letter cites problems with hematology , the lab s analytic systems , the technical supervisor , and the laboratory director . for some theranos customers , that news should be of concern . people who recently got a blood test at a theranos facility should see their doctors , says james nichols , a pathologist at vanderbilt university and the government relations committee chair for the american association for clinical chemistry . watch out glossy , slick advertising and overinflated promises ! patients should consult their physicians and have their future bloodwork analyzed by a reputable laboratory , nichols said . labs that actively share their methods and performance with ordering physicians tend to fall in that category . the cms report comes from theranos california lab , not the arizona one where the company says over percent of its tests are processed . if a blood test was processed at the arizona lab , customers shouldn t be overly concerned , says ampnbspted schutzbank , technical director of the specialized testing and microbiology laboratories for the st . john providence health system in michigan . if the testing was done in california , however , i would probably be concerned about the accuracy of the results i received , he says . what will happen to theranos ? the letter states that theranos has to provide cms with acceptable evidence of correction within days . on wednesday , when the letter was released to the public , the company said that it had already implemented a number of changes . if cms decides that theranos plan isn t good enough , however , the lab could lose its certification . theranos could also lose approval for ampnbspmedicare payments . because private insurers tend to follow the government s lead , this most likely would result in a complete shutdown of theranos lab . your lab essentially has to shut down , unless you can get people to pay you cash , schutzbank says . it s basically a death sentence for the lab . the lab director could be barred from operating a lab for two yearsif the lab closes , the director mentioned in the report could face some serious consequences . ultimately , that s who cms will hold responsible for problems at that lab , nichols says . the director faces the full brunt of the law . when a lab shuts down , the laboratory medical director can t hold a license to direct a lab ampnbspfor two years . and then there s the issue of theranos fate as a whole . federal regulations state that the owner of a lab that lost its certification can also be ampnbspbarred from owning or operating other labs for two years no person who has owned or operated a laboratory which has had its certificate revoked may , within years of the revocation of the certificate , own or operate a laboratory for which a certificate has been issued under this section . in this case , the regulation could mean that theranos or the people behind theranos would be forced to shut down all laboratories . i would interpret that to mean any laboratory , in any state would have to shut down , nichols says . but the likelihood of that happening is extremely slim at this point . none of the experts we spoke with could remember hearing of a company shutting down multiple labs because of deficiencies in a single location . and even if it did happen , theranos would probably find a way to spin off its technologies and assets into a different business . we emailed cms and theranos about this . cms declined to comment on the record . theranos spokesperson brooke buchanan told us that our question was a hypothetical that i m not going to get into at this time . the letter also mentioned a potential , per day fine . that might not seem like a lot for a company valued at billion , but it could add up . that s because the fine would be retroactive , nichols says . it s not from the point in time that you get the sanction . instead , the fine goes backwards in time and covers the period ampnbspthat the lab was non compliant . that period isn t mentioned in the letter , but the fine could cover anything from months to years , he says . the letter shows that the laboratory was mismanaged , says schutzbank , who also performs lab inspections for the cms accredited college of american pathologists . i ve never ampnbsppersonally ampnbspknown ampnbspanyone ampnbspwho has received ampnbspthat kind of letter ampnbspfrom cms , and i ve been in this lab business since . the laboratory was mismanaged . as part of its response to the inspection , theranos has made personnel changes at the lab , including adding a new lab director who s also ampnbspan associate medical director of ucla s clinical laboratories , theranos wrote ampnbspin an emailed statement . that could be enough to fix the problems relating to the lab s director , says stephen master , chief of clinical chemistry at weill cornell medical college . that would be the kind of thing that i think would satisfy cms on the lab director deficiency although it would depend on the new lab director being empowered to make the necessary changes . theranos needs to be more forthcomingin addition to the deficiencies relating to theranos staff , cms found deficiencies with the lab s analytics systems and hematology . this means that the lab had problems relating to its blood analyzers and the way it studies blood cells . and it s the problems with the lab s hematology , in particular , that cms said put patients safety at risk , theranos wrote in a statement . but the finding does not apply to the whole lab , the company added . hematology can also refer to the study of blood as it relates to blood , bone marrow , and lymphatic conditions . but that s probably not what the term means in this case , master says . in a clinical lab such as theranos that isn t doing anatomic pathology , meaning that they don t have m . d . pathologists looking at slides to make diagnoses based on morphology . rather , it likely means testing blood , and perhaps other body fluids , to characterize components like red blood cells , white blood cell counts , and platelets . cms is bringing out the big guns . whether the issue with the blood analyzers affected the machines theranos bought from other companies or its own inventions isn t clear . but given that cms told the verge that its surveyors had never inspected theranos inventions during previous inspections , it s possible that the upcoming inspection report will include information about those machines for the first time . if so , we may soon find out a lot more about the accuracy and reliability of theranos proprietary tests . whatever it is , it s clearly serious enough that cms is bringing out the big guns , master says . even if they re just using commercial equipment from other vendors , this would still indicate that there are significant problems in their lab operations . it s unclear how long it might take for cms to review theranos plan . in the meantime , the company will have to deal with the fallout from the letter . already , pennsylvania health insurer ampnbspcapital bluecross has asked theranos to stop drawing blood from customers who visit its capital blue retail store in enola , pennsylvania . those blood ampnbspsamples ampnbspwere being tested in the newark lab , according to the wall street journal . in addition , the drugstore chain walgreens told theranos on thursday ampnbspto stop sending lab tests to the california lab the startup operates theranos wellness centers inside walgreens stores . the drugstore chain has also suspended lab services at its palo alto store . we look forward to continuing to work with walgreens to provide access to reliable , high quality , and low cost lab testing services , theranos told the verge following walgreens announcement . this is an issue that many other labs have faced , and we have been and will fix it quickly and completely , working with our regulators as we always do . we look forward to continuing to work with walgreens . last week , theranos said that the findings at the newark facility don t relate to the company s arizona lab . but theranos arizona lab doesn t have a completely clean slate either . in april , an inspector found that the personnel at the then two month old lab couldn t produce data showing that it had verified that the lab s commercial instruments were working correctly before using them on patient samples . when the verge showed the lab inspection report to schutzbank a few months ago , he told us that theranos actions demonstrated extremely sloppy procedure every clinical lab always performs verification studies on all analytical instruments and the tests performed on those instruments before using them to return results to patients . theranos currently boasts of having run more than . million tests . if the company wants to restore customers faith in its tests , it will have to do more than make vague promises and dismissive statements about the government s findings . the only way theranos can recover from this is if it opens itself up to the scrutiny of the public and outside experts . 	 on thursday , followers of channel awesome , subscribers on youtube got a strange new message . the channel usually specializes in pop culture riffs , but this was a more straightforward video , with host douglas walker laying out a three week odyssey triggered by a single dmca copyright claim against a clip he d used from my neighbor totoro . according to walker , the totoro clip was in fair use , but appealing the complaint had sprawled into nearly a month of notices and counter notices . we re coming up on three weeks of getting no monetization , no money for any of the videos we ve put up , past and present , he said to the camera , growing more and more frantic . nobody has given us a straight answer . nothing has been consistent . nobody knows what s going on . walker isn t alone . the first weeks of saw a spate of similar videos from channels like eli the computer guy , subscribers , alternate history hub , subscribers , and i hate everything , subscribers . the specific infractions are different in each case , but the broad strokes are the same a random violation , a sudden restriction of advertising or upload features , and a very frustrated youtuber ready to leave the channel entirely . walker s claim was resolved four hours after his video posted , but not every channel has been so lucky , and the ordeal has raised larger questions of creators place on the web s largest video platform . nobody has given us a straight answer . nothing has been consistent . nobody knows what s going on . the latest crop of angry users doesn t seem to have resulted from a policy or enforcement change on youtube s part , and there s no evidence that complaints or appeals are rising overall . rather , the complaints seem to be the result of an appeal system that s been strained since the beginning and is now reaching a breaking point . youtube users who appeal a complaint can easily get trapped in a confusing automated system and while the system has never been perfect , the stakes have grown higher and higher . what s changed from my perspective is that this is the third year in a row i ve earned over , from the platform and i m getting tired of worrying about whether all my work is going to vanish , eli etherton told the verge . it s , not . we aim to allow as much content as possible on youtube and still ensure that our terms of service , including our community guidelines and copyright policies , are followed , a youtube spokesperson said when reached for comment . we take feedback on our policy enforcement seriously , and we encourage people to flag any issues through the youtube appeals and counter notifications processes . it s , not . still , those policies can be complex and overlapping , leaving many youtubers confused as to where they stand . in addition to the community and copyright policies , youtube channels can also run afoul of the adsense policies that determine what videos are appropriate to run ads against . community and copyright violations are governed by a three strike policy , but the decision to revoke monetization is often independent of that policy . as a result , it can be hard to say why ads were pulled on a specific channel like eli the computer guy . the real need for change is rules written in stone , eli says . malicious sounds easy to define until you get onto a platform with global reach . youtube relies on user generated flags to enforce its policies , which can make violations maddeningly inconsistent . that model was established by the dmca s copyright complaint system , but it s become the norm on youtube , twitter , and facebook alike , enforcing everything from user guidelines to advertising rules . but the scattershot nature of user complaints means video creators have little chance to get a feel for what kind of videos might trigger a violation in practice . an offending clip might sit on the network for years without being flagged , only causing problems when a channel builds up enough subscribers to attract attention . once the complaint is lodged , the venues for litigating it can be maddeningly opaque . anyone has the power to falsely flag videos , and there is no punishment for doing so , so ultimately the content creators are penalized , said alex , who runs the popular i hate everything channel and declined to give his last name . at this point a complete overhaul is necessary . at this point a complete overhaul is necessary . most of the recent complaints stem less from youtube s violation reporting system than from its appeals process , which for most youtubers is still largely automated . for google , that s a feature rather than a bug the company prides itself on scalable solutions that work as well for follower accounts as they do for heavy hitters like eli . but as youtube s personalities become more important and more powerful , they re coming to expect the kind of personalized treatment they would get from a television network . in eli s case , that s what he got he was contacted by a youtube customer service representative the day after we spoke , and now says he s likely to stay on the platform . youtube is still by far the largest source of video on the web , with hundreds of millions of hours watched each day , but the latest complaints come as the platform is facing more competition than ever . in november , facebook announced its native videos were generating billion views each day , and the social network rolled out live video features to all users just last week . for creators willing to do product placement , snapchat is also an increasingly tempting way to make money from online video . but despite the growing number of alternatives , most online video personalities still see youtube as the only game in town . for eli , leaving youtube would have meant leaving web video entirely . before youtube s representative found him , he was planning on making the leap to podcasting , which would make him less reliant on a single platform . with his following , he s also well placed to partner with a sponsored channel on youtube or elsewhere . i had actually turned down very lucrative offers to be a personality for other people s content in the past simply because i was happy with youtube , eli says . not everyone is as optimistic . tech tricks can play on any platform , but for web culture vlogging like i hate everything , the possibilities are narrower . i would happily move to another viable platform that treats their users better , except there isn t one , alex says . youtube is a monopoly so they can do whatever they want . they know we ll keep using their website no matter what . verge video youtube s plan for the future of video	 ces has become more of a car show than a tech show in the last few years , and this year just piled on the proof . in fact , ces was full of vehicles of all shapes and sizes , and many of them were electric . sure , some were pure fantasy , but others were completely practical the ecoreco m air was collapsable , fun to ride , and came with decent mileage inboard showed up with an electric skateboard that doubles as a regular one and chevrolet gave us a ride in the bolt perhaps the first affordable electric car with proper range . but sometimes you just want to throw practicality in the gutter . sometimes you just want to have fun , and this year that meant driving the electric equivalent of a three wheeled motorcycle around las vegas . arcimoto is a company that s based in eugene , oregon , where they ve been making such three wheeled electric vehicles for years . each iteration brings improvements better battery life , better range , and lower weight . the company s newest model , known simply as the srk , exemplifies that progress . the eighth iteration is pounds lighter than the company s last generation vehicle , it has a top speed of miles per hour , and it will be the first one to go into mass production . by simplifying the machine like using handlebars instead of a steering wheel they ve dropped the target price for the srk from nearly , to , . the srk looks wild , but you could use it every dayarcimoto founder mark frohnmayer would argue that , at that price , the srk is practical , especially considering people only drive an average of about miles per day . and he might be right , because as fun as the srk was to drive around las vegas , it also felt like a vehicle you could use pretty regularly . let s start with the srk s ride , which is incredibly smooth . there s not much to the vehicle save for the wheels , the seats , and the roll cage , but the suspension keeps most of the bumps at bay . i expected to be rattled around a bit , especially considering how light the srk is , but it was a joy to ride . that experience is enhanced by the srk s low center of gravity , which makes it even more fun to pilot around . the ride is extremely smooth ampnbspbut it can get a bit chilly the srk s ride is also smooth because the seats are very comfortable . but the interior is a bit spartan right now , with little more beyond a touchscreen display that shows basic information like speed and range . there s also a set of clamps that act as a phone dock in the center of the handlebars . arcimoto says customers use this mostly for google maps directions , but it s hard to imagine people resisting the temptation to check twitter or snapchat since it s right there . you wouldn t want to drive the srk in cold weather , either i was pretty chilly while driving it around , especially thanks to a cold snap while we were in vegas . arcimoto says these things will change by the time the srk enters production , though . the base model will have more basics like vents and heating for defrosting and some temperature control , and a full hvac system will be available as an upgrade option . the company will also sell an enclosure if you don t want your ride to leave you exposed . but in the right climate , the srk would be a lot of fun to have , especially because of how exhilarating it can be to drive the thing . frohnmayer let me get my feet wet with the arcimoto in the parking lot behind the legendary vegas eatery , the peppermill . bobbing and weaving around the dozen or so light poles reminded me of being on a jet ski you really have to stay on the throttle to make tight turns , which makes it more of a thrill to ride . on the open road , that agility was amplified . the srk feels more maneuverable the faster you go . as i crossed , , and miles per hour , the motorcycle handlebars were giving me almost too much control . slight twitches left or right banked me toward the passing lane to my left or the guard rail to my right . that was doubly terrifying because of how exposed you are , even though you re strapped in by a four point harness . after a few minutes at speed i finally got the hang of the experience , and my desire to own an srk eclipsed my fears . the base model will have a range of miles , which as electric vehicles go is on the border of being practical . arcimoto plans to offer an extended range model that will give riders miles on one full charge , which makes it look a lot more like something you could drive every day . arcimoto says the base model s battery system will last at least six years . a regenerative brake on the handlebars lets you feed energy back into the system which shows up on the dashboard and the trike supports both level and level charging , so you can fill the battery back up at home or on the road . but the reason i d really want an srk is that it s just a pure joy to drive . the production version will do mph in about seven seconds , which isn t going to win you many drag races , but it should be plenty enough to make your heart skip a beat when you crank the throttle . in fact , the throttle was limited on the version that arcimoto brought to ces it could only do in about seconds and it was still a thrill to gun it every time a red light turned green . arcimoto is still months away from production , so the company brought the only two existing prototypes of the srk to ces . frohnmayer and his small team have been touring them around the country , giving rides to the press and the public , and using the feedback to make small design changes on the fly . this seemed like a very smart idea for a small company to embrace until i found myself stranded on the side of the i freeway , that is . our experience with the srk actually took place over a few days , because the first day we took it out there was a problem with the hydraulic system . arcimoto had recently changed a small lug on the hydraulic brake pedal , and it was keeping the pedal on my vehicle from fully depressing . that the brake was slightly engaged wasn t the problem rather , the pedal was choking the whole hydraulic system . it s all fun and games until you re stuck on the side of the freewaythis kept my srk from eclipsing miles per hour , something we first realized once we were on i . more terrifying , though , was that the problem was draining the battery . we had set out with both prototypes at percent , good enough for well over miles according to arcimoto . by the time we pulled to the side of the freeway , my srk was down to percent battery . we were luckily able to limp back to the hotel on the remaining charge . i was upset that the fun was cut short , but frohnmayer was already on the phone with the company s technicians back in oregon , and he assured me a fix would be swift . he was right . two days later we met back at the peppermill , and we took both srks around las vegas for well over an hour with no issues at all . it s somewhat of a tradition at the verge to drive weird , crazy , three wheeled vehicles at ces . two years ago , it was toyota s itty bitty electric i road concept . last year , it was the weird gas powered prototype from elio . i proudly accepted the torch when i hopped on the arcimoto srk and took it on the streets and highways of las vegas , and with all due respect to my colleagues , my ride was the most fun . 	 marie was feeding her twin daughters when the raid began . it was a little after pm on a thursday , and she heard a loud commotion outside her apartment in the suburbs of paris . the order came minutes later police ! open your door ! marie panicked and rushed to move her one year old girls into another room before opening the door . but the police couldn t wait . within seconds , they had broken her door and forced her to the ground . there were about officers in total , she said , and some were dressed in riot gear . the children saw it all from the dinner table . as one officer held marie on the ground , the others set about rifling through her apartment , looking for incriminating evidence against her year old husband , who was still at work . the officers didn t produce a search warrant , but a paper that they hurriedly forced her to sign said that the raid was carried out under france s new state of emergency laws . the raid order , obtained by the verge , lays out three accusations against her husband he knew jihadists who had been killed , he knew people who trafficked fake passports , and that he belonged to unnamed muslim associations that promote religious radicalism . marie says the accusations are false . she and her husband are french muslims , and they regularly go to mosque , but she says they re far from conservative . she doesn t wear a veil over her long red hair , and he s already been subjected to thorough background checks for his job in the aeronautics industry . neither has ever traveled to the middle east . the police eventually tracked down marie s husband as he was on his way home and brought him home in handcuffs . the two were questioned in separate rooms late into the night . the officers finally left around am , but not without copying all the data from their smartphones and computers . no charges were filed . the officer who was in charge came and said , okay , we re going to leave now , marie , , said in an interview last month . two weeks had passed since the raid , but she still couldn t talk about it without breaking down in tears . and that was it , she continued . they just said goodbye no explanation for the how or why . aurelien meunier getty imagesmarie isn t the only one looking for answers . there has been a steady stream of similar stories in the french media since president fran ois hollande implemented a state of emergency following november s terrorist attacks in paris , which killed people . the laws , which were ampnbspextended for three months in november , give security forces expanded powers to conduct warrantless house raids , seize personal data , and place people on house arrest all without authorization from a judge . thousands of raids have been carried out at homes and businesses , and hundreds of suspects have been placed under house arrest on what some say are tenuous grounds . ampnbspa un human rights panel , amnesty international , and other rights groups have condemned the state of emergency laws , but hollande s administration has shown no signs of backing down . this week , the president formally requested that the state of emergency be extended for another three months . on wednesday , a high court rejected a rights group s appeal to suspend the state of emergency , saying the country still faces imminent peril . next week , french lawmakers will debate a bill that would enshrine state of emergency laws into the french constitution , making it easier for the president to activate them and more difficult to mount legal challenges . hollande is also pushing for a controversial proposal that would allow convicted terrorists with dual nationality to be stripped of their french citizenship a measure that has long been supported by far right politicians , and which prompted france s justice minister to resign this week in protest . french prime minister manuel valls has defended the state of emergency , saying that the raids are based on objective suspicions , and that the measures should stay in place until we can get rid of daesh , using the arabic term for isis . the laws have also enjoyed broad political and public support a recent ampnbsppoll from the huffington post and itv found that nearly seven out of are in favor of extending the laws beyond their february th expiration . they can t make the muslim minority pay for their own incompetence . but there is mounting evidence to suggest that security forces are overstepping their bounds , implicating people with no connection to terrorist groups and targeting others based on little more than mosque affiliation or social media posts . political activists and protesters have been caught up in the anti terror crackdown , most notably during the cop climate change conference in december , and human rights groups say the laws have had a disproportionate impact on france s muslim population the largest in western europe . what the government is doing is sending a message that they re doing something , but they re doing the wrong thing , said yasser louati , spokesperson for the collective against islamophobia in france ccif , an organization that provides legal support and consulting services for french muslims . they can t make the muslim minority pay for their own incompetence in not protecting the french people . louati says his organization has received complaints since the emergency laws went into effect , including related to house arrests . so far , eight cases brought to the ccif have been overturned in court , louati says , but many of those targeted are still afraid to speak out , for fear of further repercussions . that s why marie asked that i not use her real name in this article . a paris region police prefecture declined to provide further details on what motivated the raid on marie s home . the interior ministry did not respond to multiple requests for comment . kenzo tribouillard getty imagessince the november th attacks , french security forces have carried out nearly , house raids using their expanded powers , and people have been put on house arrest . the raids have led to arrests , and legal proceedings have been opened , most pertaining to drug or weapons charges . so far , only four terrorism related investigations have been opened . but the laws have been enforced with little transparency , making it difficult to gauge their effectiveness . cl mence bectarte , a lawyer at the paris based international federation for human rights , says that aside from announcements about the volume of arrests and weapons seizures , lawyers and rights groups have nothing else to understand the legal grounds , the factual grounds of these measures . we cannot measure the effectiveness of the state of emergency laws because there are no facts that would enable us to do so , bectarte said . france has never been a place where civil liberties were well protected . media reports have helped fill in some of the blanks . in nice , a six year old girl sustained head injuries after police broke down the door to her family s apartment at am and interrogated her father . they had the wrong address . a muslim man in toulouse said his wife and two year old son were left traumatized by what he called a brutal raid , when police broke into his apartment in search of weapons . there were none . in perhaps the most notorious case , armed police stormed the pepper grill restaurant outside paris in november , breaking open the door and ordering the room full of diners to put their hands on the table . the restaurant , which is owned by a muslim man and serves halal food , was believed to hold people , arms , or objects linked to terrorist activities , according to the raid order . no contraband was found and no charges were filed ampnbspsurveillance footage of the raid was later posted online . four days later , interior minister bernard cazeneuve issued a memo ampnbspreminding all police prefectures to carry out raids with respect for the law , marking the first implicit acknowledgment of possible overreach . france has passed different anti terror laws within the past years , each one moving the needle toward state power and away from civil liberty , says jonah levy , a professor of comparative politics at the university of california berkeley and an expert on french politics . the country has also cracked down on online speech , jailing those who express support for terrorist groups or other forms of hate speech on social media . despite liberty , equality , fraternity , france has never been a place where civil liberties were well protected as compared to other democracies or european countries , levy said . kenzo tribouillard getty imagesfrance s most recent anti terror legislation was ampnbsppassed in may , following the january attacks on the offices of satirical magazine ampnbspcharlie hebdo and a kosher supermarket in paris . the law , which has been likened to a french patriot act , allows officials to monitor emails and phone calls of would be jihadists without court authorization , and forces telecommunications companies to store customer metadata and make it available to the government on demand . calls for more aggressive legislation have only intensified with the rise of the far right national front party , which has pushed a nationalist , anti immigrant agenda . officials have defended the measures as necessary to confront what they describe as a unique security threat . french officials foiled terrorist plots last year , the interior ministry announced last month , but it s unclear whether more expansive powers would actually help prevent terrorism . the men responsible for both the charlie hebdo and november attacks were on french authorities radar , but were dropped either to pursue other threats , or due to poor intelligence sharing . think about the children who hid during these raids . there are also fears that hollande s response to the november attacks could further alienate french muslims . many muslims remain socially and economically isolated from the rest of france , and there are signs that tensions have heightened following last year s terror attacks . figures released by the interior ministry this month showed that anti muslim crimes were committed last year in france , more than triple the number tallied in . the problem is that now they are just sowing the seeds of further radicalization in the most fragile elements in the french population , louati said . think about the children who hid during these raids , who saw their mothers humiliated , their fathers being violently handcuffed to the ground , their apartments completely trashed by the police . marie s daughters are still too young to understand what happened the night their home was raided , and she hopes they won t remember it when they re older . but she said they re more restless following the incident , and are more difficult to put to sleep . one of the twins now cries uncontrollably whenever there are more than a few people in their living room . marie is still struggling with the trauma , too . i m afraid to be at home , she said . the slightest shut of a door , the slightest noise it stresses me , it makes me panic . she s also worried that the raid may cause problems for her husband at work , and still has no idea where the data seized from their computers and phones ended up . the family has since hired a lawyer and filed a complaint in french court , seeking damages for what marie describes as a baseless invasion of her home . they can t just break into our lives and turn everything upside down , she said . i need to know that this won t happen again . 	 the verge in celebration of our th anniversary , this month we re publishing a series of interviews with innovative leaders about what the next five years hold . to read more about this series , read our editor nilay patel s introduction here . few subsidiaries at alphabet inc . inspire as much curiosity as google x , now called simply x . x is the company s innovation lab , where ambitious but far fetched tech ideas are pitched , tested , and either come to life or are ultimately killed . it s where google s self driving car concept was developed , where giant internet access balloons were conceived , where glucose monitoring contact lenses were first experimented with , and where burrito delivering drones are part of a beta test for bigger things . and while more than employees are behind these far fetched projects , for the past five years the face of x has been astro teller , the so called captain of moonshots . teller has the cv of a mad scientist he has degrees in computer science , symbolic and heuristic computation , and a phd in artificial intelligence from carnegie mellon university . after his time in academia , he founded health tracking company body media acquired by jawbone before joining google x . with his goatee , ponytail , and the rollerblades he wears everywhere , all day , teller has become one of google s most recognizable characters . he is a published author of both fiction and nonfiction books he gives ted talks . but for someone so heavily involved in futuristic projects , teller stubbornly refuses to predict the future . for him , x is not a lab that churns out immediately useable technology or marketable products , but a place where innovation is systemized imagine henry ford s assembly line , but for ideas . he s less inclined to prognosticate about solutions than he is to talk about the problems that will need to be addressed in the future whether it s the meta problem of climate change the threats and promises of artificial intelligence or just how , exactly , society s acceptance of new technology will match the rapid pace of innovation . the interviewwhat does a day look like five to years from now ? the real answer is i don t know , and much more importantly , i don t think anyone knows . trying to prognosticate is a very dangerous business . it s good for people who are on the speaking circuit , but there isn t any evidence that anyone is any good at it . the way i would like to function , the way i think most of us here at x function , is to focus instead on asking the questions for the kinds of futures that we imagine might be possible . how fast can we discover that we re wrong , get rid of those ideas or evolve them from where they currently are , to correctly pointed ideas ? you ve been quoted as saying that your team doesn t fall in love with solutions , you fall in love with problems . five to years from now , what are our biggest problems ? i m a big believer in falling in love with the problems , not falling in love with the technologies . but falling in love with the problem doesn t always teach you exactly what to do . for example , you could observe that starting around , years ago humanity stopped primarily hunting for meat . we started domesticating animals instead . yet we still get more than half of the fish that we eat in the world by hunting it . that s just weird . surely that won t stay the way it currently is . in the future we will surely be farming in the sea and not just the standard fish farming that happens on shore and very near to the shore . climate change is a huge problem , almost a meta problem . it has a set of problems within it . just because we ve identified a problem , that means it s on our radar screen . it doesn t mean that we ve found a solution to it yet or even working on the solution yet . subscribe to our newsletter so you don t miss the rest of the verge interviews . terms apply . subscribe let s talk a little bit about the fear of change how do you prepare society at large for radically new technologies ? historically , changes in our society , particularly those driven by technology , used to take a long time . one thousand years ago , when somebody came up with a new technology the time between when the technology was invented and when it was widespread in the world was huge . that gave us several generations during which people could come to terms with how society was being changed by that technology . one hundred years ago when the steam engine was introduced or the telegraph or the telephone , and somewhat later the television , those things spread through humanity much faster . they spread maybe on the order of to years . the time between when a new technology is introduced and when it s completely changed the world has continued to shrink . fast forward to today , the time between when a new technology is introduced and when it s completely changed the world has continued to shrink at a fast rate . it s now probably five to seven years between when a new technology is introduced and when it really has changed society in a fundamental way . if the world is now changing faster than we can accommodate , it causes a huge incremental level of anxiety for society at large . that is our challenge . what can be done about that ? we can point to specific parts of society which we know we could make better . the patent system was built years ago around the idea that you would be granted a temporary monopoly for your idea , it would last about years and you would harvest a lot of value during that time . then it would be free to everybody afterwards . today that s still true . it s still a year license that you re getting . but now technology is changing so fast , by the time you get the patent it s often not worth that much anymore because it s old news the way we make laws and regulate technology is another good example where the pace at which we understand the technology and then build laws around that technology is now going sufficiently slower than the technology itself . we need to fix that . we need to go faster on those fronts . whose responsibility is it to mitigate some of that anxiety around technology ? the technologists ? the regulators ? or is society supposed to adapt more quickly ? i think that the onus for how we help society to adjust to new technologies falls on all of us . does it fall on technologists ? absolutely . technologists should be making responsible technologies . they should be working hard to educate the world about the ramifications of the technologies such as they can foresee them . that doesn t mean no one else has any responsibility . the rate at which society copes with new technologies and their ramifications for society is partly rate limited by how we educate both the young people and adults in this country . if technology is continuing to change faster and faster and we don t get better and better at educating our children to adapt to these changes , then we , the public sector and the education system , are failing our children . i don t mean to suggest that technologists don t have a role to play in how society adapts to new technologies , but certainly other aspects of society also have to pitch in so that society can really elegantly and smoothly keep pace with the technology changes that are happening . you re part of a group called ai that s doing a very long term study on the impact of artificial intelligence . the researchers involved have said they don t consider it likely that , in the near term , ai systems will autonomously choose to inflict harm on people . but they also noted that it is possible for people to use ai systems for harmful as well as helpful purposes . how do you see ai impacting society ? artificial intelligence is going to turn out , i predict it s a dangerous thing as i ve said to try to predict the future to be technology that profoundly changes the world . we will come to see it the way we see electricity . it will be in everything . it will power almost everything , but we will rarely stop to think about it in very much the way that electricity has changed so much of our lives and yet we now take so much for granted . i m sure there will be abuses of artificial intelligence in some ways . i m sure there will be abuses of artificial intelligence in some ways . i m also confident that on balance , like electricity , artificial intelligence will be a lever for the human mind . it will make it so that the things around us make our lives better . there s no strong evidence that i ve seen that that won t be the future that we end up in . cyber security is one of the world s big problems . surely the bad guys in the cyber security world will use smart interesting ways of counting , or artificial intelligence by another name , to enable them to do bad things . society probably has two choices . we can just let them get the upper hand , or we can have artificial intelligence participate in protecting us . i think that microcosm is a useful way for us to think about what our choice is in society . the hackers are going to do it either way . do we want to get our software system smarter and smarter about protecting us or not ? i think a lot of people have a vision of the future in which they wake up in the morning and shout to their virtual assistant to perform tasks for them we already do this . then a robot will drive them to work and fold their laundry at home at night . but the tradeoff is that we have to give up an immense amount of personal data in order to enable this . that makes some people very wary . do you think this will still be an issue in the future ? i think that people will have a pretty wide spectrum of how much data they feel comfortable sharing , but i think it s fair to say that even wealthy people who can afford a personal human assistant have a pretty wide spectrum on the kinds of stuff that they will share with their assistants . some will tell their assistants everything , will give them the codes to their bank account and ask them to do a lot of things that other people are uncomfortable having a human assistant do . if you don t want to share your data , you shouldn t have to share your data with a digital assistant . simultaneously , i don t think anyone should be made to feel bad if they want the benefits they can get from a digital assistant . of course , the only way to get those benefits is for the digital assistant to have enough data to be able to help them . i would certainly hope that the future encompasses both of those perspectives and allows for both of those kinds of people to get what they want . what does the job market look like once ai has started to displace some of the tasks that humans currently handle ? technology has been displacing and creating jobs since there was technology . the lever , one of the first technologies that was ever created , allows one person to lift up something that before would have taken many people to lift up . that caused some people , from a narrow perspective , to lose their jobs . artificial intelligence is likely to cause some jobs to go away . it turns out that that hasn t actually caused people to lose their jobs because people spend their time making levers and because it turned out that instead of one person moving the boulder that used to cost you people you would use that one person to move that one boulder and you have nine other people moving their own boulders . you now move times as many boulders . in other words , artificial intelligence is likely to cause some jobs to go away and is going to create a ton of new opportunity . in order to believe that all jobs are going to go away , which is a rather extreme view , but certainly one that some people are saying , i think you would have to believe that there s an end to the problems in the world . that the problems are going to get all used up , taken up . that artificial intelligence will be so good we will run out of problems . i don t believe that that s going to happen . it is a failure of imagination on our collective parts that we can t see how , when robots take over some of what we re currently doing , it won t just level us up to the next level . project wing , which is x s drone project , recently tested food delivery by drone . have you had a burrito delivered to you by drone ? i have . how was it ? it was great . it was actually slightly magical . i think people over focus on drones plus burritos . i guess i understand why they can over fixate on that , but here s how i would describe it . every time we have , as a society , as a species , removed another big chunk of the friction in how physical things are moved around in the physical world boats , planes , trains , horses and the pony express , the mail system we have profoundly changed society . it s easy for us to see those things looking backwards because we ve become used to not having the frictions that have been removed . we would never go back , but we re very used to the remaining friction and how physical things are moved around in the physical world . you probably have a power drill . you use it one , th of the time , maybe one , th of the time . let s say you could just snap your fingers and have something magically appear in your hand whenever you wanted it at no cost , and it was instantaneous . you have a hammer in your home . you probably have a power drill . you use it one , th of the time , maybe one , th of the time . if that hammer was sitting in some central location , it could be shared by thousands of people , really safely , making everybody wealthier functionally because they would get the hammer when they need it without having to pay for the hammer and drain the world s resources by making all of these hammers that go almost entirely unused . you have a drawer full of batteries right now in your home , i guarantee you , that are discharging very slowly . maybe you have a little ziplock bag full of them , because you never know for sure when you re going to need one and what shape it s going to need to be . because you don t know and because it s surprisingly inconvenient to go to cvs or walgreens to get another battery , you just keep all of these batteries in your home that are slowly discharging , most of which will hit zero without you ever using them . you re wasting the planet in a really dramatic way and the reason you re doing it is because you can t just snap your fingers and have that battery appear . if we could move from an ownership society to an access society where having it now wasn t important but having it when you need it , it would really dramatically , magically , change the world . so in the future , drones will be flying through the air overhead . we won t own as many things because we ll be sharing them . unmanned aerial vehicles will essentially power the sharing economy and reduce our carbon footprint all of this great stuff . what is the biggest challenge to achieving that right now ? i don t want to minimize the challenges for the wing project . we need to make things that can successful move long distances completely autonomously with very high levels of safety and reasonably inexpensively . that is not a solved problem . you want to make sure that you don t hit a power line , that if something goes wrong with one of your motors , that you can land elegantly instead of just crashing out of the sky . that when you get where you re going , the system can cope thoughtfully with where to put the package down and possibly taking a package back or something else . there are a lot of as yet unsolved problems . i ve actually already seen designs for skyscrapers that have little mini heliports sticking outside the window . will residences in the future be designed with drone launch pads and landing pads ? will this actually factor into our design and the way we live ? i ve actually already seen designs for skyscrapers that have little mini heliports sticking outside the window so that uavs can drop packages on people s windows in high rises or just outside their windows or maybe land and then someone can take the package right there . i ve seen those designs , that s something that we re working on . i think it s maybe a little premature to be building buildings like that , but good for them for starting to imagine them . with project loon , x is trying to solve problems around internet access , both for the underserved and for people in the developed world who have internet access but want to fill in the gaps . do you see any potential downside to constant connectivity ? i sometimes wish my kids would get off their phones , but i m not one of the people who believes that society is being damaged by constant connectivity . i happen , actually , not to be a heavy user of social media . maybe i m just missing the addiction , so it doesn t seem that bad to me , but i believe that this is not the first time that people have panicked that technology or other kinds of innovations in society were going to ruin society . rock n roll was heavily billed as destroying the youth of america and somehow the youth of america have survived rock n roll . i rather suspect they will survive facebook as well . what is the thing or the project that x is doing right now that you think will have the most impact on society in five to years ? i m not going to pick the favorite of my children . that s not a winning proposition . but i m going to give you my honest answer . i hope that in the end , when we look back at x years from now , years from now , the process that i ve described to you our attempt to systematize innovation , to get that balance of crazy optimism and really hard skepticism , married together and balanced will be just right . if we can get that right enough and demonstrate enough times that we have at least somewhat systematized innovation , i m hopeful that that will turn out to be the thing that has the biggest impact rather than any one of the projects that comes out of x . so it s x s process , rather than a specific product . what i m saying is , what do you think had a bigger impact on the world ? henry ford s observation about how to make stuff , or the model t ? i believe that henry ford s bigger impact on the world was the systematization of interchangeable parts in a factory setting . that was even bigger than some of the car specific stuff that the factory built . in the same way , while i m very proud of some of the things that have already graduated from x the self driving cars , the life sciences project , the deep learning work called google brain that went back to google . i m very proud of a lot of the things that are currently being brewed here , i am hopeful that in the end the thing that will have created the most value is the way we re making them . will x be around in five to years ? i don t know , but you re welcome to come back in five to years and ask . will x last as long as ford has ? ford s been around for a long time . x is certainly intended to go on into the future . whether it does or not we ll have to wait and see . this interview has been edited and condensed	 yesterday fcc chairman tom wheeler shared a proposal that would make the cable set top box world look a whole lot more like the mobile phone market . the idea is to give consumers more choice around the hardware they use when they sign up for tv service . the rules , he wrote in re code , would create a framework for providing device manufacturers , software developers and others the information they need to introduce innovative new technologies , while at the same time maintaining strong security , copyright and consumer protections . so is this good news or bad news ? it depends . silicon valley players and cable operators are lining up their talking points and the washington lobbies are getting together a game plan to convince you of either case . cable companies say rules would be unnecessaryfor the most part , we already know the points each side will make . cable companies say these rules would be completely unnecessary they already build out apps for third party products , including for rokus and xbox ones , so there s no need for them to directly open up a pipeline to their raw cable data . third party companies , however , say those apps aren t great and stifle them from really competing in the cable tv world . you can read more on those points here . we ve reached out to some of the biggest stakeholders in this fight to ask their thoughts on the proposal . predictably , the statements so far stick to established party lines . naturally , the cable companies have been the most vocal . they re continuing to condemn the fcc s proposal . at ampampt , time warner cable , and a coalition of multiple cable operators and media companies known as the future of tv coalition , spoke out . their statements don t exactly hide their industry s disdain for regulation . at ampampt , for example , called the proposal another disappointing example of an fcc that thinks it s smarter than a highly competitive market that will discourage the very investment it claims to want . meanwhile , time warner ceo robert marcus said during the company s earnings call today that this move represents an attempt to create regulation that is really unnecessary , given the advances that have been made driven by marketplace forces . those advances he s referring to are the industry s apps , which it believes are the answer the fcc is looking to find with possible rules . apps are the answer the fcc is looking to find consumers can already access pay tv programming right alongside streaming content on an ever expanding universe of consumer owned devices , from smart tvs , game consoles and streaming devices to laptops , tablets , and smartphones , the future of tv coalition said in a prepared statement . this app driven innovation is already happening and it doesn t require a government mandate that would increase consumer costs , strip viewers of privacy protections , and let third party device makers ignore the terms of carriage agreements between programmers and distributors . we all know where the cable companies stand , so perhaps most intriguing is silicon valley s lack of response . most companies the verge contacted in regards to the chairman s proposal said no comment on the matter , or have not yet formulated their responses . this included apple , roku , amazon , and microsoft all of whom have a vested interest in the tv world . apple , roku , amazon , and microsoft all have a vested interest in the tv worldit s possible this is because the proposal really just happened . there were rumblings of action eventually being taken , but not necessarily so soon and with so little warning . as such , tech companies are taking their time to sort out a direct response , and there s no real rush . as wheeler has said , congress mandated years ago that consumers should have this kind of choice , and yet , we re still dealing with outdated technology from cable service providers . in reality , this proposal , if passed , would greatly democratize cable television , and line up the access tech companies need in order to create the set top boxes they ve always wanted . apple , for instance , wants its apple tv to be the go to device for tv watching consumers . from it , they d ideally be able to watch live tv , access programs , channel surf , and also browse netflix and other apps . that dream has remained unattainable so far , and hindered by cable companies refusal to turn over direct cable access . these could end up creating unwanted competitionbut even if these rules could help solve that disagreement , they could also end up just creating more competition that might not be welcomed . imagine google deciding to , say , license android as a platform in order to help set top box makers design smart boxes . the field could quickly get crowded . while most companies have stayed mum , some did offer their thoughts . tivo , the one company that has played ball with comcast and actually uses the dated and forgotten cablecard standard , told the verge that it is looking to provide choice and lower cost options , and we think that will increase the desirability for cable service . general counsel matt zinn said consumers are obviously frustrated with the lack of choice , which led to cord cutting and cord shaving . this could persuade more people to stay with the cable bundles . consumers are obviously frustratedgoogle didn t directly comment on the recent news , but left behind some clues of its stance when it commented on an fcc report last year . at the time , it wrote that there s much more at stake than streamlined channel surfing when it come to reinventing top set boxes and cablecard . innovation and competition in navigation devices will promote numerous policies important to the commission , ampnbspthe company said . beyond those two companies , silicon valley produced nothing but silence . it s clear the cable companies have a vested interest in maintaining the status quo . it s working out well for them and churning out profit . meanwhile , tech companies have a vested interest in upending the norm to sell new , enhanced products . ultimately , it comes down to consumers . that s where the fcc s vested interests lie . 	 cobalt mined by child laborers in the democratic republic of the congo may be entering the supply chains of major tech companies like apple , samsung , and microsoft , as well as auto manufacturers like volkswagen and daimler ag , according to an investigation from amnesty international and afrewatch , a drc based non government organization . the ampnbspreport , released today , lays out how cobalt mined by children as young as seven is sold to a drc based subsidiary of huayou cobalt , a chinese company . the subsidiary , congo dongfang mining international cdm , processes cobalt ore and sells it to companies in china and south korea , where it is used to manufacture lithium ion batteries for use in smartphones and electric cars . amnesty contacted multinational companies listed as customers of the battery makers , based on investor documents and public records . most said they were unaware of any links to the companies cited in the report , while others , like apple and microsoft , said they were evaluating their supply chains . amnesty says that none of the companies provided enough information to independently verify the origin of their cobalt supply . the investigation is based on interviews with people who work or have worked in informal , artisanal cobalt mines in the drc , including children between the ages of and . amnesty and afrewatch obtained photographic and video evidence of the hazardous conditions in which many of the miners work , often without basic protective gear or safety guidelines . the children interviewed for the report said they work up to hours a day to earn between and , and typically work above ground , gathering and washing rocks from defunct industrial sites or nearby lakes and rivers . it wouldn t take a great deal to help these children s lives . they carry heavy loads , face physical abuse , and are regularly exposed to dangerous chemicals and dust , the report says , risking long term lung disease and in some cases , death . prolonged exposure to cobalt dust has been linked to hard metal lung disease , which is potentially fatal , and many artisanal mines are poorly constructed and ventilated . at least artisanal miners died in the drc between september and december , according to information gathered from a un operated radio station , though the report notes that the true figure is likely much higher since many accidents are not reported . it s a real tragedy , and we think that the companies that are profiting from the cobalt , which ends up in our smartphones , should be part of the solution , says mark dummett , business and human rights researcher at amnesty . it wouldn t take a great deal to help these children s lives . the drc accounts for at least percent of the world s cobalt supply . the country s mining industry used to be dominated by a state run company , but it collapsed with the rest of the congolese economy during the s . since then , the government has encouraged artisanal miners to dig for cobalt in areas deemed unsuitable for industrial mining , and it has passed regulations on environmental and safety practices . but amnesty argues that the government has not authorized enough zones for artisanal mining , forcing many to strike out in unregulated areas , and has done little to enforce its rules . the report also documents cases where government workers extorted money from artisanal mine workers by making them pay for access to unauthorized areas . amnesty international and afrewatch according to estimates from unicef , there were about , children working in mines across the drc s southern region in , and the us department of labor has listed congolese cobalt as a good produced by child labor since . a drc government study , cited by amnesty , estimated that there are between , and , artisanal miners in the country s southern region , most of whom are self employed . nearly percent of the congolese population lives in poverty , according to the world bank , and the country ranks next to last on the un s human development index . ongoing conflict in the country has been fueled in part by its vast supply of natural resources . a us law that went into effect last year under the dodd frank act requires public companies to ampnbspdisclose whether their supply chains involve so called conflict minerals tin , tungsten , tantalum , and gold which have been linked to violence in the drc . dummett says similar regulations are needed for cobalt , which has not been linked to any armed groups in the country , though some question the effectiveness of the dodd frank approach . a report from assent compliance , a canadian it firm , found that percent of the , companies that filed conflict minerals reports couldn t say for certain whether their products are conflict free . others fear that the high costs associated with the regulations could entice businesses to leave the drc altogether , which would only exacerbate the country s poverty . some say required disclosures could actually hurt the drc whether or not this could have any impact is questionable given the rather mitigated impact of dodd frank on the ground , says christoph vogel , a researcher at zurich university and senior fellow at nyu s congo research group , who was not involved in the amnesty investigation . rather than improving human rights conditions and livelihoods , the law s practical implementation has so far contributed to increasing poverty and economic exclusion while the previous criminal networks largely continue to operate . in written responses provided to amnesty , apple and microsoft said they could not verify whether the cobalt in their products originates from the drc , or whether the cobalt is processed by cdm or huayou . samsung sdi , which supplies batteries for samsung and apple , said it is impossible to determine whether its cobalt is sourced from the drc , and that both cdm and huayou are not in its supply chain . it acknowledged having a relationship with l ampampf material , a south korean battery maker that was also implicated in the report , though it claimed that its materials were sourced in japan . volkswagen , daimler , and huawei denied doing any business cdm or huayou . volkswagen acknowledged a relationship with tianjin lishen , a chinese battery maker implicated in the report , while daimler could not confirm whether cobalt in its parts originates in the region due to the high complexity of automotive supply chains . we are currently evaluating dozens of different materials , including cobalt , in order to identify labor and environmental risks as well as opportunities for apple to bring about effective , scalable and sustainable change , apple said in its statement . as we gain a better understanding of the challenges associated with cobalt we believe our work in the african great lakes region and ampnbspindonesia will serve as important guides for creating lasting solutions . companies have a responsibility to assure that these human rights abuses aren t taking place . companies still face major challenges in tracing their supply chain , says lawrence heim , managing director at elm sustainability partners , a consultancy that advises businesses on conflict minerals . the consultancy has no business relationships with the companies cited in the amnesty report . confidentiality agreements make it difficult for components makers to verify the origin of raw materials , heim says , and minerals gathered from artisanal mines are often lumped together for processing without any formal tracing . he also takes issue with amnesty s accusatory tone toward car makers and tech companies , saying it s unfair to criticize their cobalt supply chain policies when they re still working to adhere to disclosure rules on conflict minerals . in their report , amnesty and afrewatch call on the drc government to expand its list of authorized artisanal mining zones , and to enforce safety regulations at all sites . it also urged multinational companies to conduct due diligence on their cobalt supply chains , and to publicly disclose their policies . in this day and age , it s not that complicated to work out whether human rights abuses are involved in the sourcing of products on the other side of the world , dummett says . the world s getting smaller and companies have a responsibility to assure that these human rights abuses aren t taking place . ben radley , a researcher at the international institute of social studies in the hague , says any plan to eliminate child labor must address the economic factors that underpin it . you can t stop children working if it is their only means to an education or they have no other alternative to sustain themselves and their families , radley said in an email , adding if we are serious about stopping child labor in the mines , the incentives for them to do so must be there . otherwise , they will soon return . 	 last year , facebook s internet . org found itself at the center of india s net neutrality debate . over million people wrote to trai , the country s telecom and internet regulator , to share their thoughts on the subject during the comment period last spring . nearly nine months later , we are no closer to having official guidelines on net neutrality , and in a surprising move , the regulator last month released another paper seeking people s view on differential pricing , though trai insisted the topic didn t fall under the ambit of net neutrality . should the telecom service providers be allowed to have differential pricing for data usage for accessing different websites , applications or platforms ? read the first question in the regulator s paper . are there alternative methods technologies business models , other than differentiated tariff plans , available to achieve the objective of providing free internet access to the consumers ? the trai paper asked in another question , in an obvious reference to platforms like free basics , that offer a differentiated tariff aka free access to certain websites . we are no closer to having guidelines on net neutralityit wasn t long before the save the internet campaign kicked into gear , with the website encouraging users to share their views with the regulator and even providing a form with pre populated answers to trai s queries , as it had done before . as the most high profile free internet access platform , it was no surprise that facebook s free basics was mentioned in all discussions related to the subject , with the save the internet campaign effectively becoming a stop free basics campaign . at the end of december , the regulator appeared to give into this pressure and ordered facebook s telecom partner to stop free basics in india , pending a specific approval . you d be forgiven for not recognizing free basics , as the name at least is new . in september , facebook decided to rebrand the internet . org project , likely to counter all the bad press it was getting in india and other countries . after the change , facebook s project offering free , limited internet access to users by partnering with telcos was rechristened free basics , while internet . org became the larger project about connecting users through moonshots like internet beaming drones . the save the internet campaign kicked into gearcritics argue that mark zuckerberg is more interested in finding new markets for facebook than in connecting poor people . facebook has reportedly spent nearly million promoting free basics in india over the last few months and zuckerberg also made several high profile visits to the country in a bid to drum up support for the initiative . most of the folks who are pushing for net neutrality have access to the internet already . i see these petitions going around on net neutrality , and that s great . we need to mobilise sic on the internet to push for this stuff . but the people who are not on the internet , can t sign an online petition pushing for increased access to the internet , zuckerberg said answering a query during one of those visits , attending a q ampampa at iit delhi , one of india s premier technology institutes . facebook rebranded the internet . org projectthe facebook co founder seems incredulous at the criticism the project has faced in india , a country where roughly only percent of the country has internet access . instead of wanting to give people access to some basic internet services for free , critics of the program continue to spread false claims even if that means leaving behind a billion people , zuckerberg wrote in an op ed in one of india s leading dailies . instead of recognizing the fact that free basics is opening up the whole internet , they continue to claim falsely that this will make the internet more like a walled garden . after the regulator s move to halt free basics , facebook renewed its own campaign , inviting people via billboards , print ads , tv spots , and , of course , facebook notifications to write to trai to express their support for free internet free as in beer , in case anyone was wondering . the world s biggest social network claims over million people emailed the telecom regulator in support of free basics , though the regulator says it received . million responses on the subject in total , with submissions having closed on january th . nearly half a million of those replies came via the save the internet campaign , trai said , clearly a vote against free basics . the regulator even gave facebook a chance pdf to address the difference in numbers , though it s yet to respond . facebook renewed its campaignso with two high profile net neutrality campaigns behind us , we are no closer to knowing what the regulator will actually decide . consultation by trai are not opinion polls , we are not asking if the answer is yes or no because that does not help us , chairman of the body r . s . sharma said recently , hinting that the sheer number of responses is unlikely to sway the regulator in either direction . the regulator has started sharing some of the responses it has received no surprise that facebook supports differential pricing pdf but there s no word yet on when a decision on the subject is likely to be made . some have asked if the government of india should be running a project like free basics in a bid to connect the proverbial next billion , though recent events have shown that perhaps it s best to let the free market take its own course . in around years , india has gone from a country with practically no mobile connections to a region where over a billion people now carry a mobile phone . the growth has been down to users realizing the benefits of connectivity as prices rapidly decline . with handsets becoming more affordable and powerful , and g soon to take off across the country , indians look more than capable of logging on to the internet without any freebies or artificial incentives . zuckerberg seems incredulous at the criticism the project has faced in indiafacebook could argue that free basics is the free market at work , especially since users can upgrade to the full internet by paying any time they want . indeed , zuckerberg claimed in his op ed that half the people who use free basics to go online for the first time pay to access the full internet within days . critics point to the walled garden approach and the privacy concerns during the time people use free basics services . chris daniels , vice president of product at facebook s internet . org hosted an ama on reddit recently where he said facebook could monetize free basics using ads , which did little to allay fears about the company s long term plans for the platform . while free basics continues to grow across the world the program now runs in countries its future remains uncertain in india , a key market for facebook as it looks for ways to overcome slower growth in revenue . 	 last month i drove a lincoln mkx around detroit and i liked it . i was surprised for two reasons a lincoln has made a new vehicle feel like serious luxury and b it s a crossover , the most ambiguous segment of cars on the planet . yet for all its ambiguity , we are told the crossover utility vehicle cuv is the way of the road at virtually every major auto show . ampnbspdetroit s naias , which opens to the public this weekend , is no different . the long list of crossover debuts include the volkswagen tiguan gte active concept , gmc acadia , buick envision , and audi s ampnbsph tron quattro . a search of any car shopping site drums up over models that fall in the crossover category best described as the trucklets found in virtually every suburban driveway that fall somewhere between suv and minivan but the biggest differentiator is whether there s a third row of seating . i ve sat through two dozen marketing presentations in the past decade about the long term growth in this segment , which is no joke naysayers have had to keep quiet while the sales pour in and automakers profits climb . in the us , according to the atlantic , three times as many crossovers are sold as suvs and minivans combined . how do you make a crossover utility vehicle sound sexy ? in its essence , it s an uninspired blah of a silhouette , even at its most aerodynamic , sculpted extreme short in the front , big in the back . it does not take a skilled hand to draw the shape of two oblong lima beans . but for the auto industry , it s the shape that dominates our era . many buyers see it as a perfect compromise from the bloated suv . it does not take a skilled hand to draw the shape of two oblong lima beanstechnically , a crossover is based on a unibody car platform . meanwhile , a true suv is body on frame , a build common since the s in which a separate body is mounted onto a rigid frame . but this a very loose definition , and some crossovers skew toward the stretched proportions of an suv while others are more car like . it s the ambiguity that makes this segment interesting . if you want to sell a car as a suv or a suv as a car , just call it a crossover . before the term became an indelible part of our automotive vocabulary , the concept of crossing over first emerged and gained popularity in the s . while american manufacturers cashed in on the considerable profits of gas guzzling hummers , durangos , and navigators , smaller vehicles like the toyota rav , honda cr v , and subaru forester made headway . what manufacturers and buyers soon discovered was that while these crossovers took three steps back in the the evolution of automotive design , they benefitted from car like performance and do all utility . to this day , the cr v and rav jockey for the most sales in this segment . in fairness , the biggest detractors of cuvs tend to be those who write about them , who will always choose the station wagon that sits closer to the earth and makes you feel like you re at one with the autobahn , or the sports car with the wonderful exhaust note . but one of the responsibilities of an auto journalist is to put aside the fantasy of the impractical car every once in a while and think about the consumer . my time in the mkx reinforced that point . one day during my detroit adventure , it sleeted , iced , and snowed the all wheel drive mkx was an ideal ride . the handling was responsive and i felt cocooned away from the treacherous conditions , thanks in no small part to a heated steering wheel . meanwhile , i watched a rear wheel drive mustang slip and slide in front of me . the honda cr v . and for all their awkwardness , crossovers have still permeated popular culture it s perfectly chic to roll up to the valet in the porsche macan behind a ferrari . heck , ampnbspthere s a drop top crossover now . even true suvs are now taking cues from the cuv segment the ultra luxe , ultra spacious ampnbspbentley bentayga , based on audi s q platform , only has four seats . the popularity of crossovers impacts every buyer from the thrifty jeep patriot customer to those shopping for the new cadillac xt , which will hit the road this year . as many crossovers as gm already offers , cadillac is now doubling down on them the xt is the first of four cuvs that the automaker will introduce on a new platform designed to dominate this segment . the outgoing srx was already the brand s best seller . what s the appeal for buyers ? in this class of vehicle , it s what s on the inside that matters . cuvs are the cure for an automotive napoleon complex you sit a little bit higher , which might make you feel a bit safer , if only psychologically . if you re a commuter and you live in your car for several hours a day , that little bit of extra legroom and headspace makes all the difference . but unlike the s super sized suv craze that captured the hearts of soccer parents and begat odes to inch rims , cuvs are easy to park and engineered to be reasonably fuel efficient . they re even going electric now , including the wee kia soul ev , the tesla model x , and the mitsubishi outlander plug in hybrid . car like performance and do all utilityas a northeast dweller where utility and wintertime sure footedness are key , i am often asked subaru , bmw x , or ford escape ? yes , some of these people are carting around a gang of children , but others are single and more interested in room for a dog , a bike , or their next rideable . it s the vehicle that has no functional limits . in the luxury segment , where shoppers can take their pick of high end sedans , crossovers keep winning , too . bmw says that percent of its sales in will be in the crossover category . and s record breaking year for car sales was propelled by upticks in crossovers . in november alone , the sales spiked by over percent , and nearly every automaker reported record crossover sales figures for the year . and until the next great automotive evolution , only more cuvs are forecast for the immediate future . the competition is taking a smaller approach to big , because maximizing minimum space , it seems , is the path to maximum profit . 	 drones zipping above our cities , landing on rooftops to drop off a bottle of tylenol or a hot pizza , then flying home to charge their batteries . it sounds like a far off fantasy world , the kind of futuristic project that companies trot out to generate press coverage but has little chance of becoming a reality anytime soon . and yet two of the world s biggest companies , amazon and google , are starting to confidently assert that they have the technology to implement this kind of business now , if only the regulators would get out of the way . last week i attended a panel in las vegas that included google , amazon , nasa , and a former faa official with intimate knowledge of that agency s stance on drones . it gave the clearest picture yet of how the biggest stakeholders in the united states are thinking about what needs to happen for drone delivery to take off . on both the technical and legal hurdles , there was a wide range of opinions on how aggressive the industry should be , and on what level of risk , or regulation , was worth accepting to forge this new era of aviation . many passenger jets already rely on software to fly and land , with humans manually controlling some planes for an average of seven minutes or less during each flight . yet so far the federal aviation administration is insisting that drones must always be controlled by a human pilot and stay within that person s line of sight , regulations which eliminate the possibility of a large scale drone delivery fleet . how can the drone industry move beyond these restrictions ? paul misener , amazon s vice president for global public policy , believes tech companies only need a chance to prove they can fly safely . i would say we need regulatory permissions , misener said , opportunities to fly autonomously with certain restrictions . amazon has been testing outside the us for the last year and prodding the faa to give them a set of performance and risk based standards they can test against . they don t want to be told what kind of technology they can use , because they plan on experimenting and iterating quickly . but given certain thresholds for communication , latency , and obstacle avoidance , misener expressed confidence they can make it work . so far , the faa is continuing to make them wait . pushing for permission to experiment in the usamazon s vision for drone delivery carves out the airspace between and feet for high speed transit . there is a no fly zone between and feet , keeping drones distinct from crewed aircraft . amazon is building drones that can communicate with one another , sharing their location and flight path . they will also have what s known as sense and avoid technology onboard , sensors that can detect obstacles around them and dodge accordingly . there is something called collaborative sense and avoid where flying objects identify themselves to each other and you can avoid them on that basis . there are existing technologies used for crewed aircraft that do this quite well . but there are a lot of non collaborative objects out there , said misener . at low altitudes , drones could easily encounter birds or balloons , objects that you can t predict and they are certainly not broadcasting their position . for that reason , high performance sense and avoid is a must for amazon . there s an error rate . making perfect sense and avoid technology the prerequisite for commercial drone flight could delay , or even doom the industry , because sense and avoid isn t perfect now and may never be . intel , which showed off the most advanced sense and avoid technology at ces last week , confirmed this problem . we tested multiple drones abroad intuitive , adaptive , depth sensing , smart drones . there s an error rate , said peter cleveland , a vp with intel s law and policy group . a very , very low error rate , but it has to do with a communication link and latency . google took a much more aggressive approach . i think there are no hurdles , we just need to do it , said dave vos , the head of ampnbspgoogle s project wing . the biggest hurdle is the culture , not inventing more problems than we need to solve . vos spent several decades building systems to power autonomous vehicles , starting with a unicycle at mit and finishing at rockwell collins , whose technology is deployed in both military and commercial jets , most of which fly on autopilot for the majority of the time they spend in the air . this is not a technology challenge anymore . airplanes are all automated . this is not a technology challenge . google s vos wants to solve the problem of imperfect sense and avoid by moving away from this technology as a critical component altogether . instead of focusing on new rules for how well a drone can see , vos argues drones should simply follow the established rules for crewed aircraft announce their flight plans before takeoff and broadcast their location and trajectory as they go . i would advocate strongly that the need for additional regulation is very , very small , said vos . that in fact if you allowed people to do things , and to replicate what is done by crewed aviation , pilots , in this airspace , it already works . so we don t need new regulations , we just need to be allowed to go do it . nasa , which is acting as the connective tissue between private industry and the faa , has been pushing slowly past the limitations imposed on companies like google and amazon . nasa worked alongside the faa to ampnbspcomplete tests with bsnf railroad where a drone inspected hundreds of miles of track , flying well beyond the operator s line of sight . in october of this year , that government plans to conduct tests of completely autonomous drones , seeing how well they can communicate their location , avoid obstacles , and coordinate their movements . parimal kopardekar , who is leading nasa s effort to create a ampnbsptraffic management system for autonomous aircraft , noted that the creation of the faa came in response to a crisis the ampnbsp collision of two aircraft over the grand canyon . with drones , he says , we wanted to avoid repeating the history . a lot of people who had to die to make it that good . but as the panel drew to a close , ampnbspjim williams , a former faa official who recently left for private practice at a high powered law firm , offered a very different conclusion . to realize the ambitious goals of a full scale drone industry , there will almost certainly have to be some regrettable accidents . that s not cynicism , he argued . it s just being realistic . the objective is to find the spot that the community you re operating in is comfortable with and that the faa is comfortable with and then you go forward and adjust if something does happen . because that is really the history of aviation . williams told the crowd . since the very first flights , there have been crashes and . . . you try and learn from it and prevent that from happening again . it s a wonderful thing that we have a transportation system that s the best in the world , but it s based on a lot of people who had to die to make it that good . you don t learn by arguing about how to do it . you learn by doing it . 	 the notifications began rolling in a week ago . i just stole caseynewton on stolen for , on getstolen , went a typical tweet . i ignored the first few , but eventually curiosity got the better of me . i downloaded the app , stolen , and saw that it had turned my twitter profile into a trading card . anyone who had an invite code to play the game could buy me so long as they had enough in game currency . according to my profile , a pr person i m friendly with had scooped me up . her profile listed me as part of her collection . and at the time , there was nothing i could do about it . in the days since stolen s launch , it generated an outsized buzz for an app that had only around , people actively playing it . as recounted by fortune , the game represented a last ditch effort by developer hey , inc . to create a hit following the failure of heyday , a journaling app that stalled out around million downloads . but amid withering criticism over privacy concerns and the game s potential to enable abuse , the company pulled it from the app store on thursday evening . we ve heard everyone s concerns , the game s official account tweeted , and have decided the best thing to do is shut it down . anyone who purchased in game currency can get a refund through the app store . we ve heard everyone s concerns . hey founder siqi chen told me he made the decision to shut the game down after concerns that it was negatively affecting some of its players , particularly those who were being stolen without their consent . our goal with taking it down today has just been to make sure we stop what is happening that we stop the harm , real and perceived , that people are getting from the existence of our product , he said . we didn t spend hours and months , sweat and tears to build something like this and have people see it this way . this is not who we are . chen said the company had not yet decided what to work on next , but said it did not plan to revive the stolen concept . chen had previously founded serious business , a company built on facebook s once thriving games platform , and with stolen his team decided to revisit their biggest hit from that era . launched in , friends for sale ! was a popular facebook game that let you buy your friends with in game currency . in one creepy twist , the game referred to your friends as pets , and in another , it let you sell them to others for in game profit . but there was no similar outcry about the game , or about the clones that followed it . that s one thing that surprised us , chen said . still , he said that s an oversight on our part . the market changes . people s expectations change . and we didn t account for it . chen pitched friends for sale ! as a humorous app for socializing , though it profited by aggressively monetizing users power fantasies . according to venturebeat , the game s business model was born when a rich user offered chen , for million in in game currency . more than million people played friends for sale ! , and one person eventually spent more than , building their digital human zoo . but the novelty eventually wore off , and facebook s game platform deteriorated rapidly after it shut down the spammy tactics many games employed to acquire users . serious business never had a follow up hit anywhere as big as friends for sale ! , and zynga acquired the company in . stolen was friends for sale ! for the twitter age . it mimicked the game s basic mechanic of buying and selling people in an effort to turn a virtual profit . it also let users buy in game currency using real money . but instead of only acquiring friends , stolen let you acquire celebrities , politicians , actors , investors , journalists , and brands . anyone who uses twitter , in other words . stolen s premise contained the seeds of its demisethe premise contained the seeds of stolen s demise . journalist holly brockwell gave voice to a number of concerns generated by the app ampnbspin an interview with chen published wednesday . chief among them that it allowed strangers to trade users names and likenesses without their permission and that trolls could post abusive comments on profiles they had acquired . chen apologized , and promised the company would closely monitor any abuse of the platform . it also created a way for users to opt out of having their profiles listed for stealing . but the next day , the company threw in the towel . stolen s abrupt demise is likely to obscure the fact that for thousands of people , it was actually a lot of fun . i hated the idea of the app , but after i downloaded it i found myself playing every day . stolen was addictive because it played on the anxieties so many of us have about twitter and other social platforms . who s following me ? who s ignoring me ? do my contributions here have any value ? are my peers more popular than i am ? stolen looked those worries in the eye and said , here s a giant stack of money why not simply buy your way out ? you couldn t make justin bieber follow you . but you could absolutely steal him . and indeed , i found myself buying profiles of people who i admire and who never followed me back . hi felix salmon ! when a high profile person stole me , i felt a surge of pride . i compulsively checked my in game value , which peaked around million before edging steadily downward . and i relished stealing friends from other friends a magnificent , harmless troll that always made me smile . we were trying to build a positive product , where people compliment and show how much they care about the people they care about , chen said . i love justin bieber . i love rihanna . william shatner joined today ! and william shatner gets to say , ampnbspi care about these people . these people i like . and he gets to see who his biggest fans are . that s the design we intended to build . stolen was addictiveall of this distracted from the fact that , as a game , stolen felt rather pointless . there was no way to win , or , outside of spending lots of money , even to stay ahead . you could spend million to steal someone only to have them stolen back from you seconds later . once you acquired someone , the only thing you could do with their profile was to watch its value decline . the app s system for valuing users and distributing cash bonuses appeared for the most part to be entirely random . at first i wondered when stolen s novelty would wear off . when it didn t , i wondered if twitter would shut it down . the company never said anything about stolen , but adam bain , its chief operating officer , was an enthusiastic user . what i never saw coming was that chen would pull the plug himself . but pressure was mounting rep . katherine clark d ma sent letters to twitter ceo jack dorsey and apple ceo tim cook today urging them to ban it . every concern i read about stolen in its short life , i shared . the last thing twitter needs on its platform is a new way to enable abuse . and yet part of me is sad stolen never got a chance to make it right . for willing participants , it was a flirty game of tag . and that , i think , is the crux of it . had the game started by asking for our permission , perhaps it wouldn t have had to ask our forgiveness . 	 a year after pledging million toward diversity initiatives , intel is launching a new project that focuses on one element of the problem online abuse . the hack harassment initiative launched in partnership with our sister site recode , our parent company vox media , and lady gaga s born this way foundation is an attempt to find solutions to internet harassment , starting with a series of hackathons through the first half of . held both online and offline , the sessions will involve members of the tech industry , the media , the nonprofit world , and academia . they re designed to raise awareness and find potential technological solutions to harassment , which will be presented at the code conference that starts may st . for a problem that s inspired a lot of talk and few real solutions , it s still just talk but its organizers promise that more change is coming . huge numbers of people have met with extreme hostility online , with women , people of color , and other underrepresented groups being particularly vulnerable . according to ampnbspa survey by the pew research center , percent of adult internet users have personally experienced some form of harassment . it really spawned out of our diversity discussion , says intel ceo brian krzanich . as you kind of take the next step in diversity , you now need to make it a safe and comfortable place for those people to work in so harassment was a natural next step to go work on . while about half the pew respondents who had been harassed reported less severe behaviors like being called offensive names or purposely embarrassed , the other half had faced stalking , physical threats , sustained harassment , or sexual harassment . for young users those between and the problems were especially pronounced . seventy percent had been harassed in some way , almost a quarter had received physical threats , and one in five had been sexually harassed . our young people are spending more time online than ever before , making it more important than ever to face this problem head on , says ampnbspcynthia germanotta , president of the born this way foundation and mother of lady gagaand the pew study didn t address some specific , more extreme forms non consensually posting nude photos or personal information , hacking into accounts , and swatting hoaxes . a vox and intel commissioned survey of tech industry professionals found that percent had some kind of experience with swatting calls , percent had faced hacking attempts , and percent had had personal information exposed online . while both surveys broadly found that people think online harassment has negative effects , that doesn t seem to capture the extent of the harm caused by this behavior . when people start to talk about topics , that s when things begin to change . by far the most common platforms for harassment , according to pew s survey , were social networking sites and apps . two thirds of people who had been harassed pointed to social media , while smaller numbers cited website comment sections , online gaming , and email . but even when these platforms have consistent anti harassment policies , they ve struggled to enforce them . twitter in particular has been singled out for its anemic response to attacks on users , especially because it s so easy for harassers to create new accounts as soon as they re banned . for recode , hack harassment is a natural followup to last year s code conference , which ampnbspmade silicon valley diversity a major topic of discussion . when people start to talk about topics , that s when things begin to change , says recode co founder kara swisher . especially after the gamergate controversy made international news in , though , it can be hard to believe that raising awareness is still necessary . the past few years have seen companies , politicians , and activists denounce harassment and put forward tentative strategies . state and national legislators are attempting to punish some of the most clearly illegal practices members of congress have introduced multiple anti swatting bills , ampnbspmost recently in november by rep . katherine clark d ma , who has also pushed the justice department to investigate and prosecute online threats more heavily . after heavy criticism , twitter attempted to make it easier for users to report harassment . even reddit , a platform famous for hands off moderation , began banning its most notoriously vicious boards last year . an entire day of the upcoming sxsw interactive festival is dedicated to anti harassment talks . your browser does not support iframes . but swisher says that in the tech community , discussions often flare up around individual controversies and fade soon after , without meaningful change . everybody gives lip service to a lot of things and then nothing actually happens , she says . and the kind of stuff that happens during online harassment really damages people . she suggests that it s too easy for people to slip into an abstract debate that pits defenders of free speech against opponents of online harassment . i think one of the important things is to show people exactly what is happening instead of talking about the bigger issues , she says . in one case , she ampnbsprecalls an interview in which girls creator lena dunham described quitting twitter because of misogynist abuse . when she saw people criticize dunham for being thin skinned , she responded with copies of the tweets dunham was describing , including threats of rape and other violence . i said , okay , is this okay ? and of course everyone was like oh my god , i had no idea . people without dunham s privilege or visibility , meanwhile , may have their abuse outright ignored , or even be told they ve brought it on themselves . but twitter , youtube , and other platforms are already taken to task so frequently that concrete solutions seem more important than awareness raising . it s not clear whether they ll be participating in the hackathons , or what kind of solutions they might be willing to implement . but hack harassment is confident that there are technological solutions to at least some of the problems . its early suggestions involve blocking the ip addresses of known harassers on sites and giving users more filtering tools , two options that survey participants judged effective . everybody gives lip service to a lot of things and then nothing actually happens . filtering has , in fact , proven one of the best solutions on twitter so far . ampnbspthe crowdsourced tool block together lets users share lists of offenders or automatically stop seeing accounts that raise red flags , and twitter later adopted shared block lists as an official feature . some problems also seem to have clear technological causes game developer and anti harassment activist ampnbspzoe quinn recently complained that youtube and facebook automatically lined her posts with links to tirades like zoe quinn , a vapid idiot . even if there s no surefire way to block abuse , platforms could avoid accidentally promoting it . swisher believes the problem isn t just that there aren t enough options right now , but that the ones that exist are either hidden or hard to use . if i can t figure it out , the average teenager who s getting pilloried on facebook or twitter or whatever has no hope of being able to deal with this except to sign off , she says . and that shouldn t be the only choice you have , to sign off . game studio riot , creator of the hugely successful e sport league of legends , has made some of ampnbspthe most promising breakthroughs in fighting toxic community elements . a dedicated social systems team finds and tests ways to make people act better online sometimes getting results from things as simple as making voice chat opt in instead of opt out . riot s solutions don t apply everywhere , but the studio has shown that basic structural changes can pay off . but technological solutions aren t the only thing that platforms have to offer , and they can only go so far . one of the most common complaints about online abuse is that even when it s taken seriously in the world of tech and gaming , its impact is minimized or misunderstood elsewhere . the onus is on victims to gather evidence , explain basic technological concepts to police , and convince friends and family that simply quitting the internet isn t an option especially when , as with swatting , the problems reach into the real world . groups like quinn s anti harassment organization crash override ampnbsphave published guides to doing this , but an industry wide initiative holds far more weight than any individual target . silicon valley has become adept at raising public awareness about its chosen causes , using a combination of petitions , online tools , and old fashioned lobbying . if it can get people to understand and care about issues as seemingly dry as net neutrality and copyright law , harassment doesn t seem like a bridge too far . swisher believes that despite the pervasiveness of harassment , companies have an incentive to make things change . they don t want to create environments online that people are scared to be involved in , she says . they want to create a safe environment for people and at the same time allow people to express themselves . whatever happens in the next few months , krzanich admits that it s just the first step . at the end of the day , i think we can make a lot of technology that can reduce the harassment levels , he says . but it s going to be peer pressure when it just becomes unacceptable societally , that s when harassment will really change . update january th , pm et added statement from cynthia germanotta . 	 the ces party circuit can help you understand the annual consumer technology extravaganza better than a full day spent prowling convention centers , but that doesn t mean they re actually fun . the strip s evening bashes are venues for hyper focused expressions of brand identity , and they re usually headlined by celebrities with little or no connection to the companies hosting the parties . attend a few events away from the show floor , and you ll find yourself drowning in lukewarm hors d oeuvres and perfunctory , confused concerts . there are better ways to unwind after a day full of keynotes and product demos one of them is sleeping . i knew all of that going into yesterday , and ces still managed to surprise me . i watched one of s biggest hitmakers perform from a few feet away in a beautiful nightclub , but it s not the wednesday night performance i m going to cherish . instead , i m going to remember the hour plus i spent with dan halen , jef leppard , and the other middle aged mercenaries that make up one of new england s premier hair metal cover bands . i m going to remember mullett . so many chromecast audio dongles plugged into empty boxesmy evening began with google s content happy hour at one of the bellagio s nightclubs , a space decorated by dozens of chromecast audio dongles plugged into functionless boxes and a bunch of neon signs advertising the company s entertainment adjacent products . the party kicked off with a lengthy , surprisingly coherent dj set , but it wasn t much more than a huge platter of appetizers preceding the musical main course a headlining set from paterson , new jersey s finest , fetty wap . the crowd started to rush and clump in the middle of the show floor , and i caught a glimpse of blonde dreads and a chain . fetty s set lasted roughly minutes , enough time to run through each one of his singles that hit the top last year . if there s a prototypical kind of cash grab party appearance , this was close to it fetty and monty wandered through each song with the help of meaty backing tracks and crowd noise , and a confetti cannon coated everyone near the stage in sticky , white plastic midway through trap queen . there were a few diehards clustered in front of the stage , but most of the attendees stuck to their drinks and conversations while fetty danced and sang , backdropped by the bellagio s fountains . i couldn t help but think that fetty and google are an odd fit on a philosophical level . google is a company with a finger in every pie , trying to reinvent the world on a dozen different fronts fetty does one thing really , really well , and it s still unclear how he s going to adjust when churning out iterations on the same core concept becomes stale . conceptual congruity doesn t matter much when you re just trying to snag some cultural cachet with a decent party . the two bashes couldn t be more differenta few hours later , i found myself at a restaurant deep within the venetian for a party being co hosted by intel and lenovo . in terms of both aesthetics and atmosphere , the two bashes couldn t have been more different . intel and lenovo s room felt bright and relatively spacious compared to google s dark , cramped nightclub . it was unabashedly product centric booths along the side of the room hosted heavyweight gaming pcs running rocket league , and nervous attendees tiptoed around laptops of varying sizes and shapes with drinks in hand . if there was a dj at the party , he was well hidden either way , the mix leaned on recent , corny classics . an interstitial set climaxed when salt n pepa s push it led into a bass heavy club mix of andy grammer s honey i m good . this wasn t exactly boiler room . of course , the biggest difference had to do with each party s choice of live performers . google gave its crowd minutes of fetty wap intel and lenovo gave theirs a minute opening set of stompy sync rock from x ambassadors you might know renegades . oh , and a crew of and somethings bringing the cover band thunder all the way from shelton , connecticut ? two hours . in a week where everyone is always short on time and running around like chickens with their heads cut off , mullett s performance was remarkably generous , and their setlist was crammed with every goofy s rock song you can imagine . if a song involved giant , glossy manes , lewd gestures , or a live music video , you can bet mullett played it . fetty wap had an impressive year last year , but it s hard for him to compete with a machine that scrapes the best songs from an entire decade . mullett had hits arguably hits better known to the average ces attendee even if they didn t actually write any of them . intel specifically wanted an s cover bandi spoke to the band s tour manager , who confirmed mullett was playing ces for the first time . intel was specifically interested in securing the services of an s cover band for the lenovo event , and tapped mullett through a production company a texas cover band called the spazmatics , which focuses on new wave , was also under consideration . even though they re based in new england , mullett aren t strangers to vegas the band are regulars in the more humble venues of the strip . they re not opening for tiesto anytime soon . they re playing the hard rock on saturday night before heading home . i came into intel and lenovo s party steeling myself for a weird , thoroughly sad affair , and in the moments before mullett s performance , things were at an all time low . greying tech employees in business casual were grinding to jason derulo , their hips coming dangerously close to the expensive electronics around the room hordes of men in blazers and jeans were fist bumping and leering at everything in sight a roadie s ass hung out of his pants like a pale crescent moon while he tuned mullett s drums . it was bleak , so you can imagine my surprise when the band proceeded to drive the crowd which was packed , by the way into a frothing frenzy . there are some good looking girls at this lenovo party , teddy lee ! the room was alive with the glory of hair metal people were throwing up horns , crushing beers with abandon , and generally acting like paid extras in a m tley cr e video c . . at one point during a spirited rendition of pour some sugar on me , a woman stormed the stage , shed her jacket , and invited lead singer ron jovi to engage in some mimed pg sugar pouring . from that point forward , every song featured a few people climbing under the rope to dance in front of the band . the musicians of mullett were technically prodigious , charismatic , and comfortable with rehearsed lechery . there are some good looking girls at this lenovo party , teddy lee ! when i finally managed to scrape myself away from mullett after a ripping take on rick springfield s jessie s girl , i felt like i understood ces in a way i didn t before . you only need to spend a few hours here to grasp the sheer size of the event it s a technological bacchanal , one that can easily swallow you . it took me a little longer to understand the social multitudes ces contains . it has room for social climbing , wining and dining , and the kind of stereotypical networking that ll make anyone roll their eyes . but it also has room for cross country co worker reunions and pure , unabashed fun the kind that s miles away from any sort of social posturing . i felt the pressure that comes with seeing and being seen while watching fetty wap on google s dime . i can t say the same for the hours i spent rocking out with four paunchy experts well versed in whitesnake and the outfield . after taking the temperature of both events , i think i know a little more about the people and companies that help bring ces to life every year . see all of our ces news right here ! h . ces promo a background fa b a border radius px padding px px px font family ff din web condensed , helvetica , sans serif text transform uppercase font weight normal font size px text align center display inline block margin px auto color fff h . ces promo a hover background bf a d color fff text decoration none 	 bacteria found in the gut of a , year old mummy may help scientists understand how our germs evolved with us . by sequencing the dna of stomach contents found inside the iceman , researchers found a pretty famous type of bacteria , ampnbsph . pylori the same type of bacteria that sometimes causes ulcers in humans today . and ampnbspthat finding , published today in science , doesn t just hint that the iceman may have been sick at the time of his murder . as it turns out , mummy bacteria also reveals a lot about ancient human history . scientists only recently noticed the mummy contained a full stomachthe iceman was discovered in by a german couple vacationing in the italian alps . his body had been exhumed by glacier melting close to the austrian border . in the years after the body s discovery , scientists figured out that the iceman lived during the copper age , grew up in the alps , and that he was somewhere between and years old when he died . they also discovered that he died when an arrowhead lodged itself in his left shoulder , severing a major artery . in , an analysis of the iceman s dna revealed that the iceman had brown eyes , brown hair , type o blood , and that he was lactose intolerant . now , scientists have turned their attention to the organisms that lived inside the iceman s stomach . but getting to this point in their research wasn t easy scientists only noticed that the mummy contained a full stomach in , after re examining ct scans of the body . and even then , scientists still had to do something drastic defrost a , year old corpse completely to find out what might lay inside . eurac marion lafogler first , scientists had to completely defrost the mummy . then they went into the guts through a pre existing cut in the lower abdomen , says albert zink , head of the institute for mummies and the iceman at the european academy in bolzano , italy , told reporters yesterday . through the opening in the mummy , we were able to get samples of the stomach content and different parts of the stomach and intestines . they went into the guts through a pre existing cut by analyzing dna contained in the samples , scientists figured out that the ampnbsph . pylori strain found in the iceman s gut wasn t the product of a modern contamination . the ampnbsphelicobacter sequences display damage patterns , so they were clearly of ancient origin , says frank maixner , coordinator at the institute for mummies and the iceman . the researchers also determined that the iceman carried a strain that s associated with inflammation in modern day humans . in addition , the researchers found signs his immune system had been fighting off the infection . that might mean the iceman was sick when he died , but his stomach lining wasn t preserved well enough for researchers to know for sure . finding out if the iceman felt sick before his death wasn t the researchers main goal , however . what they wanted to do was use ampnbsph . pylori s genome to uncover new information about human history . eurac marion lafogler that s possible because this particular bacterium only exists in human stomachs it s transmitted when children play together , as well as from parent to child . it also happens to mutates very quickly , which means that h . pylori s dna can give researchers an even higher resolution picture of how human populations have moved around the globe than human dna would allow right now , says yoshan moodley , an evolutionary biologist at the university of venda in south africa and one of the co authors of the study . in addition , scientists already know that the modern day european population of this bacterium is made up of a roughly combination of asian and northeast african bacterial populations . but what they don t know is when that mixture one that would require close contact among disparate groups of people took place . that s why today s study is valuable for evolutionary biologists . the analysis of the bacteria s dna shows it s closely related to ancient north indian h . pylori strains and shares only a small amount of ancestry with north african strains . that s surprising , the researchers say , because modern european strains are closely related to north african strains . that means that the genetic mixture of ancestral bacterial strains found in modern europeans ampnbsphadn t occurred , or had not fully occurred , in central europe by the time of the iceman s death . he carried an unmixed strain . until now it was believe that this mixed strain was already present in the neolithic period that the farmers brought this already mixed strain to europe and now we see in the iceman that it wasn t like that . he carried an unmixed strain , maixner said in a video interview . the bacteria inside the iceman s gut was probably paleolithic bacteria that existed in europe at the time , moodley said . and the african components that scientists see in modern european strains may have been brought in by neolithic farmers at some stage in the last , years . it s unlikely that today s european mixture is the result of people from asia walking to europe and meeting african people there , moodley says . instead , the african components of modern h . pylori probably were transferred to the middle east before moving into europe over the last , years . the asian bacterial population was probably widespread in prehistoric europe it would have evolved in the middle east as well before spreading throughout paleolithic europe and asia . reconstruction of the iceman . south tyrol museum of archaeology ochsenreiter krithi sankaranarayanan , a microbiologist at the university of oklahoma , says the study was well designed but that s not all that he s excited about . he thinks the researchers methods could be used to screen other mummies from similar or older time periods . and that s something that the researchers say they ve thought of too . they re already in talks with scientists who have access to mummies in asia , northern europe , and south america , zink said mummies in egypt had their stomachs removed , so they re pretty much off the table . and that s promising for scientists , since it s hard to draw population wide conclusions based on just one specimen . this probably isn t the last time you ll hear about the iceman . his body is currently housed in the south tyrolean museum of archaeology in bolzano , italy , and the researchers say that they still have sample materials left to look at , and some data to crunch . in addition , the researchers say that the iceman didn t suffer too much from being defrosted and then re frozen . taking the samples didn t cause the iceman s body any harm , moodley said except maybe that he lacks some of his stomach content now . big future can we bring animals back from extinctionbe sure to subscribe to the verge s youtube channel for more ces videos	 federal officials released ampnbspa new set of dietary guidelines today that could have set a new path for americans by encouraging people to eat less red meat and less sugar sweetened beverages . but instead the us government released a report that many experts say shows just how much it succumbed to pressures by the meat and the soda industry yet again . for some nutrition experts , the disappointment that follows the release of the latest dietary guidelines is familiar . every five years , the us government publishes a revised set of the us dietary guidelines for americans and every five years i m disappointed , says christopher gardner , a nutrition scientist at stanford university . the guidelines focus is on disease prevention , and they re very influential they have an effect on everything from how companies label their food , to what types of food are included in school lunch programs . so , whatever the us government tells americans to eat is bound to be controversial and this latest set of guidelines was no exception . the meat lobby is very powerful in congress . even though a panel of experts convened by the government called the dietary guidelines advisory committee ampnbspsaid that a healthy dietary pattern is lower in red and processed meats the new guidelines make no mention of red meats . in addition , the new guidelines ignore the advisory committee s analysis that concluded that a healthy diet should be low in sugar sweetened drinks . there are clear benefits of replacing red meat with almost any other protein sources but the meat lobby is very powerful in congress , says walter willet , chair of the department of nutrition at harvard university . the dietary guidelines committee was also quite explicit in their recommendation to limit sugar sweetened beverages , and that s not talked about in the guidelines at all . willet isn t the only one who feels let down . as expected , due to strong lobbying by the meat industry and the resulting strong pressure that congress put into the developers of the dgas , the recommendation to reduce consumption of red and processed meats was not included , says rafael perez escamilla , an epidemiologist at yale university and a member of the dietary guidelines advisory committee . in my view , this is a major gap . in my view , this is a major gap . one of big points of contention in was the guideline committee s decision to include a section on environmental sustainability in their report . that angle on nutrition advice had never been included in the committee s report before , and it rubbed a lot of people the agriculture and meat industry , ahem the wrong way . so , after months of lobbying and letter writing by republicans and agricultural lobbyists alike , the idea that a healthy eating pattern should also be sustainable one was nixed . us department of agriculture secretary tom vilsack and sylvia burwell , secretary of health and human services , even released a joint statement in october in which they promised that the guidelines would remain within the scope of our mandate . . . which is to provide nutritional and dietary information . there was more tomfoolery in september when the british medical journal published an investigation that went after the advisory committee , suggesting that it hadn t followed a proper methodology while conceiving its report , and accusing it of deleting meat from the list of recommended foods . but the verge s own reporting showed that the bmj s accusations were misleading and false they seemed designed specifically to serve as ammunition for the meat lobby . a month after its initial publication , the bmj issued a correction for the article . finally , in november , scientists signed a letter asking for the retraction of the story . the article can still be found in the bmj s site today . the fact that a lot of the advisory committee s more radical recommendations were ignored doesn t mean that the guidelines are a failure . the new guidelines appear to slip in some language that under the right light suggests that eating less meat might be beneficial . take this summary on how americans should shift their eating patterns the u . s . population , across almost every age and sex group , consumes eating patterns that are low in vegetables , fruits , whole grains , dairy , seafood , and oil and high in refined grains , added sugars , saturated fats , sodium , and for some age sex groups , high in the meats , poultry , and eggs subgroup . . . . the guidelines almost never explicitly say that people should eat less meat and certainly make no mention of eating less red meat . they do state that some people are eating too much meat , though . here s another example . . . evidence from food pattern modeling has demonstrated that lean meats can be part of a healthy eating pattern , but as discussed in chapter , average intakes of meats , poultry , and eggs , a subgroup of the protein foods group , are above recommendations in the healthy u . s . style eating pattern for teen boys and adult men . for gardner , that small change is a positive one , even if it s hard to decipher . they actually said that ! it s not explicit , but it s as close as they have come to saying eat less meat , poultry , and egg . the guidelines also make a point of stating that people do not eat food groups and nutrients in isolation . rather , the different components of a person s eating pattern can have interactive and even cumulative effects on their health . so this year s guidelines shouldn t be seen as a rigid prescription , the guidelines state , but rather , an adaptable framework in which individuals can enjoy foods that meet their personal , cultural , and traditional preferences and fit within their budget . the stuff you ve heard for the last five years still standsso , what does this all mean for the everyday american who just wants to eat well without consuming too much crap ? it means that most the stuff you ve heard for the last five years still stands the guidelines recommend a variety of sources of protein , vegetables , fruit , oils , whole grains , and low fat and fat free dairy . they also recommended limiting the intake of sodium , trans fats , and saturated fats . finally , the report says for the first time that less than percent of calories consumed each day should come from added sugars . and all that other , more radical stuff will have to wait . the dietary guidelines advisory committee report has planted a very important seed that i hope others will see blossom and thrive , says perez escamilla . a lot of the advisory committee s recommendations didn t make it into the guidelines , and the health professional community is disappointed , gardner says . however , we realize that dietary guidelines are hugely political issues , and making huge changes is honestly not realistic so there are silver linings . 	 the verge in celebration of our th anniversary , this month we re publishing a series of interviews with innovative leaders about what the next five years hold . to read more about this series , read our editor nilay patel s introduction here . the idea for taskrabbit was conceived back in , when its soon to be founder leah busque realized she was out of dog food and didn t want to go out in cold weather to buy more . at the time , taskrabbit was on the leading edge of the on demand services that would come to reshape our economy . less than a decade later , smartphones have become nearly ubiquitous in the us , the uber for x model applies to dozens of startups , and two day shipping seems like a long time . the idea that we can outsource almost any onerous or time consuming task is no longer a new one , and the growing size of the freelance workforce has brought to light questions about worker rights , safety , and benefits . but what does the future look like for the gig economy and companies like taskrabbit , as technologies like artificial intelligence , autonomous cars , and even delivery drones hover in the not so distant future ? stacy brown philpot , formerly taskrabbit s chief operating officer , took the helm of the company this past april . while she was coo , taskrabbit made significant changes to its business model , going from an auction model to fixed prices for specific services , something brown philpot claims helped the company grow more than it had in three years prior . before joining taskrabbit , brown philpot had a decade long career as a director of sales and operations at google , and earned an mba from stanford university . while some technologists make bold predictions about the ways in which artificial intelligence will impact our lives in the near future , brown philpot thinks people , not robots , will still be performing the kinds of tasks her company provides . the notional of a work schedule as we know it will erode as freelancers and contractors make their own schedules . and , brown philpot thinks more businesses will offer portable benefits for contractors , a controversial topic in today s gig economy . the interviewwhat does a day five to years from now look like to you ? five to years from now , in my home , things will be largely solved so that i can spend more time with my family . you can imagine a world where you often spend time thinking about all the things that you need to do , but there will be so much automation that some of those things will be figured out for you . in the future , when i come home , most of the things that i need to worry about are solved . you will know that your mother is coming to visit in a week , and that a tasker is going to go and show up and clean the house . or your refrigerator will make an api call to taskrabbit that the filter needs to be replaced and then the scheduling will already happen and you ll get that filter replaced . in the future , when i come home , most of the things that i need to worry about are solved so i can spend time with my family . the devices are connected , but as humans , you re more connected because you can actually connect in the things that really matter for families . what s the greatest challenge in creating that fully automated future ? i think the biggest challenge is reaching that point of automation in a way that the common technologies across these different services can talk to each other that you can build the services on top of them . we ll move into a world where there are specialized services but the challenge is getting the technologies to talk to each other in an easy and efficient way . five years from now , what do you think we ll be calling this phenomenon of apps essentially connecting people with services and things that they need on demand ? will it still be called the sharing economy or the gig economy ? i don t have the phrase for it yet . part of it is really just the future of work this is just how we get things done . today , if you think about the fabric of america really changing , getting affordable services and help in an affordable way today , we need a phrase for it . tomorrow it will just be how we get things done . you re going to go from sharing economy to connected home to some automation to specialized services to just life and how we get things done . in a recent interview with recode s kara swisher , you say that taskrabbit pays your taskers well above minimum wage . yeah , we pay five times the federal minimum wage and an average hourly rate of an hour . what is the future of minimum wage ? it s something that comes up a lot , especially now in such a contentious election . is minimum wage going to change dramatically , and if so , is that going to happen because of the private sector ? it has to happen . i think that people need a livable wage . when you think about the last months , there has been such an increase in anxiety and actually an increase in just hopelessness in this country . what we re trying to inspire and do is create hope and hope is about opportunity . we need to have pride in what we do . it s about pride in what you do and it s about making a meaningful income . if that means that things like the minimum wage need to change because private sector companies like ours are building hope , are building opportunity , are building the way for people to make a meaningful income , then so be it . but in order for us to thrive and survive as humans , we need to have those things . we need to have pride in what we do . we need to be able to feed our families and take care of our families . and so all of the systems and the infrastructure that supported the structure around work years ago have got to change in order to make that reality possible . subscribe to our newsletter so you don t miss the rest of the verge interviews . terms apply . subscribe do you think it s realistic that the minimum wage would go up five years from now ? i think it s realistic that companies like ours will continue to push the envelope on what it takes to make a meaningful income . ninety percent of our taskers today are part time , so they have a job somewhere else but that job isn t filling the gap . so i hope that five years from now the gap that we continue to fill will be so big that the government and other people will realize that this is something that s not going anywhere . twenty to percent of people in the us and europe have some independent or freelance job . sixty million people in the us by will have some freelance job . this really isn t going anywhere , and maybe it will take years , to your point , that the structures need to evolve and change to really support this growing workforce . will support beyond minimum wage , things like benefits , change for contractors in a significant way in the next five years ? i hope so . there are already smaller companies out there that are trying to separate the benefits that we get from traditional employment with the actual employment . if you separate the benefits , you can look at them individually and determine how you want to offer those services . we ve partnered with some of them to make some of them available . we ve worked with the obamacare and the health care system to make sure that s available . we ve partnered with intuit to make sure tax planning is available for independent contracts and self employed people . there are already early signs that businesses are being built around setting up portable benefits that i , as an individual , can extract and use , and build retirement , do tax planning , create a health care structure for myself . i think over time those things will naturally continue to grow as the work force grows . the businesses will follow . i hope that the structures , from a public sector standpoint , will evolve by the time we build great companies around it . will the gig economy transform our notions of schedules ? it already is . you should come to a tasker meetup . they don t think , i work hours a week , to . the notion of a schedule is , i have two hours today , what can i get done ? a client on taskrabbit might wake up in the morning on saturday and she s like , i ve got a two hour window . i can hire somebody to come here and hang these pictures up on the wall that have been sitting here for two months because i ve got this window right now . the idea being , i don t have to plan or think anymore because i ve got the specialized services available to me . so i think the notion of a schedule has already changed . another thing that will evolve is , how do i think about making time for my friends and my family if we re not scheduled in a traditional way ? it will be much more integrated . work will be much more integrated . family time will be much more integrated . if the average american worker s schedule becomes totally fluid , what sort of impact does that have on other industries ? i often think about that in regards to things like flight fares around holidays , where prices are currently dictated by the idea of days off . it s just going to become more personalized . how i interact every day when i get home , my typical day would be very personalized . all of the businesses that make extra money by charging more because society has said that people get off between christmas and new year s are going to have to figure out a way to deliver a service that i ll pay for . i ll have a personalized way to look at when and how i travel . and because my schedule is going to be unique to me , i ll pay what it costs to fit it within my schedule . my google search is very different from your google search for the same keyword . we could sit right side by side and do the same search and we have a different result and it s all based on how we interact on the internet today . those will come out of the computer and into the home and then to all the other services that we decide to transact on . how will voice control change how we interact with on demand services like taskrabbit ? we spend a lot of time with our heads down on our phones . we want to see what s going on with our friends and our family who are not where we are . but we also spend time ordering things , emailing things , requesting things , and typing things by looking down . but you can imagine a time when typing and pushing a button isn t as fast as you just saying what you want . you re setting it and forgetting it and after the sentence is spoken , the work is done . you could imagine saying alexa , please change my house cleaning appointment from thursday to friday . alexa says , okay , and now it s already done . you didn t write that down in to do list , you didn t type it in anywhere , you don t have to post the task , you didn t have to do anything , and you can move on . you re setting it and forgetting it and after the sentence is spoken , the work is done . it s so much easier for you to organize your thoughts . you can just speak the thought and the work will happen . how will artificial intelligence impact the gig economy in a way that it hasn t already ? i think there s a boundary . cars are machines , so we ll automate cars . our washer and dryer are machines . we ll figure out how to automate them and put the technology in and then you ll buy one in five years and it already talks to taskrabbit . but , it s really hard to turn a human being into a machine . i used to watch the jetsons growing up . i used to think that this woman , rosie , the robot housekeeper , was going to exist . i think we re far away from that happening . the sharing economy will change because a lot of these things will be automated , but someone will have to physically take those clothes out of the washing machine and put them into the dryer . that s got to be a human being . someone has to level that tv on the wall and mount it in the right exact parameters that you wanted it . that s going to be a human being . because people aren t machines , the true specialized services that people need to provide will still continue to be provided in a very flexible way as part of what we today call the sharing economy . one of my colleagues wrote an article recently about the value of doing things yourself . this idea that you can get a sense of pride or satisfaction from the tasks of everyday life . do you think that there could ever potentially be a backlash to this idea of having every single chore driving , building shelves done on our behalf ? i think that human beings are often looking for a reason to relate . i remember growing up , we couldn t afford anybody to come and do the chores around the house , so saturday mornings we had to clean the house and do the chores . part of that was the experience of interacting with the family as a unit , everyone having a role and a part . the question is , do you actually need the task of doing the chore to create the family unit and the ability to relate , or is it just that the family wants to find a way spend time together ? i separate the task from what i think human behavior is , which is , i just want to connect with you on something that is common , or , i just want to feel proud of something that i m able to do and capable of doing . if it s putting together those shelves or running a mile for the first time , you can decide which one of those things is going to make you proud of yourself and other people proud of you . it will be great to have the choice . for some people , they will still want to put that crib together for the first kid and that s going to make them feel like a great dad . and for some people , they re going to be on their second kid and they re like , you know what ? i want to go kick the soccer ball around and let somebody else put the crib together because that also makes me a great dad . let s talk about diversity . you ve said before that when you were growing up , there just weren t that many black ceos for you to look up to . even now , there are very few other prominent black female ceos . what do you think needs to happen in order for the tech workforce to become more diverse in the next five years ? a lot . there is progress . i ve been in silicon valley for years . the conversation around diversity is richer than it has ever been . people are willing to talk about it . people are willing to accept that they failed in creating a diverse workforce from the beginning . the conversation around diversity is richer than it has ever been . people are willing to reach out and ask for help in partner with various organizations like code and others to change the dynamic in the numbers . what it s going to come down to now is their willingness to do the harder thing . the harder thing being holding yourself accountable to results , deciding what those targets are , and being slow to hire which is really hard to say when you re a growing company . being slow to hire gives you the time to find the best qualified candidate and look at the diverse population of people . i also know that the next person that we add who may be lgbtq , who may be african american , who may be hispanic , will make the very few african americans or lgbtq people in the company feel like they can bring their whole self to work and all of them will now be more productive because of it . but that s the harder thing to do and that s the biggest challenge that we have because we re being held accountable to hitting certain revenue numbers . when you re a venture funded company , you ve got to achieve lots of heroic things to make that investment pay off and sometimes you sacrifice the real need to address diversity . what makes hiring a diverse workforce so difficult , though ? if you don t have an active pipeline of diverse candidates and you don t know where to start , there is some work on your part to go and build it . it s not hard because the people aren t there you have to just go and find them and you have to decide that you re going to do it . if your natural network doesn t include that group of people , then you re going to have to send two extra emails , have two more meetings . let s get down to the specifics of it . when we brought in our vp of legal and regulatory , danielle merida , i really wanted to create some diversity in my leadership team and reached out to a lot of women who were parts of various associations of law professionals . so when we brought in our candidate pool for the role , we had a very diverse set of people to choose from and that s because i m a woman so i could focus on that . if you re not a woman and you don t have access to those networks , you have now got to go build that and it might be uncomfortable . where do you think taskrabbit will be in five years ? i have this vision of ubiquity for taskrabbit . i think we can become the starbucks for home services . think about it everyone drinks coffee , but starbucks created an experience around it . there s a lot of services and chores that you need to get done and we re creating an experience around it which is , i can set it and forget it . i have someone who can help me out as a trusted , individual human being . i think in five to years people will still be using phones , but it will be a much more connected world where we re doing a lot of talking to devices and machines and a lot of background fulfilling of chores and tasks so that our clients can really live their lives . can you paint me a scenario of what that background fulfilling of chores looks like ? i have led light bulbs in my home . we just did a remodel in the kid s room and we re getting ready for the second baby . we need to change how things are set up we need more led bulbs . because my light system is connected , that order will get placed somewhere . you never actually had to place the order , you never had to think about it . the tasker will show up with them . you re probably having dinner with your family , with your kids . you re sitting at the table , someone knocks on the door , and they go , i m here to install an led bulb . what led bulb ? what are you talking about ? there s four in this new room that you just added and so i m just going to go ahead and put that in for you . great . it s already been taken care of and it happens . you spend two minutes opening the door and you never actually had to place the order , you never had to think about , but it s something you wanted to get done and you can go back to your conversation . is taskrabbit selling those bulbs in this futuristic picture ? it doesn t matter . it could be , or it could be you already have an account with home depot and we go to home depot because we ve partnered with them and pick it up . amazon is already headed in this direction with their dash replenishment service built into home appliances , dash buttons , and their far flung voice control . you can reorder your garbage bags through alexa . do you see that all competitive to what taskrabbit is trying to do ? i don t . we ve partnered with amazon last year , particularly around tv mounting . if you buy a tv , you can add the service to cart to get the tv mounted . the person who shows up could be a tasker from taskrabbit that mounts that tv for you . there is that last step of the human being we are not replacing . what about autonomous vehicles ? will that impact taskrabbit s grand plan for the next five years ? probably . i would love to solve the infrastructure in transportation problem . one of the biggest challenges for succeeding in smaller markets is some of these smaller markets just don t have good public transportation . if you re tasking on taskrabbit , you re probably trying to make ends meet , you re trying to make some extra money and you may not have a car . if you have a car , that s great but if you don t , you rely on a transportation system that is not as reliable as it should be . autonomous vehicles that are affordable will solve a lot of how do you get people from point a to point b and it ll enable millions of people to task on taskrabbit who wouldn t otherwise be able to do that today . this interview has been edited and condensed	 so , here s a crazy thing this time last year , no one even knew that gm was working on an affordable , high range electric car . in automotive terms , going from concept to production to test drives in months time is an exceptionally tight schedule . there are regulatory hurdles and crash testing . there s the fact that engineering a good , roadworthy vehicle is fundamentally difficult and expensive . in reality , of course , development on the bolt started long before the introduction of the concept car at naias in detroit last year , and it shows . i think this car might be ready for the real world . but let s back up for a second and talk numbers . gm isn t going into any new details here , but the bolt is expected to deliver plus mile range for a net price of around , after tax breaks . that can be misleading if your income is too low to take advantage of the full tax credit , but the car will be well under , regardless . the company tells me that time will fall under seconds , which should match or best vehicles of similar size and shape like ford s c max . my test drive of the bolt ahead of its introduction today took place on a closed , walled off course just a few hundred feet from the stage where gm chairman and ceo mary barra will unveil it . the course wasn t nearly as big as i would ve liked ampnbspi need to stretch the bolt s legs before i issue a fleshed out opinion on it but i had enough laps to get the sense that this is a very unremarkable car on the road . and i mean that in the best possible way gm is trying to make a car that real people want to buy . this isn t a parlor trick , it s not for speed freaks , it s not for tech nerds well , maybe it is ampnbspmore on that in a bit . the bolt just needs to feel like a good , usable , everyday car that happens to be fully electric . unlike a , tesla model s , unremarkable is high praise for a car in this category . you ll hear me say it s for anybody who wants to save time , money , and the environment , barra told me in a conversation before she took the stage today . we wanted it to be a great car , and to really separate it . . . i think it s going to have wide appeal . what exactly do i mean by unremarkable ? decent , usable acceleration which , in typical ev fashion , is eerily smooth in the bolt handling that prioritizes comfort over performance and , for the young families that could become a core target demo for cars like this , space . space ! i actually commented to the gm staff on hand that the bolt has an optical illusory flair to it , because it s got a freakish amount of rear passenger legroom considering the compact dimensions . as near as i can tell , some of that legroom comes from thin front seats they seemed comfortable enough to me , though you never know until you ve road tripped in them . weirdly , the most interesting thing about the bolt might not be the drivetrain but the infotainment system , an lg sourced unit that is unique to this car and is crazy good . to be fair , when i say crazy good , i mean by car standards ampnbsprarely are factory infotainment systems much more than maddening garbage fires that make your seemingly trivial task of changing the radio station a chore . the bolt s system is anchored by a . inch touch display that might be the most responsive i ve ever used in a car ampnbspthere were no appreciable delays between taps and responses , which was a baseline expectation for phones and tablets years ago that hasn t really taken hold in the auto industry yet . unremarkable is not an insult with this carall of this is probably thanks to lg having a heavy hand in the bolt s development . i think i even see some lg influence in the ui , which is flat , two dimensional , and modern looking ampnbspthere s no skeuomorphism , no drop shadows or reflections that look like they were pulled from a five year old smartphone . the home screen is comprised of customizable widgets for different functions ampnbspmusic , battery status , and clock , for instance ampnbspthat can be rearranged to the driver s content , and any widget can be made full screen by tapping an icon in the corner . carplay and android auto are both supported . it s worlds better than the infotainment system on the first generation volt , and it s even substantially better than chevy s relatively new system that s used across the portfolio . if gm is smart , it ll adopt the bolt s hardware in more vehicles . and there s one more tech trick in the interior the rear view mirror is replaced with an lcd display linked to a wide angle camera behind the car . the value , or so the story goes , is that this kind of setup eliminates obstructions like pillars and rear passengers so you get a better view of what s going on . shockingly , it s good . i thought i d hate it , but i immediately adapted to it and treated it like i would a standard mirror . and if you don t like it , you can flip a lever beneath the display and it magically turns into a regular mirror . none of this matters if gm can t make the bolt in volume , customers can t be bothered to look at it in a world of cheap gasoline , or the upcoming tesla model is a lot better . any of those scenarios is possible . but regardless , i can t help feel like the company has just made history it has produced a practical ev without the traditional ev downsides that many , many people can afford . and while i can t yet declare that it s great , i m comfortable saying that it s not bad . of course , the bolt is the first of its kind , but it certainly won t be the last . the auto industry is changing at an unprecedented pace right now , and if ces has taught me anything over the years , it s that the first mover advantage doesn t mean much . gm is going to have to haul ass just to keep up but so will everyone else . for owners , car sharers , and riders alike , that s pretty awesome news . see all of our ces news right here ! h . ces promo a background fa b a border radius px padding px px px font family ff din web condensed , helvetica , sans serif text transform uppercase font weight normal font size px text align center display inline block margin px auto color fff h . ces promo a hover background bf a d color fff text decoration none 	 ces has already given us plenty of news about drones and cars , it s even given us drones that launch from the back of trucks ! both industries are working toward the same end goal completely autonomous vehicles that can carry passengers or packages . and they are relying on a similar set of fundamental technologies from computer vision and artificial intelligence to a suite of sensors for positioning and navigation . but we rarely think of them as overlapping . that will certainly change after this morning . ehang , a chinese drone company , announced a new product at ces it s calling the ehang , an all electric quadcopter scaled up from a drone so that it s large enough to carry a passenger . ehang calls it an autonomous aerial vehicle , i prefer personal pilotless helicopter , but if you need to explain what it is to anyone , just say it s a driverless car for the sky . ehang says the , which is all electric , can carry a single passenger up to miles or roughly minutes of flight . the person in the cockpit doesn t do any piloting , they just input their destination and enjoy the ride . the aircraft claims to be able to autonomously take off , fly a route , sense obstacles , and land . and if anything goes wrong , a human pilot is supposed to step in and take over the controls from a remote command station . it s been a lifetime goal of mine to make flight faster , easier , and more convenient than ever . the provides a viable solution to the many challenges the transportation industry faces in a safe and energy efficient way , said ehang ceo huazhi hu . i truly believe that ehang will make a global impact across dozens of industries beyond personal travel . the is evocative of a future we ve always dreamed of and is primed to alter the very fundamentals of the way we get around . we haven t seen a human inside a flying yet if this sounds crazy and illegal , well that s because currently it is . right now ehang has no plans to fly it in the us , where it hasn t been tested or approved as airworthy by the faa , so unfortunately a live demo at ces isn t happening . it says it has completed successful flight in china , but the video the company provided never showed the aircraft in flight with a human inside . the photos it supplied were mostly renders or images of the craft that lacked any other objects for scale . its press materials and statements raise lots of questions . could a remote pilot really take over in an emergency and hope to successfully navigate a landing ? how does it communicate with other aircraft ? the minutes of flight time is given only for a flight at sea level , so what is the maximum height at which this aircraft can function effectively ? ehang did show off a fully built unit this morning at ces , and it s promising to deliver a working unit for sale some time this year . but at this point we re taking it all with a big grain of salt . it s probably best to think of the ehang the same way we do a concept car , a prompt for exploring the delightful potential of a world in which you could hail a tiny helicopter as easily as an uber . sanjiv singh , a professor at carnegie mellon s robotics institute , has worked on a flying car project for darpa and currently leads a startup , not affiliated in any way with ehang , that develops autonomous rotorcraft . that company s work with the us navy shows , seen in the video above , it is indeed possible to design an autonomous helicopter that can make sense of obstacles like a tree line and navigate to a landing on its own . but singh says ehang will face additional challenges because it is proposing a smaller , more delicate craft . even a small change in temperature could prove challenging if you re flying on what is essentially a scaled up quadrotor , something as simple as the temperature can have a big impact , says singh . when it gets hot , the air gets thinner , and the rotors produce less thrust . the aircraft has to be smart enough to know that on a hot day , it will be harder to clear that tree line that it would be on a cold day . and it has to be able to make those measurements in real time , for air temperature changing at different altitudes . the ehang would have to be able to detect very small obstacles , like power lines or wires that came loose in a storm . and even if it achieved this level of computer vision and autonomous navigation , for now , the idea that you could input any destination and simply head there with the push of a button is unrealistic . with airports , you have fixed routes and can ensure that those routes , and the places where you take off and land , are clear , says singh . until we have built a more robust set of skyways , a craft like this would be limited in terms of where it can travel and what path it can take . luckily for ehang , massive companies like amazon are already pushing for a new era of skyways designed with autonomous aircraft in mind . amazon has proposed carving out different layers of the sky for a variety of drone activity . it s easy to imagine one swath being dedicated to drones with packages , another for drones that carry people . meanwhile , google is working on a smaller , cheaper version of the ads b technology which would allow autonomous aircraft to communicate their position to one another the same way commercial jetliners do . reducing traffic by taking people off the road right now the amount of intellectual and economic resources flowing into driverless cars is far larger than what is being directed at personal autonomous aircraft . but singh believes that commercial and military operations will continue to drive the progress of autonomous aircraft , and that those advances will eventually trickle down to consumer vehicles . if small , autonomous aircraft were to become commonplace , it certainly could have a major impact on transportation , and our society , says singh . while driverless cars might reduce car ownership and encourage ride sharing , there would still be times of peak demand when the number of cars needed on the road would create traffic . move some of those same rush hour passengers into the air , and suddenly it s a whole new ball game . will ehang be the company to spark that revolution ? so far it s only made a standard consumer drone , the ghost , a unit with fairly mixed reviews . it s exciting to see a company making such bold claims here at ces , and the concept is certainly a fascinating and feasible one . this is vegas , but we wouldn t bet on a fully functional and faa approved version of the ehang arriving anytime soon . see all of our ces news right here ! h . ces promo a background fa b a border radius px padding px px px font family ff din web condensed , helvetica , sans serif text transform uppercase font weight normal font size px text align center display inline block margin px auto color fff h . ces promo a hover background bf a d color fff text decoration none 	 theranos , the silicon valley blood testing company , launched its first blood sampling center at the end of . but for most of the two years that followed , federal officials didn t inspect theranos inventions at all , the verge has learned . this suggests one of two possibilities either theranos customers received test results generated by equipment that no federal official checked for accuracy , or theranos wasn t using the proprietary technology behind its billion valuation to return results to patients . a recent report from the wall street journal pointed toward an extreme version of option number one that theranos actively hid its proprietary technology from lab inspectors , which would explain why the inventions were never checked . and theranos has publicly proclaimed it used its technology on patients , which means either that the company s lying or patients received tests that had not been validated by any federal authorities . steve jurvetson flickr cms did not inspect the theranos proprietary technology . theranos first came under scrutiny after a report in the journal in october , which said that theranos inventions were only used on a small number of tests sold to patients . on sunday , the paper reported that during an inspection by centers for medicare and medicaid services auditors , employees who worked in the normandy section of the theranos lab were told not to enter or exit the lab the inspectors toured the section of the lab that housed traditional lab instruments theranos bought from other companies but never saw the edison machines theranos highly publicized blood analyzers . this account fits with lab inspection documents that the verge obtained from cms , which do not mention theranos proprietary technology at all . there s a reason for that cms did not inspect the theranos proprietary technology , a spokesperson for cms told the verge in an email . consequently , at no point between theranos opening its first wellness center in and a surprise inspection by the fda in august did any federal official examine the company s proprietary technology either its edison machine , which reads samples , or its nanotainer device , which stores blood from pinprick testing . the lack of inspection was possible in part because theranos registered its technology in categories that have minimal oversight . theranos sold its tests under a designation that even the us food and drug administration calls a regulatory loophole the lab developed test . under this designation , no pre market fda approval is required for the company s blood tests as it typically is for most drugs and devices . the category was meant for research hospitals , which sometimes adapt commercial tests to suit patients needs , and theranos is one of ampnbspseveral companies using the loophole to sell its tests to the public . instead of the fda , regulation of theranos labs fell to the centers for medicare and medicaid services . theranos also registered its blood containers as fda class i medical devices in , according to the fda . that category of medical device doesn t require an fda inspection . no fda inspectors entered a theranos facility until august of this year , during a round of surprise inspections . in the fda s inspection report , it referred to theranos nanotainer as an uncleared medical device and altered its registration to a class ii medical device , which requires greater oversight . cms declined to provide us with additional information about theranos . the fda provided some information about theranos regulatory status including the fact that theranos registered its containers as class i in but declined to reveal anything further about the company . theranos cms auditors were proactively briefed . theranos says cms inspectors have looked at documents relating to the proprietary machines and tests . cms auditors and personnel have been proactively briefed on theranos laboratory developed tests and theranos proprietary platform on multiple occasions , including reviewing validation reports and other documents about our ldts , theranos spokesperson brooke buchanan told the verge in an email . she also points to a section of a december lab inspection report which mentions the lab s alternative assessment procedures , an in house verification procedure that the company says it used to check the accuracy of its proprietary tests . there were no observations related to alternative assessment procedures or otherwise related to our ldts in that report , buchanan says , meaning the inspectors didn t note any problems with the company s methods . but the cms report that mentions an alternative form of verification in the lab inspection doesn t reference the company s inventions . in addition , this type of verification process isn t conducted by an external agency so it s up to theranos to make sure it s doing it correctly . alternative assessment procedures or aap are used by companies because their machines are too different to be used with standard proficiency testing samples . under aap , theranos gathers its own blood sample and then runs it on two different machines a commercial machine and one of its own analyzers inside its own lab . then it compares the two results and documents the process . no outside agencies are involved , so theranos has a lot more control than it would during proficiency testing . and as the verge previously reported , the decision to perform aap came from theranos not cms . in addition , using aap does not let companies skip out on portions of a lab inspection . inspectors normally tour the lab particularly to see the instrument workstation . it s unclear why cms didn t verify whether theranos proprietary tests were accurate . inspections don t just involve briefing assessors on machines and reviewing documents . theranos labs fall under the clinical laboratory improvement amendments , or clia . under clia , cms is supposed to make sure labs are checking the accuracy and precision of each test performed in their lab . also among cms inspectors tasks ensuring that correct results are reported to patients and that a blood sample tested on one day will return the same results on the test at a later date . to do that , inspectors check a company s maintenance procedures , patient test reports , and quality control data . inspectors are supposed to walk the lab floor , says james nichols , a pathologist at vanderbilt university and the government relations committee chair for the american association for clinical chemistry . inspectors typically will read the procedure , review the data supporting method validation , and then tour the lab particularly to see the instrument workstation and speak with the technologists performing the testing to ensure that what they are doing matches what is written in the test policy . and while this type of verification can t determine if a test really does detect a health condition , it does help establish that the test is functioning properly . michael kovac getty images there are several possible explanations for the fact that cms says it never inspected theranos inventions . if a machine or a test isn t being used to return results to patients , cms doesn t have to check it . it s possible that despite claims made by theranos in the media , these machines were never used to return results to patients a scenario that resembles conclusions in the wall street journal s initial report . federal regulators may also have failed to do their jobs correctly . or , as the wall street journal has most recently suggested , the devices could have been hidden during inspection . if they have a shelf in their freezer that says research , i won t check anything . it s not unusual for cms to ignore experimental technology if a company is using conventional technology to deliver patient results , says michael murphy , president of conatus consulting , a medical device regulatory consulting firm . these companies rely on conventional machines to generate revenue , while their scientists work out the kinks in their new technologies a company might use an invention on patient samples , but only in parallel with other methods . when these companies hand out test results , they only use those generated by fda cleared machines . in those instances , technologies that are in development aren t included in cms inspections . if i m inspecting a lab , and they have a shelf in their freezer that says research , i won t check anything on that shelf because those materials and reagents are not being used for patient testing , says ted schutzbank , technical director of the specialized testing and microbiology laboratories for the st . john providence health system in michigan . he also occasionally conducts lab inspections for the cms accredited college of american pathologists . if there s an instrument that says research , not for patient testing , i won t check that instrument either . this practice is quite common but companies that operate this way don t tout their revolutionary tests to the public and press , murphy says . either theranos ran patient samples on unchecked machines or theranos wasn t using its inventions at all a lot of companies would probably be more conservative and not advertise that their new collection device is ready for prime time if , in fact , they re just using it for comparison to a standard method which is what it sounds like that they re doing , murphy says . i wouldn t be making such bold claims , especially given the notoriety of their founder and especially their board members . they don t need to brag about something that they aren t doing . theranos insists that it used its proprietary technology to conduct patient tests . in its , word response to the initial wall street journal report , theranos said that by the end of , theranos offered more than of the tests on our online test menu via finger stick . of those , all ran using proprietary technologies . in addition , the company stated that by the fourth quarter of , percent of guests got lab tests run on finger stick samples . if theranos has been using its own inventions , then uninspected results of totally unknown accuracy may have been returned to patients . by some estimates , test results influence ampnbsp to ampnbsp percent of medical decisions although that number ampnbsphas been disputed . lab tests are essential to the everyday practice of medicine , says richard novick , the recanati family professor of science at new york university s school of medicine . it is critical that they be accurate . inaccuracies can put patients health at risk . it s possible that cms was just out of its depth . most tests that fall under the category of lab developed tests consist of slight alterations to existing commercial tests . but theranos took ldts to an extreme when it decided to build a brand new system with no peer reviewed studies to back up its methods . however , if cms failed to inspect novel technologies that were returning results to patients , that s bizarre , says stephen master , chief of clinical chemistry at weill cornell medical college . if there was an inspection of a lab that s focused on novel technology and it didn t explicitly examine the validation data for those assays , it would raise some significant concerns . the fda s august inspection wasn t routinein august , theranos inventions were finally looked over by federal officials from the fda . the circumstances that surround those inspections are murky . theranos fda cleared herpes device had not yet come up for routine inspection when the agency conducted surprise inspections at theranos facilities in august , a spokesperson for the fda told us . that inspection may therefore have been a simple , random inspection , or the result of someone tipping the fda off about the company . something made them want to inspect but i don t know what it is , says mary pendergast , a lawyer and regulatory expert who is also a former deputy commissioner at the fda . your guess is as good as mine . theranos buchanan declined to comment on the reason for the inspection . theranos says it halted tests on its proprietary technology following the august fda inspection except for the one test that has fda approval . still , that doesn t address what happened at the company during the two previous years . either theranos never used its proprietary technology to return patient results presenting itself as a revolutionary startup when the company was actually a conventional lab or the company gave out results with unverified accuracy to patients . neither option looks good for the . million tests that belonged to patients who trusted theranos with their health . 	 every january , tech makers come to the consumer electronics show in las vegas to promise disruption and revolution . before we embark on the edition of ces , which is less than a week away , we re taking a look back to see how the last batch of hyped up announcements has fared . how have the past months gone for the innovations and products that grabbed the headlines of ces ? dell xps let s start off with the least controversial of all the products introduced at ces . dell s xps came in looking like the future of windows laptops , and it spent the year as the top choice in that category . it made a great first impression with its practically nonexistent display bezels and high end construction materials , and backed it up with good performance and ergonomics . none of the xps s aluminum clad luster has faded , and a refresh late in the year with intel s updated skylake processors only made it better . dell also extended the edge to edge infinity display to its xps model , underlining the success and popularity of its ces debutant . gogoro smartscooter the verge s best in show from ces did not disappoint . gogoro s grand plan is rather more ambitious and holistic than being a mere scooter , but that s where it all starts . in january the taiwanese startup stirred imaginations with its irresistibly cute personal transporter , and by july it was being warmly received in its native capital of taipei . a city teeming with scooters of every type and price was nevertheless smitten with the electric gogoro . from taipei to amsterdam and beyondfollowing its winning pilot scheme in taipei , gogoro announced it will expand to europe in , starting with amsterdam . due to the scooter s design it only exchanges battery packs and cannot be plugged into a conventional electric charging station gogoro has to roll out on a city by city basis , building citywide grids of battery exchanges as it goes . that s not an easy or cheap process , but the company is making rapid progress and its future looks bright . americans can probably expect news about a san francisco expansion before is through , perhaps even as soon as the upcoming ces . asctec firefly one of the big themes of ces was the rapid improvement in drone technology and capabilities . numerous companies showed off flying devices capable of following their user , with some even touting degree selfies . german company ascending technologies brought the most impressive example to the show with its obstacle avoiding firefly hexacopter , which played a starring role in intel s keynote presentation . quadcopters , hexacopters , awesomecoptersas the year has progressed , it s been encouraging to see asctec s products which are intended for industrial and research purposes being matched by drones that are closer to commercial availability . the dji matrice , which was introduced in the summer , laid claim to being the first consumer drone with the ability to see and avoid objects in its path . most of the other future facing demonstrations of ces have also made their way into mainstream drones by now , setting the stage for another big jump forward at the show . asctec will no doubt want to show improvements too , as its obstacle avoidance tech was surpassed a month ago by an mit drone that autonomously weaved its way through tree branches at a formidable mph . lg g flex lg did almost everything right with the curved g flex . it took the flawed design of its original g flex smartphone and refined it smartly . the flex was a smaller , more manageable device that nevertheless retained a unique look and a very high end spec sheet . capable of withstanding great bending pressure , it was also one of the more durable devices introduced in . its fancy back cover featured the second generation of lg s self healing plastic , which can recover from scratches in about seconds . and yes , you could buy the g flex in a sumptuous shade of candy apple red . has there ever been a successful smartphone that launched at ces ? by lg s own account , the flex series has always been a design exercise more than anything . it represents the korean conglomerate s most advanced technologies , such as the flexible plastic oled display from lg display and curved batteries from lg chem , and it hints at things lg might do with its future flagship smartphones . but what held the g flex back wasn t so much its experimental nature as it was the rather prosaic issues of price and performance . for all its specs , this smartphone didn t perform as quickly and beautifully as it promised , and with a limited release and high cost , it never saw any great adoption . the future of curved phones is far from certain , following the underwhelmed response to lg s efforts and to samsung s galaxy round . on the one hand , current consumer demands are clearly geared toward obtaining more performance and battery life from phones , not more quirky form factors on the other hand , these handsets are pushing design boundaries and thus are always on the brink of delivering something groundbreaking . for now , at least , the curves seem to have been shelved . zboard with the breakthrough of so called hoverboards into the mainstream , has been a big year for electric rideables , but not for the one that garnered the most attention at ces in january the zboard electric skateboard . it arrived in vegas seeking support for a crowdfunding campaign , and it promptly secured nearly , from indiegogo backers . alas , its development has been slow , and the company only recently started shipping boards to beta testers . a year after its big moment in the spotlight , the zboard is still a work in progress . the ignominy of being overshadowed by hoverboardsthe advantage hoverboards enjoy over more serious projects like the zboard is one of price and convenience . they re hastily put together and questions have arisen about their safety , but their lower price has prompted many to buy them on a whim . to compete with them , the zboard and other electric skateboards like it will have to prove their superior reliability and quality over the long run . pono player looking like a segment from a toblerone chocolate bar , the pono player was one of the most charming and fascinating launches of ces . neil young s high res audio player was built around simple controls , a simple display , and a simple mission delivering high fidelity music to a wider , more mainstream audience . it was such an appealing proposition that over , people contributed in excess of . million to its kickstarter campaign before it even arrived in las vegas . the reception to the pono has been decidedly mixed and its future is uncertainbut the pono player s fortunes this year have been mixed . it launched to a chorus of critical disapproval , which revolved around the simple fact that regular music listeners just couldn t hear any difference between the pono s high res tracks and conventional , compressed mp s . for a music player tied to a pono music service where users have to purchase high res versions of songs they already own for more than each the pono s failure to display clearly superior quality seemed fatal . financial struggles hampered the company in august , by which point its chief , neil young , admitted that he and his team were doing everything they could just to keep pono alive . at the same time , though , he did point out that tens of thousands of pono players and hundreds of thousands of tracks had been sold , and later in the year he had news of an expansion to canada and the uk . pono closed off the year by collecting a pair of awards , so its promises of higher quality playback appear to have been justified , even if the benefits of high res audio remain dubious at best . audeze el the pono player could also be found at the audeze pronounced like odyssey booth at ces , serving as a bright yellow marker to attract people to this boutique headphone maker s stand . those who perused audeze s offerings were rewarded with a listen to the excellent el planar magnetic headphones that the company had just launched . costing , they actually represented a significant move down in price class for audeze , whose flagship lcd collection is often compared against sennheiser s hd for the title of best overall headphones available . audeze made further progress in by introducing a lightning connected pair , called the el titanium , which integrates an amp and a digital to analog converter into the cable . this makes it possible to get the best and loudest sound from a pair of true audiophile headphones while relying on just an iphone as the music source . big headphones and big sound at a big , but declining , pricethe el has been a clear success for audeze , which has spread its name further than ever before by making its products more accessible and friendlier to mobile devices . the company has asserted its position as a pioneer in the movement to take high end personal audio on the move , and ces is likely to show many competitors introducing their efforts at catching up . mercedes benz f the self driving car seemed to be everyone s darling at ces , but mercedes went furthest in its embrace of the futuristic motoring experience . its f concept car , subtitled luxury in motion , featured four swiveling passenger seats , an array of touchscreen displays , and extra advanced features like gesture and eye tracking . running on hydrogen and built out of carbon fiber reinforced plastic , it s an all out rejection of everything conventional and a true vehicle for research and experimentation . mercedes benz offered test rides inside the functional f a couple of months after its big ces unveiling , and the car has gone on to set the design language for all of mercedes concepts that followed . the entire f package is very far away , but its most practical elements are likely to start appearing in production cars before too long . lg webos smartwatch before samsung s gear s which was as much a treatise on the benefits of round watches as it was a great product in its own right the most exciting and interesting smartwatch out there was lg s webos timepiece , briefly teased at ces . introduced by audi rather than lg , it was demonstrated as a futuristic way to unlock your car with the effortlessness of wireless nfc communications . its appeal was that it was a watch , a key for your car , and a smart device with cellular connectivity that could perform a variety of advanced tasks . audi s focus on automotive applications , such as checking and controlling the status of a car remotely , didn t discourage curiosity even from public transit users the watch was just too attractive and , at the time , unique . webos isn t deadthe good looks of the watch itself were carried over in the software within , which was tailored to make the most of a round face and already included a number of apps designed for a circular interface . everything worked smoothly and quickly , with webos making its android wear competition feel unwieldy and sluggish by comparison . much of what made this watch stand out in january has now been either matched or surpassed by samsung s gear s , however there s still plenty of room for attractive , nicely designed smartwatches . audi s teaser for this watch promised it for , and the latest word from lg is that it s still on track . expectations are that lg will also be introducing webos smartwatch models under its own brand in the new year . the ces appearance can , therefore , be deemed a success it whetted appetites and confirmed consumer interest in developing a geekily beloved operating system into a new smartwatch platform . htc s connected future not a singular product , but the vision of a connected future described by htc was one of the bigger announcements at ces in terms of potential impact . the smartphone maker was on the brink of a transformation that would turn it into the vendor of connected devices and experiences . it was emblematic of the connect everything ! theme that pervaded much of ces , with every company having its own take on the internet of things and its own philosophy on how to turn it into reality . none have made any huge strides in this direction since then , and htc is once again an instructive example of it . the awesome stuff htc promised for has been bumped to htc s plan included the connected home , the connected life and self , and connected entertainment . it wasn t known at the time , but ces marked the company s first , cagey hint at the htc vive vr headset that would be revealed a month later at mobile world congress . regrettably , the vive s release date was bumped from the holiday season of all the way to april in the new year , and a similar fate befell the accompanying htc grip fitness wearable . by this point in the year , htc would ideally have realized a range of re branded devices , putting hardware behind its promises of fundamental change . that hasn t happened for the taiwanese company yet , and its struggles to diversify are illustrative of the broader industry challenge of tackling unfamiliar sectors . car companies are getting involved in personal tech and connectivity , while phone makers are dabbling with auto technology , and everyone is experimenting with the potential of novelties like drones and vr . ces was like every ces that came before it and like every ces that is yet to come . it had obvious hits like the dell xps , unlikely successes like the gogoro , and a fair share of both predictable and surprising disappointments . what distinguishes every year from the next , however , is the specifics of those winners and losers . gogoro s strong development and expansion are nudging the entire electric vehicle industry forward , while companies like pono and audeze are making audiophile technology more accessible to the masses , with varying degrees of success . everything that happens at the upcoming ces in a week s time will be informed by the fortunes of the products first revealed at ces a year ago the successes will breed imitators and emulators , while the failures will be taken as lessons for what not to do . such is the circle of tech life . 	 one of the interesting things about becoming a parent is that your home is no longer your own . things disappear from drawers , mysteriously topple off shelves , and somehow wind up in the toilet . you learn which strange sounds need immediate attention and which can be safely ignored . and the mess . oh , the mess . it blooms like mushrooms after a rainstorm , appearing out of nowhere , spreading suddenly across rooms that just an hour ago where spotless . i have two boys under the age of three , and in the fall of this year my will to fight against the endless tide of clutter started to fade . i began just tidying up the surface mess , sure , but underneath , a steady layer of deep debris was accumulating . i needed reinforcements , warriors who wouldn t flag in the face of such a ceaseless foe . so i brought in a new breed of cleaning soldier , the robotic vacuum . i had resisted these gadgets for years , assuming that they wouldn t be able to really handle the work , and in fact might create more headaches than they saved . and the cheaper unit i tested confirmed those fears . it wandered around the house like a drunken sailor , going over the same areas needlessly , missing others , and getting hopelessly snagged on the smallest of obstacles . but the higher end units impressed me with their intelligence and autonomy . and my sons , who were of course curious about the robot , have grown fond of the new beings that roll , beep , and suction their way around our home . there is a mind boggling variety of robotic vacuum cleaners on the market . you can get units that specialize in wood flooring , carpet , or tile units that will wet mop your home and units that are customized to pick up pet hair . for this story , we looked at the new offerings from the biggest brands with basic cleaning capabilities the ampnbsproomba , ampnbspdeebot , and ampnbspneato botvac connected . they ranged in price from to , and the gap in cost showed in their performance . a cheap bot proved hopeless and frustrating let s start with the deebot , the cheapest of the units we tested . it can t see the world around it , so it relies on touch , bouncing off objects and adjusting accordingly . using it is a supremely frustrating experience . the deebot frequently goes over the same areas multiple times , takes extremely inefficient paths , and gets stuck in corners and on carpet . it s not representative of the brand overall deebot has more expensive units that can connect to wi fi and empty their own bins but it certainly speaks to what you get when buying a cheaper robot that has a limited ability to sense its surroundings . when you jump up to the neato connected botvac , the difference is clear . it still bumps into things as it moves around , but far less often . it uses laser scanning to map the space around it and then sweeps the floor in a smart , methodical pattern . it even circles around tricky areas like couch legs . it did miss corners , and struggled to find its way back to its charging station , but at a basic level it got the job done well . able to return home and recharge itself the next step up is the roomba , the most expensive and sophisticated unit we tested . it has a camera and floor sensor to track its location and avoid obstacles . i found that it was incredibly good at navigating my home and working its way into nooks and crannies . and when it needed a charge , the was always able to work its way back to the dock and connect , something the neato did often , but not always . all of these units had one major problem , which was that in a house as messy as mine , they filled up their trays after just a room or two , and while the roomba and neato can recharge on their own , you have to empty their trays by hand before they can get back to work . all promise to have the power and space to clean an entire apartment . but to make that happen , you need to religiously run them everyday , keeping the overall level of dirt down to a manageable level . adding wifi makes a world of difference luckily the newest neato and the roomba we tested are both wi fi enabled , and can be controlled remotely by an app . this makes it far easier to program routine cleaning set a schedule and just let the robot run once a day . or if you prefer , start it when you remember , either in person , or with a few taps on your phone . the ability to connect to wi fi is what really sets these units apart from their predecessors , like the roomba , which i also tested . if you re at work and the neato gets stuck , for example , it will send you an alert . you can switch to manual control and help to guide it off the obstacle so it can get back to work . as you can see in the video above , two kids means a ton of clutter . both the roomba and neato were able to work over and around most toys , although even they got snagged on the occasional toothbrush . overall i found the roomba struggled less with tangles in its brush , an issue that caused my neato to stop working several times , and which requires you to be on hand to manually fix . the roomba comes with an invisible fence the neato came with a magnetic strip which you could use to keep it from going past a certain point . the roomba , on the other hand , came with two battery powered towers that could cordon off a certain area , either with a straight line or a halo with a roughly foot diameter . this was really helpful if i wanted to simply push all the toys in a pile and then have my roomba clean around that . in my testing , the deebot is a waste of time for any home which doesn t have very simple , flat surfaces . by comparison the roomba was clearly the best overall , both in terms of its cleaning power and its ability to operate autonomously . the neato , which is cheaper than the roomba , is , in my opinion , the best deal , offering a solid if not quite superlative clean . not quite the jetsons , but getting closeryou shouldn t consider this a comprehensive review of the category , however , which is simply too vast and diverse to cover without many more months of testing . think of this as an introduction , with more reviews and comparisons to come . we haven t quite reached the jetson era miracle of a completely autonomous robot that can clean your whole house , but these little gizmos are getting extremely sophisticated . the technology on the market today , especially for a busy parent , is a huge asset in the daily battle against clutter and chaos . 	 if early reports prove true , ford and google will announce the development of a self driving car initiative at the consumer electronics show in las vegas early next month , a mutually beneficial partnership that could provide a blueprint for the next shift in the transportation industry . yahoo autos reports that the two companies are creating an independent joint venture , a structure that protects google and ford from potential liability , to produce self driving cars . it s said to be part of a non exclusive deal , meaning that google could partner with other automakers as well . in recent weeks , both companies have been making news that could support this pending announcement . google has been reported to be creating an alphabet company to house its self driving car research . last week , ford received approval to test autonomous cars on public california roads , where google s efforts have been focused . what gives google an edge is that it isn t a car companygoogle s self driving car program on public roads has helped it carve out its reputation as the breakout leader in a transformational technology that will fundamentally reshape the way we get around in the decades to come . it s logged over million miles of self driving on public streets in california and texas . while google is not the first to pilot autonomous features , its silicon valley roots have helped foster the perception that it s poised to leave the legacy car industry titans behind . what gives google an edge is that it isn t a car company it s unencumbered by customer perception , dealer networks , and the politics that are indelible parts of the auto industry . google can essentially afford to play and experiment in this space , which is exactly what it s been doing for years . in doing so , it s been able to develop software without being bogged down by the brutal economic realities of the auto industry and a customer base that s wary of too much technology . but in reality , taking the next step in the car business is not so straightforward and ford has much to offer a company like google , if it wants to create a viable product based on its treasure trove of real world driving data . so far , self driving has been a research initiative for google with no demonstrative profit . google lacks the traditional auto industry infrastructure to manufacture cars at the same speed that it produces software and services . by working with ford , google gains complex manufacturing , quality , safety , and environmental regulation know how that dates back to henry ford s invention of the assembly line . while tesla s efforts to work outside the traditional dealer model have punished its ability to consistently sell cars everywhere that it wants to , ford s expansive dealer and sales networks are already in place . and ford is the second largest automaker in the us and the fifth largest in the world with manufacturing plants worldwide , its sheer potential for volume is a lucrative asset . it s also notable that both ford and google have already started expanding to each other s territories . while ford has opened a silicon valley research center in palo alto , google has expanded its detroit area offices this year as well , where ford , gm , and fiat chrysler are headquartered , along with many of the industry s tier one suppliers and universities that specialize in automotive research . nissan has kept its us research and development facilities headquarters in the area for this reason . before the report of the partnership broke , i spoke to michelle krebs , a senior analyst at autotrader , who essentially predicted the viability of this kind of pairing . the traditional automakers are clearly doing a lot of research and development and have been doing so for a long time on all kinds of electrification , autonomous features , and connectivity long before apple and google were interested , krebs said . but google and apple are clearly interested in now getting in the car business . i think what they are interested in ultimately is supplying what goes in the cars not getting into the whole car business of running plants and logistics around all that and dealing with regulatory issues and safety . the auto business is not a high margin business . the electronics business is a very high margin business . ford has much to offer a company like googleif the announcement does happen at ces , this partnership has probably been in the works for some time . car companies tend to keep a tight lid on advanced product development . last year , ford managed to unveil the new ford gt supercar at the north american international auto show without any substantive leaks . it took great pains to keep the development process under wraps , spearheaded by a small team of engineers and designers in a secret facility . like all the major car companies , ford has been testing autonomous technology for years and has the test facilities to do so far away from the public eye . yet too often what s dreamed up in the labs doesn t make it into production , thanks to regulatory concerns , cost , or technological constraints . ford and other automakers might be able to build autonomous cars , but could lack the fluid organizational structure necessary to integrate them across the product lineup , or to find the best business models for them . so what ford could gain from a company like google is the lean versatility to operate at the pace of a tech company , where development moves and iterates faster . and this partnership would be part of a running trend for ford it s been aggressive in recent years in its push to recast itself as tech leader , going back to its partnership with microsoft to introduce sync . while sync wasn t ultimately much further ahead than its competition , it marked a dramatic shift in the way ford presented itself . that shift continued earlier this year with the opening of ford s silicon valley office . and this year , it has steadily unveiled more tech initiatives , including last week s announcement that it s gearing up to increase its electrification efforts . it has also recently touted its partnership with techstars mobility in detroit , another effort to create a startup culture around transportation . ford also stands to gain by drawing in forward thinking players . it has touted the growth of its intellectual property and is keen to draw more talent to its ranks and above all else , get there first . this competition is classic detroit , dating back to the heyday of the big three brands , and what still fuels local pride . in recent years , some of the auto industry s most promising young talents have gone to tesla and faraday future , among other valley destinations . ford needs to invest in its perception to woo employees . of course , it also makes sense that google would also want to take this leap . former ford ceo alan mulally joined google s board last year . mulally , once an outsider from the aerospace industry , earned the respect of ford employees and is credited with turning the company into a financially healthy contender . he retired from ford in , but considering the wealth of knowledge about the industry that he built during his time there , it makes sense that he would be instrumental in putting this deal together . in addition , several former higher ranking ford employees including john krafcik , who now heads self driving for google . it s daunting to set up a car company , krebs said to me . that s the reason tesla is the only one who s done it recently . it s a hugely capital intensive business , where tech is not . automotive is a hugely capital intensive business , where tech is not . ford also recently announced a program to create a ride sharing business for its employees that could serve as a model for a tech partnership , while bloomberg reported that google could be considering ride sharing services in well defined areas , like college campuses . it seems like for the foreseeable future , small , contained environments are the low hanging fruit for self driving car fleets , and a fleet business would be a great place for a ford google joint venture to start . after all , before uber , the lincoln town car and the ford crown victoria were ubiquitous black cars and taxis . none of this is to say that ford is necessarily the only car company involved with google in the long term , it could take on a role that mirrors traditional auto industry suppliers like bosch , delphi , and most recently mobileye , which produce parts used in dozens of makes . maybe alphabet eventually wants to print its logo on cars made by ford , fiat , ferrari , and everyone in between . google s current self driving cars are already assembled by detroit mainstay roush industries , maker of custom ford mustangs . but at a moment when self driving hype is at a high , it certainly doesn t hurt ford to be first out of the gate . 	 the scene is a snowy apartment building out of the s , rendered in a bright , slightly retro palette . a janitor trudges across the courtyard , then stops , wary . someone is out there . someone large , nimble , and wearing a floppy red hat . then you turn your phone . the janitor slides away , and instead you re looking into the third floor window of a snoring tenant . move over a little more , and there s a cat eyeing a tiny bird on the rooftop . as you focus , the cat tries to pounce . another bird this one giant and angry plops down in front of it , and the cat scoots back across a line of christmas lights , chastened . and then we re back to the janitor , who starts a wild chase with a mysterious intruder who is , obviously , santa claus . this animated short called special delivery and released today is the latest project released for spotlight stories , a smartphone based video platform run by google s advanced technology and projects atap group . it s an interactive youtube video compatible with android phones , with a non interactive degree video version for ios or web users . a collaboration with uk studio aardman animations , the project is another small step towards turning a google experiment into a new artistic medium . spotlight stories started in with a one off video called windy day , created by ratatouille co director jan pinkava now spotlight stories creative director . instead of using a fixed camera , windy day asked viewers to pretend their phones were windows into a tiny , pixar esque world . they could choose to follow a mouse chasing his wayward hat , or they could soak in details from the scenery around him . it was the kind of video that could only be done with a smartphone s motion sensors , turning phones into more than little tvs . windy day debuted as a cute perk for moto x phone owners , but google quickly started thinking bigger . after the short was well received , atap started two new pieces , one of them in partnership with legendary disney animator glen keane . keane s creation , a hand drawn animation called duet , was nominated for both an annie award and an oscar . duet got us a lot of credibility within the artist community , that this is not a gimmick , this is not a sort of gamey thing that we re doing , says spotlight stories technical lead rachid el guerrab . this is actually real animation , just in a different way . this is actually real animation , just in a different way . since then , atap has been reaching out not just to the art community , but to hollywood and the world at large . it recruited furious director justin lin for the first live action short earlier this year , and it announced a story development kit , a toolbox for artists to create spotlight style animation or video on their own . we re trying to do more and figure out is this really a new form of entertainment ? says el guerrab . what are the ingredients in it that make it different from a normal film ? the creators of special delivery have a long pedigree in normal film aardman animations is behind among other things the film chicken run and the wallace and gromit animated shorts . when atap approached aardman with the story development kit , says director tim ruffle , they returned with a number of ideas that they thought would fit the medium . one of them stuck what if looking through the phone s imaginary window was more like peering into a literal one ? we kind of imagined what if rear window happened at christmas , and was trapped in your little phone in a degree world ? says ruffle . instead of following one or two characters , viewers could see snippets of life across an entire apartment block , blended with a single main storyline that would give the piece focus . it seemed so perfect for looking out into these little vignettes . aardman wasn t the first to pitch a rear window inspired spotlight short it s actually a pretty intuitive connection . but google liked the studio s vision of what pinkava calls a groovy period piece . its style was inspired by mid th century animation trailblazer upa , creator of both comedic characters like mr . magoo and surreal shorts like an adaptation of poe s the tell tale heart . aardman s animation , though , had to look good from several different possible camera angles . it couldn t be linear , and it had to progress at the viewer s pace . in special delivery , some vignettes only begin when you look closely at them , and major story events will wait until you re paying attention . instead of a screen , the team had to imagine something more like a stage . they even built a circular cardboard set as a storyboard , blocking out the movement of their characters in physical space . when you have that literal arm s length of looking through a window , you have many more options . you re giving away the camera to the audience , which is a bit nerve wracking , says ruffle . after a while , you kind of get the idea that you re trying to create an experience for people , rather than creating a show . that s a sentiment that s heard more and more often , from directors exploring the nascent field of virtual reality video . the natural progression for spotlight stories seems like a switch from holding a phone to wearing goggles of being in the world instead of seeing little pieces of it . windy day eventually got support for google s cardboard headset , and special delivery works in cardboard as well . but pinkava disputes the idea that spotlight stories is just a stepping stone towards vr . there s a difference to having a sense of being inside a world more literally , when you have vr goggles on your face , he says . but looking through a window also gives the maker of a story different options for what you can do . there s no need to worry about motion sickness , for example a major limiting factor in designing for vr . when you have that literal arm s length of looking through a window , you have many more options to kind of cheat , and do exciting and interesting tricks to tell a story . special delivery is supposed to work equally well with both . but when i try it out , i actually prefer the non cardboard version . cardboard focuses me totally on the scene , but because i have to turn with my head and not my comparatively super flexible hands , it feels as if i have less control over my view . i m distracted by the phone s low resolution in vr , which makes it harder to appreciate the crisp , stylish animation . and in a strange twist , cardboard feels more artificial . i ve spent so much time staring into screens that i ve nearly stopped noticing them , but cardboard is still a novelty that constantly reminds me of its presence especially because unlike other headsets , you have to actively hold it against your face . it s almost more technologically impressive that while the earlier spotlight stories were hefty downloads in a dedicated app , special delivery streams on youtube , making it far easier for casual viewers to check it out . google has spent the past two months playing up degree youtube videos , but special delivery s light interactive elements push it closer to something like a living environment . most of the scenes are available to you from the first moment you enter , says el guerrab . it s like downloading half of your movie in the beginning few seconds . it s like downloading half of your movie in the beginning few seconds . it s almost , i suggest , like youtube could become a basic game platform . el guerrab quickly shuts down the comparison . it s partly on technical grounds atap prides itself on making spotlight stories technical components as stripped down as possible , compared to a full featured game engine . but it s also a question of vision . the focus is on storytelling . it s a much bigger audience for us , for creators in general , he says . there s a different audience that is game developers . those distinctions , though , are blurring . el guerreb admits that there s an intersection between something like special delivery and the non traditional adventure games of telltale , and virtual reality has popularized semi interactive experiences without obvious game like elements . and while spotlight stories is still working closely with high profile artists like academy award winning animator patrick osborne , the team also hopes to release the story development kit publicly at some point next year , so creators can figure out its limits for themselves . we have at least enough material and support that we can say go create stuff with it , says el guerrab . that s our biggest push . 	 if you were building a system to catalog and study the human face , it would be hard to do better than facebook . just years after its creation , the network is not just the largest photo storage service but the largest single collection of images that human beings have ever had access to . the total number of photos is hard to gauge , but it passed billion pictures in , and by now is likely closing in on trillion , spread across . billion users worldwide . that much data is a powerful thing , and facebook has made good use of it . since , the company has been using those photos to fuel a powerful facial recognition engine . when you upload a photo of someone , facebook will almost always know who that person is , encouraging you to tag them and let them know . thanks to the mountains of data , it s become one of the most advanced facial recognition systems available , far beyond the fbi s face scanning system . it s also a crucial product for facebook itself , integrated into the messenger app earlier this year . nearly trillion photos , spread across . billion users worldwidenow , a new lawsuit has called that system into question , claiming facebook s biometric faceprints violate user privacy . facebook disputes the claim , although it has avoided rolling out facial recognition in europe and canada , presumably over similar concerns . if the latest complaints are upheld , it could mean a profound shift in how facebook treats user photos , potentially even pushing the feature out of the us entirely . the case centers around the illinois biometric information privacy act , which deals with fingerprints , voiceprints , and scans of facial geometry . according to the law , anyone collecting those identifiers has to notify users in advance , say why they re being collected , and how long they re being retained . it also puts strict limits on how those identifiers can be shared and how long they can be stored . notably , photographs are explicitly ruled out as a biometric , but the plaintiffs argue the relevant biometric is the facial geometry scans created from those photographs . if facebook were a simple photo service , it wouldn t have to worry about biometrics at all but the plaintiffs argue that as long as the company is using those photos to create and apply faceprints , the illinois law applies . the key point isn t the collection of data , but using that data to create a profile specific to a person s body . alvaro bedoya , who has been following the case for the center on privacy and technology at georgetown law , described it this way if you run a bar , the law doesn t prevent you from picking up my used pint glass , but it prevents you from pulling my dna off it . the biggest question facing the court is whether facebook s photo tagging system crosses that line . the system is more complex than simply producing a scan from a photograph , relying heavily on known friends of the person uploading the photo . if a face doesn t belong to one of your friends , it won t be suggested as a tag . at the same time , the machine learning that powers the feature means matches are fuzzier than conventional biometrics , working off broad similarities rather than hard certainties . still , the net result is the same , reaching percent accuracy in a recent test . if you run a bar , the law doesn t prevent you from picking up my used pint glass , but it prevents you from pulling my dna off it . then there s the question of whether facebook has users consent to build that profile . there s nothing about facial recognition or biometric collection in facebook s terms of service . the company s data policy which users are also required to approve does refer to the system , saying tag suggestions are created by comparing your friend s pictures to information we ve put together from your profile pictures and the other photos in which you ve been tagged . users are also able to opt out of the system at any time , as described in the help center . somewhat confusingly , the option is nested in settings under the question who sees tag suggestions when photos that look like you are uploaded ? as long as the option is set to no one , facebook won t build a facial recognition profile for that user . neither the help center nor the settings page mention facial recognition or biometrics by name . they refer to the system simply as tag suggestions . even if the court agrees facebook s system violates the illinois law , it may not matter . last week , in a motion to dismiss the suit , facebook argued that the company was bound only by the state laws of california , as agreed to in the terms of service . if the court agrees , it would mean that plaintiffs have forfeited their rights under illinois law simply by signing up with the service . that would be a serious blow to state sovereignty effectively meaning illinois can t pass laws concerning its own citizens data privacy but courts have upheld similar clauses in the past . if the case survives the motion , facebook will have plenty more chances to dismiss the case before it reaches a final verdict . we will defend ourselves vigorously . but even if the case is dismissed , the issues are unlikely to disappear entirely . as biometric data like fingerprints and iris scans become more pervasive , more states are considering privacy laws like the one passed in illinois . texas already has a similar criminal statute although testing it would require a state attorney general to bring the company up on charges . alaska and washington have brought similar bills to the legislature , although neither one made it into law . if any of those laws do affect facebook , it won t be alone . google released a similar system in photos earlier this year , and facial recognition is quickly becoming a must have feature for photo storage systems , raising the stakes even higher . in theory , the problems could be solved by simply disclosing the recognition systems more aggressively , but it s unlikely either company would want to submit to the law s retention rules or any other policies that might be handed down in the future . either way , facebook isn t giving up the illinois case without a fight . this lawsuit is without merit , a spokesperson said in a statement , and we will defend ourselves vigorously . 	 the american public is becoming less religious and less likely to attend church than in decades past , according to research like the ampnbsppew study released last month . but for christians looking to spread the faith , there s been a recent bright spot apps that can put the bible in the pockets of millions , plus open the door for new and potentially more habitual forms of prayer and meditation . jesus met people where they were at and then drew them really deep into understanding the truth of god , said neil ahlsten , who left google last year to found the app abide . we re creating liturgy that people can consume whenever and wherever and however works for them . it fits the modern life . ahlsten has heard from many users who check abide in bed first thing in the morning and right before they go to sleep as many secular people do with their phones . christians have been praying at morning and night for millennia , but it turns out the tradition fits comfortably with habitual smartphone use . jesus met people where they were . youversion was one of the first christian apps and remains one of the most popular and one of the most popular apps , period but it almost didn t make it into the app store . before it was an app , youversion lived online as a website created to help people better engage with the bible , said bobby gruenewald , the app s founder . the site was on the verge of being shut down in , when an early mobile version saw a spike in traffic with the adoption of smartphones . the team behind youversion put together an app for the app store launch , and it had over , downloads the first day alone . since then , it has been downloaded nearly million times and consistently lands in the top charts section of the app store . it s not always practical to carry a print bible in my purse , said nish weiseth , a christian author and speaker . it s usually stuffed , so throwing in a bible is just one more thing to dig out . i m on my phone a lot throughout the day anyway , so having the entire bible readily available to read on my phone is really handy when i m out and about . this refrain was common among people talking about their devotional apps they re convenient . just as most of us no longer get our news from the delivery boy , those who read the bible are opening an app rather than carrying the physical thing . a screenshot from abide . phones also enable forms of devotion beyond simply reading a digital version of the bible . want to get daily texts from jesus ? there s an app for that . your daily bible reading can be delivered to your inbox , and if the faithful don t feel like leaving home on sunday mornings , they can stream church services from one of dozens of apps . confession guides users through the appropriate prayers of penitence for the sacrament of confession prayer notebook lets users sync their prayers across devices and neu bible is a minimalist take on the holy book for the design minded . full disclosure my father , who is a pastor , has consulted on the development of a religious app called soulpulse . behind a number of these apps is the christian concept of spiritual formation , the idea that if we undertake certain practices or disciplines , christians can become more , well , christian kinder , gentler , more full of joy , and so on . books and bible studies have been written with this goal in mind for centuries , but now spiritual formation efforts have moved online and into the app store . some , like that texts from jesus app , appear to be just another flashy version of religious kitsch , like an app ified footprints poem . but others seek to use the ubiquity of personal devices as an opportunity to encourage spiritual growth . some appear to be just another version of religious kitsch , like an app ified footprints poemthe youversion bible app is on million phones and is available in languages . backed to the tune of million by oklahoma city based life . church a megachurch that streams its services online , youversion features reading plans , goal setting abilities , and a built in social network . tam s k d r , a year old hungarian it consultant living in sweden , uses youversion to follow along in church and whenever i need to look up something , especially with different translations , in different languages . within the app , you can overlay bible verses on top of nature images and share the resulting meme with your twitter followers , facebook friends , or on the app s home feed . the youversion bible , also comes stocked with hundreds of reading plans , from the devotional to studies for the family to topical studies , like find purpose in your work . these plans often come at the result of partnerships with other apps or publishing houses , which can feel a little sponsored . for instance , the iphone game gun bros once featured youversion as an app that players could purchase to gain more in game currency . some christian apps have encountered serious problemssome christian apps have encountered serious problems instapray , the peter thiel backed app that allowed users to share their prayers with each other on their proprietary platform , sent an email out to members in october saying that they are no longer able to sustain the costs associated with running the app and asking members to subscribe to the instapray reading club for . a month . apps like idisciple charge their users a monthly fee for access to premium content . in this case , premium content means bible reading plans , shareable prayers , and teachings from well known christian leaders . many christian apps charge a fee to download . still , it s a hard market to succeed in financially . as amy keyishian wrote at recode earlier this year , it s next to impossible to monetize a prayer app . therefore , the only logical explanation for thiel s involvement is that it s a sort of tithing , or giving back to the community . it s next to impossible to monetize a prayer app . neil ahlsten worked in business development at google from , but left when he felt god calling him to put technology to use for the church at large . what if you assume that the bible contains insights into human behavior ? ahslten asked himself . can we design experiences around those behaviors that help people practice them better in modern life ? ahlsten and his team some of whom also came from google surveyed christians about their user experience of the bible , and found that the top problem modern day christians had was that they weren t sure how to pray . basically we re creating liturgy that people can consume whenever and wherever and however works for them , said ahlsten . abide provides users with daily prayers based on bible verses and the ability to set prayer reminders . the prayers themselves are accompanied by gentle background music , and cover topics like thankfulness , god s plans for you , and unity in love . in many ways developers of religious apps are no different from their secular counterparts . everyone is trying to take a desired habit in this case , prayer or scripture reading and make it more painless , easier , and more deliverable . the word frictionless pops up often . youversion will send you a gentle reminder if you haven t made much progress on the plan you selected , and give you a few helpful hints for keeping up . abide provides an array of recorded prayers users can listen to so that they can learn how to pray . the word frictionless pops up oftenevangelical christianity is very interested in cultural relevance . one of its flagship magazines is actually called relevant church services have been streaming online ever since the technology was made available pastors trumpet their love of u and sufjan stevens as badges of being with it . with the demise of christian separatist communities and the crumbling of the moral majority s denunciation of culture , christians are increasingly adapting to existing cultural norms , in this case , those of the tech sector . in a ampnbsp new yorker article , casey cep compared this phenomenon to a fitbit for the soul , and she s not wrong . in the quest to live quantified lives , we can set reminders for ourselves to exercise , eat well , and now , to pray . and it makes sense , if we think of the spiritual life as a discipline , that it could benefit from some of the same techniques that have reimagined the way people approach fitnessthe people behind many of these christian apps have set out to examine the ux of the spiritual life where are there bugs , and why do they happen ? what features are users missing ? how can we hack prayer ? quantifying spirituality makes some people understandably uncomfortable , and the latest technology will always have its skeptics . but it will also have its evangelists , and they re ready to share the good news . 	 the verge in celebration of our th anniversary , this month we re publishing a series of interviews with innovative leaders about what the next five years hold . to read more about this series , read our editor nilay patel s introduction here . in his final months on the job , us secretary of transportation anthony foxx has been vocal about the pressing need to repair america s broken infrastructure , and all the ways in which technology will fundamentally change the way we move . with , employees and a budget of over billion , the department of transportation is a massive enterprise responsible for regulating american air , maritime , and surface transportation spaces . but the organization s directives can have far reaching implications the federal aid highway act of established the modern freeway system , which divided communities but also redefined how americans traveled long distances . in september , the dot released a landmark autonomous vehicles policy that will speed up the safe deployment of autonomous vehicles self driving cars , the report asserted , will save lives and make transportation both more efficient and accessible . the policy sets forth rules for manufacturing and sales of autonomous vehicles , requires companies to share research data with federal regulators , and promotes protection for passenger privacy . foxx s vision for us transportation also includes high speed rail , gps tracking systems for airplanes , and drones that will replace trucks to deliver goods to your doorstep . when we sat down with foxx in late september he was candid about his thoughts , and eager to talk about why changing how we get around is inevitable , and crucial to moving the nation forward . the interviewit s november , what does the world look like ? by , we will see autonomous vehicles in operation across the country in ways that we only imagine today families will be able to walk out of their homes and call a vehicle , and that vehicle will take them to work or to school . we re going to see transit systems sharing services with some of these companies . it s not just autonomy in the vehicles . you re going to see trucks running more closely together , which result in fuel savings and positive climate impact . you ll see companies that will start to use unmanned aircraft to deliver products to us . my daughter , who will be in , won t have her driver s license . she will be using a service . autonomous vehicles are the biggest disruptors we ve seen in transportation since the horse went the way of the automobile . what are some of the big challenges you envision in our near future ? where will private sector market players be asked to lead on things beyond just the development of the vehicle itself ? one of the biggest challenges has been the absence in clarity of how autonomous vehicles are going to be integrated into the bloodstream of america s transportation system . what safety regulations are going to apply ? what role will the federal government play in regulating autonomous vehicles ? what should states do ? where will private sector market players be asked to lead on things beyond just the development of the vehicle itself ? we recently released the autonomous vehicle policy that lays out where all these different players belong and how the federal government will be approaching this long term . today , you go to the dmv to get your driver s license and that is the state s way of regulating the operations of a vehicle . what happens when the software is operating the vehicle ? there are studies that show americans aren t quite ready for autonomous vehicles . how do you make people believe that this is something that they re going to want in their everyday lives ? the acceptance issue is something that the industry and government have to be focused on . the most important question that consumers will have is , is it safe ? early indications are that the first few minutes of a ride in an autonomous car can be pretty scary to people who haven t been in one before . but people get used to it quickly . people having real life experiences with the technology will help in the long run . i m sure that when the horse and buggy gave way to the automobile , there was probably an acceptance factor there as well . this is part of the progression of technology and transportation . i believe strongly that in the future , people will trust autonomous cars . self driving is coming to everything . it s just a question of what the sequencing is . you re going to see trucks that are driverless , and ships and trains that have self driving features . data collection can enable autonomy , but only if it s shared across the industry . how do you encourage that sharing ? i want us to have a broader imagination of how data can lift the safety advantages of autonomous cars . if i drive over a pothole and you are driving behind me , and see what happens to my car , you glean that understanding and you think to avoid that pothole . if an autonomous car runs over a pothole , will it be able to communicate and share that data not only with cars of the same type of car , or a particular manufacturer , but with all autonomous vehicles regardless of who made it ? that s one question i think the industry needs to spend time on , because there are issues around propriety of information . we found in the aviation arena that information is shared between commercial carriers all the time on an anonymous basis . the information doesn t identify the carrier specifically , but it identifies the situation and it allows us to attack safety challenges much more quickly . what if , for example , a car averts an accident by making a particular move ? can that information now be shared among other vehicles ? subscribe to our newsletter so you don t miss the rest of the verge interviews . terms apply . subscribe in the first half of the th century in and around new york city , planner robert moses designed the highway system to create physical barriers between communities . it was destructive , and it showed how transportation can be a civil rights and social justice issue . how do you adopt policies that address those causes ? this age of technology we re in is going to revolutionize the way we think about transportation . there are risks , because the typical trajectory of technology is that it goes to those who can afford it the most first and then over time , becomes more ubiquitous . in an era and in a sector where so much of the investment is driven by government , one of the challenges we have is to think about , at the outset , how this technology can be relevant to people across the whole socio economic spectrum . our highway system is the product of legislation from the eisenhower years when we were a country that had laws of segregation . many of our citizens could not vote . in many corners of our country , there were projects that were designed in the s that ultimately got built along racial or economic lines . you go to new orleans , syracuse , staten island , seattle , or los angeles , and you can see those distinct lines that have been drawn and the highways and overpasses that are still there that are actually walls between people . how do we repair a crumbling infrastructure that wasn t designed correctly in the first place ? i ve not yet seen a european city that has a complex network of freeways in the heart of its interior . though the technology was available , the europeans recognized that there s something about the fabric of the interior they didn t want to tear away . people are talking about the possibility of tearing down some of these freeways that run into the interior of our cities . we see rochester , new york doing that right now , and serious talks in syracuse . in columbus , ohio , they didn t tear down the freeway , they put a physical landscape on top of it to reconnect an area that had been bifurcated by a freeway . some say americans will never give up their cars . how do you create a mass transit system that appeals to americans ? for a country that is urbanizing , the way we pay for infrastructure doesn t correlate . two of the largest groups in our society today are the boomers and the millennials . in some ways , they re both looking for the same thing to live closer to the central core of cities , where they don t have to get in a car all the time . what our system hasn t done is respond to those demographic changes . out of our highway trust fund , cents on every dollar spent goes into our road system and only cents goes into transit . for a country that is urbanizing , the way we pay for infrastructure doesn t correlate . we need a more flexible funding approach at the federal , state , and local level that is demand driven , not supply side driven , and that responds to what people want . high speed rail is going to be something people embrace as we see it happen in places like california and possibly texas and florida . the more it succeeds , the more people are going to want it where they live . that , coupled with fixed rail transit , bus transit , roads and highways , bike paths , and places for people to walk are going to give the people the choices they want . what does rural life look like in ? rural america is shrinking , and i don t just mean by population . i mean by land mass . as our urban centers get hungrier and swallow up more of the outlying areas , that has squeezed out some of what we historically refer to as rural areas . that has implications both for urban areas and rural areas because those rural areas are often the supplier of things like food and some manufacturing . one of the biggest game changers we could have is a more robust passenger rail system . that s how people can continue to live in one place and have access to the jobs and other amenities that cities offer without having to give up the lifestyle they ve chosen . aviation is another area that you have to address . how will our skies be different ? you ll experience percent fewer delays when you re at the airport , because of technology that we re investing in called next generation aviation . next gen is taking us off of a s radar system and into a gps tracking system for airplanes . if you can precisely track a plane , then you don t have to be as imprecise about the routes . you can allow the planes to fly closer together . we re going to see efficiency as we load up , fewer delays , and routes that are more direct and hopefully faster . as transportation improves , what kind of ripple effects are we going to see through the rest of society ? if we do it right , transportation is going to enable our society to become much more fully integrated . in columbus , ohio , the city that won the smart cities challenge , they have an infant mortality rate four times the national average . it was a point of embarrassment for the community . they re developing an app that will allow mothers to set their doctors appointments up using the app and plan a transit trip , so they have a way to get there . if the bus is late , the app will help them reschedule that meeting with the doctor . that s a creative use of technology to problem solve . my biggest fear is that we won t be intentional about trying to build a concept of equity into how we develop and deploy technology . what are you most excited for ? it starts with the idea that we ve got to democratize our transportation system . i m most excited about our country getting transportation right and thinking about transportation choices that enhance communities in fundamental ways creating access to technology for people who live in underserved areas , technology that reduces the cost of transportation and gives them a way to get to the doctor s office or to school . the existence of a staging area for rideshares that attracts new housing , neighborhood services like pharmacies and grocery stores that begin to provide an underpinning of economic activity in an area . it starts with the idea that we ve got to democratize our transportation system in way that provides access for everybody . what will define the next era of transportation ? we have an opportunity to drive forward a global transformation of the relationship between human beings and machines . it s a pretty heavy responsibility . we have to be careful about safety and think about the societal disruptions that come about as a result of it . i ve heard a lot of people worrying about sprawl and labor market disruptions . those are things that we need to have our eyes set on . the advantages of safety , being able to avert some percentage of the percent of crashes that are attributable to human factors , allow the elderly and people who have disabilities to have more freedom to move about , being able to help families that spend their second highest amount of money on transportation to capture some of those dollars back . where do we find these ideas ? when the federal interstate highway act was passed in , it was a top down strategy . the federal government was going to pay percent of the cost of putting the interstate system in place . local state government decided where the highways would fit , but largely it was a federal approach . we have an opportunity to reverse that with this revolution . we can see many examples of how to tailor technology solutions to cities . a community that has cold weather and high elevation may have a different approach to mobility than a place that is flat and has sun most of the year . cities are going to have to be much more sophisticated about what choices they make when it comes to investing in these technologies . do we need to drive ? the whole point is that someone can make that choice . someone can choose not to drive if they don t want to , or if they choose to drive they have the safest possible options to get from one place to another . there was a time when folks had no choice and there are still rural parts of our country where there is no practical choice . our study of the next years of transportation needs suggest that we ve run out of space in some areas to build more road capacity and our population is growing at such an exponential level that even if we physically could provide that infrastructure , it s not going to keep up with the growth . our roads are crowded . people s travel times are getting longer . there s an opportunity for us in this era with data and analytics . i ve had situations in this job and in my previous role as a mayor , where i thought i knew the answer to a transportation problem , but when i saw the data , it told me something different . the ability of things like autonomous vehicles and intelligent transportation systems to give us more information about how people use the transportation infrastructure is built can be enormous . one of the challenges is that we get so nostalgic about transportation . we think , gosh man , it was great when we had the car and we could just get on the freeway and go as far and as fast as we want it to . that s not where we are today . our roads are crowded . people s travel times are getting longer . if there s a solution presented to the average person that will shorten the trip they re taking every day , man , they will run for it . what i ve tried to do in this agency over the time i ve had the privilege to lead it is to focus more on the problems we have today and the problems we see coming around the corner because that s where the solutions are . i hope that some of the work we ve done to build cornerstones for autonomous vehicles and for next gen technology in aviation and for drones is adding up to a future where we see travel times going down in our generation . we are at risk of being the first generation of americans that pass on longer travel times to the generations behind it . much of what i m trying to do is to assure that doesn t happen . this interview has been edited and condensed	 super deluxe built a weird internet empire . can it succeed on tv ? when wolfgang hammer talks about the future of entertainment , people listen . hammer is the mastermind behind the american reboot of house of cards , the guy with the unlikely idea of bringing together david fincher and a forgotten bbc series . he oversaw two of cbs films first prestige movies the coen brothers inside llewyn davis and martin mcdonagh s seven psychopaths . he s had a charmed career leap frogging from a master s degree at stanford to an entry level job at media rights capital to eventually becoming the president of cbs s fledgling films division . so when hammer came to turner with an ambitious concept , the cable giant was willing to entertain it . turner owns tbs , tnt , cnn , and cartoon network , but what hammer was proposing was something altogether different an all in one production company that would thrive online and pretty much do whatever it wanted . now months old , super deluxe is being nurtured with a reliable budget and total creative freedom , and it s given hammer the opportunity to play fairy godmother , granting wishes for creators who want to make interesting , innovative art . super deluxe isn t a traditional production company , media company , or art house , but it is a go between for young talent who have struggled to break the bubble around the hollywood institutions that can launch stars . over a series of phone interviews , hammer declined to divulge how much money super deluxe gets from turner . hammer says they don t have an annual budget from turner just a pot of money that gets replenished if they do well . and if they don t ? well , then we re out of luck , and there s no more super deluxe . in the meantime , hammer s ambitions are grand and he wields the power and jargon to match . he brushes off an employee s comparison to walt disney , but says , if you want to say that we aspire to be vertically integrated like the largest entertainment company the world has ever seen that s probably true . he wants to make apps , games , merch , documentaries , viral videos , instagram stars , his own technology for facebook live , and , most importantly , as many of the original tv shows his team has been developing as possible . the looming question now is whether hammer can bring all these pieces together into a package that appeals to a large audience . with the recent sale of super deluxe s first big television show the chances , it s almost time to find out . you may not have heard of super deluxe , but if you re part of the demographic that spends its days online , you ve likely seen its work . super deluxe is the force behind some of last year s greatest internet hoaxes and the weirdest diced up video edits of the dystopian circus that was the election . in the last months , the studio produced dozens of scripts for tv comedies , bit video games based on memes , and a facebook live video that got pulled for nudity . they re the specter behind the web magazine extremely good shit and the multi platform juggernaut joanne the scammer . most recently , they ve worked with youtube and instagram stars like poppy , bread face , and scorpiondagger . their creative director , former vice editor in chief jesse pearson , is big on diy videos teaching valuable skills like how to give yourself a stick and poke tattoo or build your own gravity bong . hammer says super deluxe is averse to noise , but their content belies that assertion , both figuratively and literally they made the easy oscars best picture fuck up remix just like everyone else their go to sound effects are literally air horns and screams . a lot of the political humor that doesn t come from fan fave contributor vic berger is gallows y in a way that can feel cheap , even market tested , leaning hard on the internet s favorite mode of speaking existential dread and off hand quips about doomsday . sometimes super deluxe can feel like a play for counterculture street cred at a time when the counterculture isn t that fringe . photo by vjeran pavic the verge wolfgang hammer . photo by vjeran pavic the verge winnie kemp . you almost certainly haven t seen the other half of the company . at sundance in january , it debuted a documentary about martin luther king jr . speechwriter bayard rustin , alongside a four minute viral video about a teen s friendship with a wild deer . super deluxe also premiered the chances , a concept that the company s vp of original programming , winnie kemp , stumbled across on kickstarter it s now in production as a half hour tv show . the chances is the first show to star deaf characters written by deaf writers and played by deaf actors . its creators , shoshannah stern and josh feldman , are completely unknown . super deluxe is everywhere and nowhere , taking credit for things when they feel like it , eschewing it if it seems like it ll be more fun that way . sometimes super deluxe even goes out of its way to obfuscate its involvement , like it did when its tech team spurred the short lived rumor that drake and rihanna were about to drop a collaborative album by launching drakeandrihanna . com . according to hammer , there s no reason all these seemingly unrelated projects shouldn t exist side by side there s no brand identity more compelling than complete creative freedom . to build that brand , hammer borrowed a little bit of something old . the original incarnation of super deluxe , born in and scrapped in , was a slightly edgier and way less popular funny or die , with comedy talent borrowed from turner s adult swim . when hammer presented his untitled business plan , he asked if he could revive the name , knowing that most of the audience he planned to court would likely never have heard of the original we thought the name was timeless and if we did our jobs right , would eventually become an adjective . super deluxe now has a staff of full time employees , tasked with turning a number of well intentioned oddball web experiments into a financially viable commodity . the studio is leveling up it recently added former vice sales executive thomas nolan to lead an ad sales team , and it s planning on taking more shows to market throughout the year . this fall , super deluxe will be taking over a minute late night programming block on tbs . in the old model of self made online success , the only way to make money was to make a lot of free content for indifferent platforms like youtube and twitter , accrue followers , then hope and pray that someone would grant you a book deal or a part in a commercial . you could have millions of fans and still subsist on top ramen . that model treats raw talent like fuel , and inevitably , fuels get burned . across the board , youtube personalities disappear far more often than they transition into stable stardom . super deluxe isn t the first to consider paying young people to do the stuff they re already doing for free . plenty of others have tried to do the same , operating under the assumption that throwing money at a rising internet star is enough to jumpstart success and mass appeal . but a big budget doesn t erase skeletons from the closet , nor can it structure a series length story around a character that shines in five minute youtube videos . pewdiepie s disney deal imploded in february , partly the result of his flippant , detached attitude toward the holocaust , while youtube star miranda sings disappointing netflix show last year was bloated and clearly lacked a savvy editor in the writers room . companies built specifically to exploit internet talent haven t fared much better experiments like dreamworks awesomenesstv , verizon s go , and even youtube s own premium service have fallen short of expectations for one reason or another . other , more successful , networks of youtube creators have been gobbled up by corporations warner bros . acquired machinima s loose network of gaming vloggers last year , folding all of its content into at ampampt s purview and angling for better promo for its dc comics properties . disney acquired maker , along with most of its management , in . a year later , power struggles between the youtube network and disney s corporate megastructure was already leading to layoffs and deflated expectations . only a few creators have managed to truly break through , unaltered the remarkably driven hannah hart , the creator of my drunk kitchen or the fine brothers , who maintain a youtube channel with million subscribers and managed to launch their own production company . super deluxe has a new approach , one it thinks supports creatives and simultaneously holds corporate influence at arm s length . kemp explains super deluxe s role in the entertainment industry in buzzy startup terms we re almost like an incubator . we re able to help young creators preserve what they want to make and present it in a way that makes bigger companies feel confident that the execution and the creative is all going to be there when we make it . translated super deluxe gives these creators experienced production teams , the resource of their enormous industry network , notes on their drafts , and yeah , space and time and money . their crown jewel is branden miller s joanne the scammer , a self described messy bitch who lives for drama who was discovered , of all places , on instagram by the company s then social media manager jason richards . miller says when he and wolfgang hammer met for the first time , hammer told him , alternately , you re going to be a star and you re already a star . miller signed on for three videos as joanne less than a year later , he landed a cover story in the fader . now he s working with super deluxe to put together a half hour comedy series to pitch for tv and churning out increasingly elaborate short films . he has an app and merch he s one of the most diversely monetized internet creators currently working . but in his fader story he was careful to point out how fragile that is people know my past and they don t feel that i m worthy of being verified or talking to celebrities . i have to be funny at all times . if i say something not funny , the one thing they don t give me a second chance . i m cancelled . before the chances , super deluxe had only sold one show in development magic funhouse , a raunchy half hour comedy about a drug addled kids tv show host that scored two seasons with the at ampampt owned youtube network and digital content distributor fullscreen . that s a sale kemp and hammer are proud of . but sundance now is a whole other ballgame , a full blown tv service you can subscribe to through amazon . the chances will be that service s first original scripted series . when kemp first met with stern and feldman , she and her team were so impressed by their ideas and commitment that they offered to fund the web series on the spot . once signed , kemp surrounded the creators with a production team , a director from the deaf west theater company , and her team s help selling the series for television . watching the series s shorts , it s easy to see why kemp found the chances so exciting , as well as how much work there still is to do . stern and feldman play best friends navigating bizarre , incredibly specific situations , from a uti that causes stern s character to pee at the table at her anniversary dinner , to an episode about clunky movie theater closed captioning devices , to a tender take on the someone accidentally got super high comedy trope . there s not much there in the way of an overarching story , but the ease between the two leads , and the confidence of the writing , is obvious . it s reminiscent of the early youtube shorts that eventually became broad city little in the way of plot , but the characters are golden , and obviously belong together . the chances . to rebuild the show as a half hour drama , stern and feldman started from scratch , sending episode drafts to kemp for notes before polishing them up and submitting them to the sundance team . super deluxe will hire producers and a director , but feldman and stern will still write every episode themselves just like they would have done if super deluxe had never come along . when it comes to the script , the company plays support . kemp recognizes that super deluxe s primary role in the next few months will be in maturing stern and feldman as writers guiding them through the process of constructing a tv show with several storylines , developing more interesting side characters , and spinning up satisfying narrative arcs . the chances is an opportunity for super deluxe to prove that its soul is really where hammer and kemp and pearson insist it is . we re always looking for fresh and unique perspectives , from vic berger to joanne , says kemp . we always bring it back to what does this particular creator have to say ? how is it going to ripple through the society at large , and hopefully make some kind of impact or be a point of conversation ? i just feel like that s the spirit of everything that the company is making , at its core . pearson echoes her , saying , it s kind of finding the right voices and tone and then letting them do what they do rather than mediating or editorializing too much on what they do i ve always leaned toward the voice that speaks in the margins , because i believe that s where the future is made . hammer takes it even further this idea that you have pieces like the chances living next to some of the pieces we make for live or snapchat or youtube that breadth is unparalleled . it doesn t exist . you can t point to a company in the entertainment space that does that . and that s what s exciting about super deluxe . when the chances premieres next year , stern and feldman have a pretty good idea of who will watch it what will make our show so relatable is that everyone can understand how it feels to be on the outside looking in , wanting to be a part of something . but the chances won t premiere until early next year , and in the meantime super deluxe has to shop its other shows around and hedge its bets . they re doing that with an ever widening roster of youtube videos , facebook live interactive stunts , apps , mobile games , an aggressively irreverent social media presence , and , of course , a go at an adult swim esque tbs late night block . facebook live is a venue where super deluxe excels . the tech team , led by cto shahruz shaukat , has built its own box of tools that supplement what facebook provides , allowing them to make their shows far more interactive than videos made by most other brands . viewers can collaboratively punch a nazi , assemble a taco , or decide which celebrities will get a visit from a stop motion grim reaper in . pearson says facebook live s punk rock energy appeals to him it s chaotic , it s spontaneous , it s like walking a tightwire . it ties back to the early days of television in some ways . it s also an opportunity a product owned and supported by what is inarguably the most powerful content distributor in history , and one that not many people know what to do with it yet . they recently put together a choose your own adventure telenovela purely dictated by audience input on live , a concept novel enough to get picked up by dozens of internet culture blogs . these videos rack up hundreds of thousands or sometimes millions of views , which makes super deluxe the platform s biggest star . kevin reilly , the chief creative officer of turner entertainment says he s proud of the work super deluxe has done so far , explaining , we started super deluxe to create unique experiences for a discerning consumer of video on social . it has obviously done that . on the other hand , richard greenfield , a media and tech analyst at the investment firm btig , told me he was impressed by what super deluxe is attempting . but , bottom line there s no clear path to super deluxe making billions of dollars . most of the traditional media companies make tens of billions of dollars . that s not to say super deluxe can t be successful . their advertising business is just getting off the ground , and they ve got the audience everyone wants . though it might seem risky building infrastructure around untested talent , the process is ultimately pretty lean . and having total editorial independence from their principal benefactor gives super deluxe the freedom to avoid the standard pitfalls of entertainment production costly rewrites , staffing change ups , projects killed on the vine , ideas that get bloated and rendered amorphous by a cacophony of contributing voices . everyone who works there prides themselves on speed , and saving young talent from development hell . if super deluxe is the future of entertainment , it s because it isn t much like a tv channel or a media company . it s more like a tool for supporting inexperienced talent in a entertainment world that s been stuck in its ways . being on every single platform at once makes super deluxe as multi functional as a swiss army knife . it can serve as a translator between two parties the amateurs of the internet and the stubborn pros of hollywood who are constantly dancing around each other . that idea courses through every single thing super deluxe produces . the studio will bring joanne the scammer , an instagram star , to tv . it took a viral homemade documentary to sundance . it intends to monetize facebook live by throwing together young talent and unique tech on a rickety , bare bones platform . super deluxe s hustle mimics that of the stars it hopes to create success could be anywhere , so you might as well try everything . correction a previous version of this article listed two films produced by wolfgang hammer at cbs films . he oversaw their production as co president . 	 on the evening of saturday , august th , , the volunteer fire department in prattsville , new york held its annual clambake . the event has not historically been associated with temperance , but that year , the festivities broke up early . prattsville is a sleepy town of fewer than , residents in the northern catskill mountains , about miles inland from the atlantic ocean . it s leaf peeping country , not tropical storm country . but a hurricane was moving up the east coast , and sunday s forecast called for rain . meteorologists had predicted that the catskills would get a peripheral spray , rather than the storm s brunt , which was slated for new york city and long island . still , tom olson , who was then fire chief , intended to be ready . in his late s , with an average build and short , dark hair flecked with gray , olson has lived in prattsville all his life . soft spoken almost to the point of shyness , he delivers mail for a living , and cannot help but know most everyone in town . until olson primarily associated flooding with cold weather . when he was young , the schoharie creek a gentle tributary of the mohawk river that runs along main street , past the firehouse used to jam with ice , forcing water onto the road . on such occasions , the fire department had often helped pump out waterlogged basements . he suspected that sunday might be similar . olson woke around am at his home in the hills above town . he got in his dodge ram pickup , a model that would not survive the day , and drove down to the station , where he monitored the creek . rain fell hard and warm through the humid air . though he felt no panic , at am , he decided to man the firehouse , sounding its alarm to summon to duty roughly firefighters . as they arrived , he sent them on foot in crews of three and four to knock on the doors of homes he considered likely to flood . it might be wise , he thought , to suggest to people living in low lying areas that they take shelter at the firehouse . by noon , all of them were trappedpeople living in low lying areas of prattsville , however , weren t inclined to flee . to most , conditions that morning didn t appear likely to inflict damage worse than what they d seen many times before water in the basement , perhaps some flattening of the lawn . pamela young , who graduated from high school with olson , lived in the same house where as a child she had visited her grandparents , who moved there in . she saw no reason to drag her son and nephew both nine plus two dogs and a cat , out in a downpour . peggy and jim young , who were both in their s and who have no relation to pamela had spent the night before watching the weather channel , a favorite pastime . what they saw didn t much worry them . with their adult sons , brian and john , they used the morning to move items stored near ground level in their home and their store on main street to higher , seemingly flood safe locations . scott jackson , who lived with his four young children in a rented home across the street from the creek , was perhaps the least concerned of the bunch , spending the morning with coffee and tv . but by noon , all of them , together with perhaps several dozen others who lived and worked in downtown prattsville , were trapped on rooftops and on the upper floors of their homes , as floodwaters from hurricane irene , the ninth named storm of the hurricane season , submerged much of the town . tom olson , in the prattsville firehouse . over the course of hours that sunday , between and inches of rain fell on the schoharie valley roughly percent of the region s annual average . at their height , floodwaters on main street are thought to have measured perhaps six to eight feet deep . the us geological survey later estimated the schoharie creek s peak flow rate during the storm at , cubic feet per second percent larger than what fema had projected might occur during a year flood , and more than twice as large as the previous recorded high . set off by two creek overflows , the water surged suddenly , leaving little time to prepare or react . in late morning , it began spilling through the front doors of the firehouse . olson led the roughly people inside to the second floor . through main street , the water moved in a rust colored torrent , swallowing pavement and washing away cars and trailers , so that a goulash of hazardous debris roiled below the surface . the fire department , the town s sole emergency team , had neither the equipment nor the expertise for water rescue , and their evacuation efforts came to an abrupt halt . at a certain point , we had to stop , olson recalled . because now , we re putting our people in harm s way . young s home eventually tore loose from its foundation and began to disintegratetrapped on the second floor of the firehouse in an open , wood paneled room decorated with decades worth of trophies commemorating local parades , olson watched the water rise . his truck , which he d parked near the station , was likely already destroyed flooded beyond repair . prattsville had lost power . the radio olson had been using to communicate with greene county emergency services soon went down , too . his phone rang constantly . olson s neighbors were calling , and randy omerod , at the county emergency office , was calling olson . both men understood that there was nothing olson could do , but they saw no option but to follow protocol . i got a guy with four kids in a house , omerod told olson at one point . he s thinking about jumping . well , olson replied , exasperated , tell em don t jump ! not long after declining to leave her house , pamela young realized she d made a mistake . she called olson , her old classmate , on his cell . tommy , you gotta come get me , she said . again , olson was forced to demur . i had to tell her , listen , pam , i m sorry . i can t , olson said later . he made a pea pinching motion with his index finger and his thumb you feel about that big . young s home eventually tore loose from its foundation and began to disintegrate . when she felt the house shift , young led her son , joey , and her nephew , riley , onto the the flat roof of an addition , a distinct structure . by late afternoon , young said recently , she had called perhaps times . but emergency responders outside of prattsville seemed to be just as hobbled as they were in town . young was told that boats were coming , then that a helicopter was en route , and then that the helicopter wasn t coming , after all . later , she learned that the first boat she d heard about had capsized . during her last call that day , young asked what she might use , if necessary , as a raft . the dispatcher didn t know . just don t use a mattress , he said . an abandoned prattsville home , destroyed by hurricane irene . in , the national academy of sciences published a report on the state of weather observation in the us . observing weather and climate from the ground up a nationwide network of networks indicated that the nation s radar system remained the best in the world . advances of recent years in inexpensive atmospheric observation technology and fervent public demand for up to the minute forecasts had furthermore allowed thousands of players , including small businesses , fortune companies , and local and state agencies , to enter the field . nonetheless , the authors wrote , all was not well with atmospheric and related environmental observations . while the radar , satellites , and supercomputers used by national weather service meteorologists excelled at big picture projections , they could provide only limited , low resolution information about conditions on the ground in specific locations . at the surface level , data on things like rainfall , wind , and humidity was being collected from state to state in a chaotic , non standardized fashion , using a hodgepodge of poorly coordinated networks . the report held a variety of negative implications for research scientists , but it also carried an urgent message . the us was ill prepared to track weather on the mesoscale systems that range from the size of a small city to an average midwestern state precisely the scale on which extreme weather events , like hurricane irene , occur . recent meteorological patterns make that fact disquieting . in august , shortly after a hour louisiana rain caused flooding that destroyed more than , homes and killed at least nine people , climatewire noted that in the past year alone , catastrophic rain events characterized as once in year or even once in , year events have flooded west virginia , texas , oklahoma , south carolina . such events have become more common in recent decades a spike consistent with human caused climate change , complete with rising temperatures that increase atmospheric water vapor , producing intensified rainfall . in the last years , extreme rainfall in the northeastern united states has increased by about percent , more than any other region of the country . according to a recent study published by the american meteorological society , new york is among the states most economically vulnerable to the adverse effects of weather variability . ten days after hurricane irene , tropical storm lee , a lesser cyclone , hit new york . together , the storms inflicted more than billion worth of damage statewide and left people dead . to date , in the history of new york , only the terrorist attacks of september th , rival the storms for recovery costs . the storms provided a timely , if unpleasant impetus for new york to apply the findings of the nas report , which had gone largely unheeded at the state level . the authors of the report recommended a nationwide web of interlinked state networks , each comprised of surface level observation stations the titular network of networks . in theory , such a system would fill the informational gaps left by top down apparatus , like satellites , and those unaccounted for by existing surface level stations . the state university of new york at albany has one of the largest concentrations of weather research scientists in the country . in the months after irene , chris thorncroft , who chairs albany s department of atmospheric and environmental sciences , and other scientists at the university , took the first steps toward the adoption of an observation system that might mitigate the ravages of future storms . known as a mesonet , it was modeled after one in oklahoma , which had enabled industry there to protect assets from oncoming storms , and helped public safety workers to remove residents from the paths of tornadoes . the new york state mesonet , which thorncroft now oversees , is funded by a million fema grant . comprised of observation towers , densely spaced at no more than miles apart , the new network will make data transmissions every five minutes to a wide range of meteorologists , emergency managers , and private sector partners . when it s complete , new york s statewide weather network will be the most advanced in the country uniquely well suited to respond to the sorts of extreme events associated with climate change . currently under construction , it is scheduled to be fully operational by the end of the year . a map of flood zones hanging in the the new york state mesonet command center in suny s albany campus . for the average smartphone user , the ready accessibility of forecasts understates the mysteries they seek to address . a canceler of ballgames and planner of picnics , modern meteorology is a workaday brand of divination a wholly practical magic . during the th century , our understanding of our relationship to nature was substantially more fraught . the publication of charles darwin s on the origin of species , in , was followed two years later by england s first official weather forecasts , published daily in the london times . often surprisingly accurate , they were derived , like today s forecasts , from a great mass of data measurements of temperature , wind , barometric pressure , and rainfall much of it culled from the logbooks of naval captains and explorers . the resultant predictions often aimed to reduce the risk of death at sea . but many found them upsetting a source of existential angst . in their attempt to prophesy the future , weather forecasts could seem to spring from the same heretical abandon that had induced darwin to probe the role of god in the makeup of the past . the man largely responsible for those forecasts was robert fitzroy , an aristocrat and scientist who , years earlier , had captained darwin s ship on the journey that would produce the voyage of the beagle . even fitzroy , however , struggled with the tension between science and faith . an intensely religious man , he doubted any theory contradicting the bible . he once suggested that the dinosaurs , having been too ungainly for noah s ark , must have died off in the deluge . as journalist cynthia barnett notes in rain a natural and cultural history , at the time , forecasting was widely considered an immoral pseudo science . the british press sometimes equated it with astrology , and in the s , england enacted a ban on public forecasts , ostensibly to defend against inaccurate predictions . darker motives were also at work , barnett writes . for one , the large ship salvage companies of cornwall and devon complained to parliament that the forecasts were putting them out of business . forecasting was widely considered an immoral pseudo science . if meteorology seemed to many victorians perhaps vaguely redolent of witchcraft , the obsessive measurement taking that underlay the nascent science nonetheless had an estimable pedigree . the first written reference to a rain gauge can be found in the writings of the hindu philosopher and statesman kautilya , circa bc . king sejong the great , who ruled korea from to , demanded that even his most far flung villages make use of a more advanced gauge to report back to him on rainfall . thomas jefferson also put great stock in his store of weathervanes , thermometers , and rain gauges . in philadelphia , shortly after the continental congress adopted his declaration of independence , he found time to stop off at sparhawk s apothecary , purchasing a barometer to add to his collection . in the weather experiment , an account of the birth of modern forecasting , peter moore writes of the georgian era , for many who believed that nature , after the bible , was god s second book , the quest to understand the natural world , to peek into the celestial machine , became a spiritual experience . a careful eye and inquisitive mind might bring them , for a moment , closer to god . and yet , even the most devoted atmospheric observers of the time considered weather s operation essentially mysterious beyond human reckoning . the tradition endures . in , wildfires swallowed more than . million texas acres during a long drought , destroying hundreds of homes and burning up crops and businesses . governor rick perry , who was at the time contemplating the white house , appealed to god i , rick perry , governor of texas , under the authority vested in me by the constitution of the state of texas , do hereby proclaim the three day period from friday , april , , to sunday , april , , as days of prayer for rain in the state of texas . chris thorncroft , chair of albany s department of atmospheric and environmental sciences . by the time hurricane irene reached the us , meteorologists at the national hurricane center in miami had been tracking the storm for weeks . using satellites , radar , and complex multivariable equations executed by powerful computers , they followed it from its origins , on the west african coast . while it remained hundreds of miles away from the eastern seaboard , they could predict its movements with fairly good accuracy . but once irene arrived , meteorologists were unable to judge how conditions differed from minute to minute , or from county to county . in new york , the national weather service was relying on ground level data from a mere observation stations . most were at airports , and did not accurately represent the state s varied weather or topography . transmitting measurements only once an hour , they also failed to provide information in sufficient quality or quantity . while irene bore down , new york was like a kingdom with farsighted lookouts on the ramparts , but no way of keeping track of invaders who managed to breach the castle gates . as the storm laid siege , the intelligence available to emergency managers a broad category including local firefighters , state officials overseeing road and bridge closures , and federal disaster relief czars was full of holes , making the hurricane s assault impossible to analyze holistically in real time . as the storm laid siege , the intelligence available to emergency managers was full of holesa major part of the trouble arose from the highly localized character of extreme weather even within one storm , conditions can vary vastly . irene s center , which passed through brooklyn and manhattan where subways had been closed and pantries stocked was relatively calm . its strongest winds blew to the east , bringing down trees and electrical lines on long island . irene s most damaging effects , however , came from rain , which concentrated in bands on the storm s western flank , over the catskills , vermont , and northern new hampshire . curtis marshall is the program director for the national mesonet program at the national weather service a sporadically connected network of state based programs established after the publication of the nas report . he is also one of the principal authors of observing weather and climate from the ground up . marshall told me , our capabilities for observation have not kept up with our capabilities for forecasting . in effect , the basics have often been neglected we have sophisticated models capable of providing forecasts for short term , high impact events , but the results of your calculations are only as good as the observations you feed into them . we knew that it was raining , thorncroft said of the storms . but we did not know how much it was raining , or exactly where rain was falling . we didn t know , until after the fact , that records were being broken . in the early s , when ken crawford , who was then head meteorologist at the norman , oklahoma office of the national weather service , began thinking about weaknesses in the state s system , he noticed similar deficiencies . he felt vexed , especially , by a number of recent severe floods , about which , due to a lack of data , almost nothing meaningful could be said . oklahoma relied on stations consisting of little more than a stick stuck into a rain gauge . around that time , in a meeting with several japanese meteorologists , crawford , who is considered the father of the mesonet , was shown a glossy plan for an island wide system of automated observation stations . the japanese scientists wanted to see oklahoma s equivalent . crawford felt embarrassed . his state relied on stations consisting of little more than a stick stuck into a rain gauge , he would later recall . readings were taken manually , often by elderly volunteers who made frequent typographical errors . but that meeting became the seed from which the original mesonet grew . by the mid s , crawford had developed a system not dissimilar from the one the japanese scientists showed him , but funding lagged and the network didn t go live until . since then , it has repeatedly proven its merit . in may , as several tornadoes moved through central oklahoma , the mesonet was used to divert a law enforcement caravan when forecasters determined that a cyclone would cross the highway on which the vehicles were traveling . during the same set of storms , about miles away , an emergency manager drew on mesonet data to evacuate a large mall minutes before it was destroyed . late last year , as heavy rains caused historic overflows of the grand river , mesonet measurements helped emergency managers to issue county specific evacuation warnings in advance of devastating floods . but financing for a full mesonet system remains out of reach for most states . in new york , fema s contribution covers only construction . the network s operating budget will rely on specialized services offered to the private sector for a fee . agricultural clients will receive reports tailored to mitigate damage from insects and disease , and others to optimize spraying , irrigation , frost protection , planting , and harvesting . the mesonet will supply energy producers with improved wind and solar data , as well as customized short term forecasts designed to limit profit loss during extreme weather events . additional revenue is likely to come from freight and travel related industries . to a significant degree , it is new york s sensitivity to erratic weather that will provide the mesonet s lifeblood . the office of emergency management center in albany , new york the new york state mesonet command center is located below ground , in a building on the suny albany campus . a visitor there might well be treated to a quip about the fact that the office , which is devoted to the observation of outdoor phenomena , has no windows . it can be reached through the tunnels that snake below campus , affording students and faculty shelter from inclement weather . i met chris thorncroft there on a warm , humid day in july . he wore a navy polo shirt untucked over brown khakis , frameless ovular glasses , and short gray hair . on one wall of an open , low ceilinged room , a large flat screen displayed panels in a seven by seven grid . each panel showed a feed from a camera affixed to a mesonet tower somewhere in the state westmoreland , wallkill , whiteface mountain , camden , morrisville , elmira , cold brook . it was an incomplete array . as of minutes earlier , thorncroft said , sites had been completed . finished towers begin broadcasting readings immediately . basic mesonet data is available free to the public online , and also gets transmitted directly to the new york state office of emergency management and the national weather service , whose forecasts trickle down to newscasters , weather apps , and the like . thorncroft has been working on a method for predicting , from the moment a system leaves the african coast , whether it will become a hurricanethorncroft examined another flat screen , showing a radar image of an approaching storm , and we set off for a tower in schaghticoke , about miles away . the schaghticoke tower stands on property occupied by the town s highway department . by the time we arrived , the storm had , too , and we waited out the rain in thorncroft s car . deep puddles formed in the dirt parking lot and lightning broke through the late afternoon sky , which was dark gray , urgent with swift clouds . thorncroft pointed to shreds of ashen vapor that seemed to be tearing away from one another , leaving wisps between them . when you see that sort of thing , he said , you know that there s a lot of stirred up energy in the atmosphere an ambient upset that tends to resolve itself in rain . thorncroft speaks with a clipped but genial frankness common to many people who are british and also to many people who are very good at math . thorncroft is both . his research focuses primarily on the relationship between atlantic hurricanes and the west african low pressure systems from which roughly percent of them develop . hurricane irene began as such a system . for some time , thorncroft has been working on a method for predicting , from the moment a system leaves the african coast , whether it will become a hurricane . he regards the solution to the problem as his holy grail . during a break in the storm , we walked past mounds of mulch and soil to where the tower stood , protected by wire fencing , on a patch of grass . thirty feet tall and made of bright metal , its slender frame extended arms and instruments at intervals , like a bird feeder offering various meals to different species . the meteorologists i spoke with were all quick to point out that the mesonet will work in concert with extant stations , rather than replace them . the factor by which the new network increases observational capacity , however , suggests the depth of the old one s inadequacy . a mesonet tower . the mesonet s improvements take two basic forms . the first is an entirely new kind of vertical profiling technology , present at of the towers . though its presentation is unglamorous it s a box , thorncroft says , it looks like a mailbox . thorncroft calls it a game changer . using an electromagnetic beam , the box plumbs the ether to take a kind of atmospheric core sample six miles high . each sample will show layers of temperature , humidity , and wind activity a profile of conditions in flux through elevation that represent statistical mana to meteorologists on the ground . the control of our weather is coming from above , thorncroft said . cyclones , anticyclones , fronts these exist up into the atmosphere . in order to understand how they re evolving , you need to know what is happening up there . this is particularly true for near term , extreme weather forecasts . up until now , new york has relied on just three sites for atmospheric profiles . launches in long island , buffalo , and albany send up high altitude weather balloons twice daily . but their transmissions are relatively few , somewhat irregular , and they account for only a small portion of the state . if you want to know if the next few days are going to be sunny or stormy , a coarser resolution balloon based network will give you the gist of the information you need to make a forecast , curtis marshall told me . but if you want to know over the next hours if a hurricane or a squall line is going to impact a locality or region , you need to have to have this finer resolution observational data . he continued , how levels of wind and moisture change with height in the atmosphere that tells you the most about how these smaller scale systems will evolve in time , where they will go and what they will do . it s like looking out the window every five minutes at places around the state . it s not clear whether enhanced sites will be sufficient to capture atmospheric happenings statewide , but thorncroft is optimistic . once you make a profile of a site , that information gets shifted downstream it s in a model . when you re taking a profile every five minutes , that will give you a very accurate picture of the whole state , not just of the sites . here , the distance between observation and forecast can shrink , eliminating the dizzyingly complex , variable rich intermediary equations used for longer term predictions . the resultant practice is called nowcasting , and can be useful to monitor and warn for the erratic , highly localized behavior of extreme weather . when you know how the weather has been evolving in the last hour , you can project what s going to happen in the next hour , thorncroft said . the mesonet s second major improvement lies simply in the volume , density , and quality of its uptake . each tower transmits basic measurements including rainfall , air temperature , wind speed , wind direction , surface pressure , and humidity . in cold weather , they will register the time and location at which falling water turns from freezing rain to snow , from sleet to hail . it s like looking out the window every five minutes at places around the state , thorncroft said . the sites also collect data that has been largely neglected , but which is essential to anticipating the kind of flooding precipitated by the storms soil moisture and temperature , radiation , snowpack . in addition to aiding forecasters and other decision makers in moments of crisis , both vertical profiling sites and standard mesonet towers will supply data to longer term forecasting models that fall under the canopy of numerical weather prediction . the province of the aforementioned horrifyingly complicated algorithms , numerical weather prediction addresses a range of time scales , from three days out to the vast arcs of climatic change . ampnbspnaturally , each data point , equation , model , and prediction informs myriad others . to understand that an atlantic hurricane began as a series of weak rain showers in west africa requires one kind of knowledge , predicting that storm s course over a five day period another . to say how much it has been raining and for how long in a rural county in upstate new york to know that the soil there is saturated and that soon , the rivers will flood other kinds still . entrance to the the new york state office of emergency management center . the new york state office of emergency management stands in a gray , labyrinthine office park not far from the mesonet command center , in albany . it too occupies subterranean quarters a cold war era bunker a la dr . strangelove , constructed to function as a temporary state government base of operations in the event of nuclear attack . inside , the oem s halls are decorated with framed photographs commemorating disasters both irrefutably man made and ostensibly natural the sunrise wildfire , on long island wreckage from september th and from the crash of twa flight destruction wrought by hurricane irene and hurricane sandy and tropical storm lee . one afternoon this summer , kevin wisely , the director of the oem , led me through the office s emergency operations center . during an event that requires maximal state level response a full activation the center bustles with representatives from agencies , including the department of environmental conservation , the department of transportation , the office of fire prevention and control , and the national weather service . during my visit , the center was dormant cool , dim , and empty . cnn , msnbc , and the weather channel flickered silently from wall mounted flat screens . it s difficult to summarize the activity of the oem , but wisely , a bald and solidly built man with the warm , soldierly manner of a good hearted state trooper , tried to sketch out the general order of operations information flows up , beginning with emergency managers and local executives in towns and villages , while resources , or assets , and direction move down from centralized agencies , in accordance with received intelligence . hurricane irene was what the oem calls a notice event one the state specifically anticipated . assets were mustered well before landfall sandbagging units and swiftwater rescue teams , light towers , generators , high axle vehicles , ready to eat meals , and other items . but they were deployed largely in and around the new york metropolitan area , where forecasters had predicted that the storm would land its heaviest blows . by the time the oem had received enough information to establish a reasonably complete picture of statewide conditions , travel had become difficult . long island fire crews that needed to be transferred to the catskills and the adirondacks were hampered by sinkholes . asphalt had torn away from roadbeds . long stretches of the new york thruway were closed . in prattsville , tom olson was told that he d have to wait for assistance to arrive from newburgh , more than miles away dozens of other emergency managers faced similar predicaments . rescue teams did not reach prattsville until late afternoon , when floodwaters had already largely receded . kevin wisely , director of oem . it s impossible to say with certainty how upstate new york might fare if a hurricane were to pass through next year , with the mesonet in place . every storm is different , and the chaos of extreme weather does not permit perfect planning . but by the end of , the informational gaps that plagued emergency response in will have been substantially closed . mesonet towers will equip the oem with a continually updated view of meteorological goings on statewide , so that if conditions worsen suddenly , emergency managers will know exactly when and where . mesonet intelligence should largely eliminate the sort of paralysis that occurred during the storms . to make optimal use of mesonet data , in august , governor andrew cuomo introduced new york responds , a . million initiative to supplant the patchwork of county specific emergency management software then in use with a statewide network . the new software integrates real time measurements from mesonet stations plus forecasts and models created by the national weather service from the raw data with incident reports , resource requests , and status updates from emergency managers . officials at every level can access a common operating snapshot power outages , reports on infrastructure , traffic cameras . to make emergency response nimbler , the oem has established nine supply depots across the state , whose inventories can be augmented in advance of storms . a true nationwide network of networks would provide something like a comprehensive vision of the hyper localthe advantages of the new york state mesonet and the emergency infrastructure it informs are nonetheless limited . neighboring states , visited by weather that has passed through new york , will benefit from the x rays the mesonet provides . for now , though , those neighbors have nothing analogous to offer . how many other states ultimately participate in a system like the one described in the nas report will likely depend on the benefits , humanitarian and financial , that new york derives from chris thorncroft s mesonet . a true nationwide network of networks would provide something like a comprehensive vision of the hyper local a technical apotheosis of the methods applied by sejong the great , thomas jefferson , and robert fitzroy , enabling accurate nowcasting across the country . such a system would leave many meteorological questions unanswered , like which west african low pressure systems will become hurricanes thorncroft s holy grail but it would also vastly improve the accuracy of mathematical models used to sketch global patterns , like the the progress of climate change . it s odd to consider that our understanding of historical atmospheric shifts depends on the careful tallying of minutiae . odder still to think that despite leaps in technological and analytical wisdom , parsing the relationship between humans and nature has become , if anything , more complicated . although scientists detect the force of climate change in an increasing number of extreme weather events , cynthia barnett writes , they can t tie the tragedy of any particular deluge or drought to human caused climate change . as one scientist told her , rainfall and other weather events happening today are happening in a different climate than one hundred years ago , and so they are behaving differently than they would have a hundred years ago . the question is how much . over time , the new york state mesonet will help to begin answering that question . but for many , a peek into the celestial machine now involves a reckoning with the startling power of our species . where weather wonks of centuries past sought in rain gauges and barometers something like a brush with divinity , in the pointillism that emerges from today s observation stations , we hunt , strangely , for traces of ourselves . david rikard , inside his home office . his home which previously sat on the same plat was destroyed by irene . in the aftermath of hurricane irene , governor cuomo declared prattsville one of the state s hardest hit communities . each of its businesses was damaged or destroyed . eleven homes collapsed . fifteen more were condemned . one hundred houses were so wrecked as to be unlivable without substantial rehabilitation . and yet , prattsville was lucky . by late afternoon on the day of the storm , tom olson and his crew were able to walk out the front door of the firehouse . with the help of an out of town rescue team , pamela young and her son and nephew plus the two dogs and a cat made it safely to a neighbor s house . the second storm , lee , mostly passed the town by . it escaped fatalities spring valley , new scotland , altona , and other new york towns did not . those who endured the storm in prattsville are inclined to divide their lives into two epochs before the flood , and after . i visited the town on a bright , cloudless day in june . at first , it seemed a kind of bucolic ideal in miniature . crisp american flags hung from telephone poles downtown and gnome sized lilies grew from the banks of the schoharie creek , which was running low and clear . atop a distant green hill , a red tractor stood parked beside a neat , white homestead . amid this rural idyll , the abandoned homes on main street had an eerie presence . a red x still marked the storm door of the small , green house where scott jackson distracted his children with board games upstairs as the water rose to five feet in his living room . ampnbspnearby , boards obscured the windows of a home that might have once been purple or periwinkle , its low front porch had warped with rot , admitting intrusions of tall grass . across the street , a paneless picture window looked into what had been a living room an upright piano stood at an odd angle in the dark beside an overturned couch and an overturned swivel chair and a folded stroller , all covered in dust . peggy young indicates how high the water had risen inside her home . david rikard , a lawyer , judge , and a member of the fire department , told me that the day after the storm had been very much like this one , only hotter . rikard had spent much of it on the second floor of the stationhouse with tom olson . his home was among those condemned and demolished after the storm his daughter , anastasia , had escaped from an upstairs window with the help of a water rescue team . a man of sardonic wit and robust physique , rikard had rebuilt on the same site and reestablished his practice in a first floor home office , where we spoke as afternoon bled into evening . those blue , hot , cloudless skies , he remembered . that heat . that feeling of steam coming off everything . riverbottom mud , sticky , rank , and black , had coated much of the town . volunteers , and representatives from state and federal agencies thronged main street . overhead , helicopters beat the air . things felt surreal at that point , rikard continued . it reminded me of apocalypse now . pamela young wasn t in town on the day of my visit . she still owns the land where her grandparents once lived , but their house had been torn down . she has not rebuilt there . instead , she settled closer to albany , where she works . househunting , a broker had shown her an attractive home in a country setting . around back , a small stream cut through the yard . right away , i said , no , young told me recently . the broker was surprised the stream didn t seem to her remotely threatening . i told her , i ve already seen how powerful water is , young said . it s unimaginable . and the funny thing is , after the storm happened , you would drive a couple of miles out of town , and it was like nothing . and then you come to our town , and it s like someone dropped a bomb and flew away . it s bizarre . it s just bizarre what can happen . peggy and jim young had rebuilt on main street , too , though neither their store nor their home had been as badly damaged as rikard s house . peggy is slim and blonde , with light eyes . she and i sat on patio furniture upstairs at young s agway and hardware , a few hours before closing time . taxidermied specimens of grizzly and kodiak stood close by , as did a display of casual women s wear . peggy and her family had spent most of the storm on the roof of a sturdy outdoor shed , besieged by surging water . for hours that day , they believed they would die . talking about it , peggy s eyes well up . she and her husband no longer watch the weather channel . for them , storm footage can cause an unpleasant flashback effect . besides , they are skeptical of forecasts . editor michael zelenko	 every android phone has always been a little compromised , and everybody knows it . there s been a veil of bullshit between you and what google intended on all of them . sometimes that veil looks like ugly , bad , and usually unnecessary extra software . sometimes it looks like a carrier failing to send out timely software updates . other times it means getting something inexpensive , but fundamentally flawed in some way . even the nexus phones were behind the veil , little more than reference designs with hardware that was mostly determined by a third party before google made tweaks here and there . a pessimist would call this situation fragmentation , an optimist would call it diversity . either way , it hasn t really been a huge problem for google yet . google wanted people to use its services , and the android platform was flexible and ubiquitous enough to thrive and take over the planet , achieving dominant marketshare . just because android is everywhere doesn t mean that google is everywhere on mobile . there has been a lot of talk about google being more opinionated about what a phone should be , and google s opinion has always been hidden behind that veil . that situation might be okay at the low end , but at the high end where all the profit and mindshare is , samsung and apple have expressed the only opinions that really matter . with note s off the market and samsung hedging its bets against google s services , that situation was going to become untenable someday . someday is today google is making a phone for the first time . it s called the pixel and it s a google phone inside and out , sold directly by the company to a mass audience for the first time . with pixel , we finally get to see behind the veil and get an unmediated experience of google s very best shot at a phone . all the excuses that existed before for android phones not living up to their potential won t work here . no more bullshit . there are actually two pixels the regular inch screen version and a larger . inch version called the pixel xl . they are identical in every respect except for the size of their batteries , the resolution of their screens , and , of course , their prices the spectrum ranges from for a gb pixel and goes all the way up to for a gb pixel xl . for people who have been following google s phone efforts so far , the best comparison we have are the nexus phones spanning the past six years . that comparison has led many to experience sticker shock about the price , because nexus phones were usually inexpensive . but the pixel is different although it is manufactured by htc , it s fully designed by google . and google designed it to compete at the top tier , so it s priced to match the iphone and the galaxy s . it has a couple incredibly obvious objectives in mind with this phone make it familiar and make it powerful . let s start with familiar and say the obvious thing the pixel kind of looks like an iphone . every high end phone these days is designed with some combination of metal and glass , and so you could argue that there are only so many ways to make a rectangle . but even so , look at the bezels on the front , the curves at the corners , the antenna lines , and the placement of the speaker the thing looks very familiar . after years of trying , samsung managed to find its own , techier aesthetic . maybe google will do that eventually , but for this first try i think it wants the thing to look like what what people are used to . people are used to iphones . that said , there are lot of differences , and they add up to a phone that s utilitarian and approachable . the biggest design element is the glass shade that replaces the metal on the top third of the back of the phone . functionally , it might help with radio reception , but mostly i think it s there to align the phone in your hand . neither pixel is precisely flat , there s a subtle wedge shape to them to accommodate the camera at the top . that means there s no camera bump but also that they still feel relatively thin where you actually hold them on the bottom half . on the front , it s easy to kvetch about the large bezel on the bottom , but i don t mind it it makes the phone feel balanced and it s more comfortable to hit the on screen home button . google puts the fingerprint sensor on the back , and i really like having it there . it s a hassle when the phone is sitting on a table , but i usually pick up my phone to interact with it anyway . you can just rest your finger on it to turn on and unlock the phone , but it doesn t serve as a home button . you can also set it up so that when you slide your finger down on it , it pulls down the notification shade . the pixel is not waterproof , which is dumb and annoying . i should also note that a very short fall managed to crack the screen on the smaller pixel during our review . a sample size of one is obviously too small to say that these devices are less durable than they ought to be , but it s not a great sign . it fast charges via usb c and there s only one speaker at the bottom . luckily , it s a pretty loud , decent speaker a charitable person might say that s why the bezel on the bottom is so large . there is , of course , a headphone jack on the top . these are easily the best android phones you can buyas for specs they re great . both pixel variants have a qualcomm snapdragon processor , gigs of ram , and flat out gorgeous oled screens with deep blacks and vibrant , punchy colors . and that s important at some point next month , daydream vr will finally get released and you ll want high quality screens for that . the pixels are fast noticeably faster than samsung s galaxy s . on performance alone , these are easily the best android phones you can buy . for a phone made by google , that s absolutely the expectation it s just good to note that at its first time at bat , google hit a home run . for the first time , google is arguing strenuously that it can make a better phone because it controls both the hardware and software . so i wouldn t enjoy being another android manufacturer right now . that s not my problem nor yours , though . for us , the really important question is simply this did google take advantage of that integration to push the pixel beyond what has been possible on other android phones . i d say that the answer is yes . google tells me that once again it did more work optimizing touch response to make the phone feel snappier . in fact , the company claims that under a high speed camera it s exactly as responsive as an iphone . it doesn t quite feel that way to me , but perhaps the differences come down to how the different operating systems tune their inertia on scrolling . i also think that google was able to optimize battery life beyond what other android phones can do . over the week and a half i tested the phones , i got absolutely stupendous battery life , especially on the pixel xl . last sunday i streamed two hours of the vikings texans game , used the phone throughout the day , and obsessively scrolled twitter during the presidential debate . at the end of the day i was still at percent . in my experience , the pixels are lasting a couple of hours longer than comparably sized iphones or nexuses . that s better than the about a day you get from most phones these days , and it s so good that i m a little worried that it won t last or my results are an outlier . so i ll note that two other reviewers i spoke with were less pleased with the battery life on the smaller pixel . if you care about battery life , definitely get the xl . it feels much smaller than the iphone plus , too . besides the battery , google says the other hardware component that benefits the most from google s assembly integration is the pixel camera . the camera on the back is . megapixels with an f . lens and two ways to focus phase detect and laser auto focus . it has a two tone flash , too , but unfortunately no optical image stabilization . google product vp brian rakowski calls this the best smartphone camera anyone has ever made . usually you don t hear such bold claims , but he s confident dxomark gave it the highest score it s ever given a phone . but benchmarks are one thing , results are very much another . luckily for google , the results on the pixel are very , very good . i put it in the same ballpark as the iphone and the galaxy s in most situations , which is not something i expected to say going in . lt ! function var l function new pym . parent pixel photo comparison graphic , https apps . voxmedia . com graphics theverge pixel photo comparison if typeof pym undefined var h document . getelementsbytagname head , s document . createelement script s . type text javascript s . src https cdnjs . cloudflare . com ajax libs pym . . pym . js s . onload l h . appendchild s else l gtthe pixel bested the iphone in picking up detail and color in my test shots . to my eyes , it seems to be making more pleasing decisions with lighting and hdr , too . i want to put the emphasis on more pleasing , because my hunch is that if we looked at the raw input each sensor is getting we d be hard pressed to tell the difference . instead , the distinctions between all three of these phone cameras are more about the stylistic decisions each company is making . both google and samsung are slightly more aggressive at processing the image into something pleasing , while the iphone seems to give a more natural look . it matches or beats the iphone and the galaxy s edge but for me , the most important thing is that google seems to have finally fixed my biggest gripe about most android cameras the speed . the camera app opens fast and takes pictures immediately . google also has figured out a way to make hdr feel fast the camera defaults to hdr auto and though sometimes it takes a couple of seconds to process the hdr image , it happens in the background , freeing you to take more shots . you can manually turn on hdr mode , which forces the camera to take a higher quality hdr shot and slows things down a bit . holding your finger down on the shutter button takes burst photos , and the google photos app will pick the best one for you and also automatically make a little gif animation of your shots . if you like custom camera controls , there s good news and bad news . the good news is that you have easy access to af ae lock by holding your finger down on the screen , and dragging your finger up and down adjusts exposure . the less good news is that the camera defaults to hdr auto every time you open it even if you turned hdr off the last time you used it . lt ! function var l function new pym . parent pixel photo comparison graphic , https apps . voxmedia . com graphics theverge pixel photo comparison if typeof pym undefined var h document . getelementsbytagname head , s document . createelement script s . type text javascript s . src https cdnjs . cloudflare . com ajax libs pym . . pym . js s . onload l h . appendchild s else l gtgoogle did add some video stabilization software that ties the camera sensor to the gyroscope . it can stabilize what you re shooting as long as you don t shake the camera too much . walking down a wooded path fine , the results are stable and don t have a jelly effect , though the video does look vaguely artificial to me . running down that path less fine , this isn t going to save you from shaky video if you really jostle it . bottom line if you wanted to agree with google and call this the best smartphone camera , i wouldn t argue with you . instead i would say that picking the best camera among the pixel , the iphone , and the samsung galaxy s is more a matter of personal preference than it is of pure picture quality . and i would add that i don t think google would have gotten this far if it hadn t controlled both the hardware and the software from the start . so google has made a great phone that can compete at the high end . but that s really not enough reason for it to exist at least not for a company like google . instead , the real reason the pixel exists is to be the flagship platform for the google assistant . you launch the assistant by long pressing the home button and then talking , just like siri on the iphone . you can also say ok google , but as always that s a little less reliable for me . what s remarkably reliable is the assistant s ability to understand what i m asking it gets it right almost every time , in all sorts of noise environments , and even when my data connection isn t very good . the assistant shows up in a chat like interface that slides up from the bottom . you pose your question , google answers it , and then you can ask follow up questions either by speaking or tapping a suggested reply . there s a lot riding on the assistant being good . when he announced the pixel , ceo sundar pichai envisioned creating a personal google for each person . in order to make that happen , the company is going to need to keep collecting and analyzing a lot of data to make that happen . so the tradeoff has to be that you get a massive benefit from using the assistant . i can t judge for you whether it s a good idea to continue to let google know so much about you including location , web and search history , and whatever is on your screen when you launch the assistant but i can tell you if the assistant is any good . short answer it is . but it still lives in a weird world of functionality . sometimes it amazes you with what it can figure out and sometimes it also baffles you when it can t answer seemingly obvious questions . when you ask the assistant for information that can be culled from the web , it s impressively , sometimes ridiculously , smart . it can read the screen and then tell you who the cast is for the tv show you re reading about then understand follow up questions about someone like lee pace who is a national treasure . the assistant can read back relevant sections of how to articles , complete with spoken sourcing . in general it s less likely to frustrate you enough to stop using it like siri , but it s not radically better . for example , it can tell me when the next debates are but it s not smart enough to understand its own answer has enough information to add it to my calendar . it also doesn t yet talk to as many apps and services as siri does . i ve successfully made dinner reservations with opentable but it can t call an uber . google says it s been working to create an actions system that makes those integrations easier for the user than it is on , say , amazon s alexa . that system won t arrive until december , unfortunately . meanwhile the assistant is also able to do most of the basic phone stuff you d expect make calls , send texts , adjust screen brightness , and so on . it also has a daily briefing feature that will tell you the weather , your next appointment , and play some news from sources like npr , the bbc , and fox . the google assistant is the smartest there is , but it s not a geniusthat daily briefing is similar to the flash briefing , a feature i use with amazon s alexa every day , and i love it . it s also the perfect example of the assistant s as yet unrealized promise for as much as google knows about me , it s not using all that information effectively yet . see , my most important google calendar is on my work google account , and the assistant doesn t include that in the briefing . if i explicitly ask about my next appointment , it can find it , but it doesn t include it in my daily briefing . there is one place where google knows a lot about me and its assistant returns amazing results google photos . i ve asked it for whiteboards , pictures of my cat , pictures of my kitchen , pictures of my friends who i don t ever remember tagging , selfies , locations , and more . every time google finds the pictures . it s way more accurate and comprehensive than ios and siri . even though there s ostensibly one google brain behind all of it , the different lobes don t always seem to be talking to each other . that confusion extends to the various ways that google exists on the pixel itself . you can only speak to the assistant , for example , not type at it . except that you can type at it in allo , google s chat app . you can also tap the google search button on the home screen to type queries , but that s not technically the assistant . oh , and google now , the predictive information stream , still sits to the left of your main home screen . that s four different ways to talk to google on this phone , not counting apps like maps and gmail . and each one has a slightly different interface and provides slightly different results . for example , the assistant can t recognize songs yet , but asking the exact same question with the google search button works fine . to be very clear the google assistant is absolutely the smartest of the assistant bunch , but it s not yet in a class of its own . google knows so much more about me than , say , apple , and its assistant should reflect that . because google itself is placing so much emphasis on the assistant , it should be held to a higher standard than all the rest and there s clearly still some work to do . since we re getting into the business of holding the pixel to a higher standard , let s also do that with android . in general , the persistent knock on android is that its third party apps are slightly worse than on ios and that it can often feel slower or jankier . i think that these arguments still have some merit , but not as much as the conventional wisdom would have you believe . i find android nougat to be comprehensible and powerful , but it still has some annoying spots . the phones ship with version . of android nougat , with a few pixel specific features . the one you ll notice right away is a custom launcher with round icons and a new swipe up gesture to get to the app drawer . i like it but then i am the guy who was already using a third party launcher with a custom icon theme to begin with . you can also long press on icons to get shortcut options , and the neat trick with them is you can drag any of those shortcuts out and make it a top level icon in your launcher . there are also some nice live wallpapers that change based on your location , time of day , or even your battery level . google is also providing some bonus features for pixel users . there s chat and phone support built right into the settings app on the phone . if you like , you can give screen viewing capabilities to your support representative so they can walk you through your issue . you also get free , unlimited cloud storage for every picture and video you take with the pixel . as for android . , it s a nice incremental update . it has support for daydream vr , which i didn t get to test . it also finally ! has a night mode that shows less blue light so it s easier on your eyes in the dark . it is aggressively , almost ridiculously yellow and i am not as fond of it here as i am on ios devices , where it s possible to adjust the strength of the filter . google has done more tuning to make android feel more responsive to touch and that work is much appreciated . but i don t think that same attention to detail has been applied to the overall interface yet . take the new keyboard as one example it supports gif search , but it s buried deep in the keyboard and it only shows up in certain supported messaging apps . sometimes it s there , usually it s not , and it s basically guaranteed you ll forget about it and never use it . i should note that the pixel will get software updates before any other android phone and they ll install quietly in the background on a custom partition and seamlessly switch you over when they re ready . verizon users will have a small handful of apps downloaded to their phone when they put a sim in , but you can easily delete them without any issue . these are small gripes about an operating system that i genuinely like and prefer over ios for its openness and flexibility . but in making a system that supports such flexibility , google has historically let its opinions about design and functionality take a back seat to the preferences of android manufacturers and carriers . and that has meant that you need to do a little more work to make android feel polished than you should have to . google has , in essence , been too deferential to everybody else in the android ecosystem . you can see the results of that deference most clearly in its messaging apps , where the company s try everything and don t piss off anybody strategy has it losing out to apple , facebook , and even smaller outfits like telegram . should you be using sms messaging , hangouts , allo , the messenger app verizon auto installs , facebook messenger , or all of the above ? google doesn t offer any guidance on the issue , and that s a problem . the result is confusion for potential iphone switchers who don t know what their go to messaging app should be . i think it s just going to take a while for google s opinionated take on how its software should be designed to get stronger . i hope it does get stronger . every time google has made a forceful choice in designing the hardware or the software on this phone , it s been a good one . this is google s first phone , and for a first effort it is remarkably good . by almost every metric i can think of speed , power , camera , smart assistant , you name it it matches or exceeds the best phones available on the market today . and though the design is far from groundbreaking , it s certainly approachable . the whole package is pretty incredible , and if you re not put off by the premium price , you ll be very happy with this premium phone . i prefer the xl , which isn t huge and seems to get notably better battery life . when i ve shown the pixel to iphone users over the last week and a half , a bunch of them expressed interest in switching . that is a very good sign for google . and yet i always asked the exact same questions do you use imessage a lot ? how about group conversations ? the answer was inevitably yes and the light dimmed from their eyes a bit . in the us , at least , the apple ecosystem platform lock in is real and a big hurdle to jump . to get over that hurdle , google needs to do more than offer something comparable or slightly better . it needs to offer something radically better , something that makes the pain of switching feel trivial by comparison to the benefit you get from the new thing . that s presumably supposed to be the google assistant , but it s not quite ready to play that role yet . it would be nice if that great leap forward came all at once , in a shocking reveal . but that s not what s going to happen . instead , google will have to aggressively and quietly improve the assistant until , sometime in the future , we look back and wonder how we lived with stilted and limited ais . those are going to be tomorrow s standards . by today s standards , the pixel and pixel xl are among the best phones you can buy . good stuff long battery life fast and powerful google assistantbad stuff not waterproof pedestrian design google s take on android needs more polishphotography by sean o kane . edited by michael zelenko and ampnbspvlad savov . 	 when her best friend died , she rebuilt him using artificial intelligence when the engineers had at last finished their work , eugenia kuyda opened a console on her laptop and began to type . roman , she wrote . this is your digital monument . it had been three months since roman mazurenko , kuyda s closest friend , had died . kuyda had spent that time gathering up his old text messages , setting aside the ones that felt too personal , and feeding the rest into a neural network built by developers at her artificial intelligence startup . she had struggled with whether she was doing the right thing by bringing him back this way . at times it had even given her nightmares . but ever since mazurenko s death , kuyda had wanted one more chance to speak with him . a message blinked onto the screen . you have one of the most interesting puzzles in the world in your hands , it said . solve it . kuyda promised herself that she would . born in belarus in , roman mazurenko was the only child of sergei , an engineer , and victoria , a landscape architect . they remember him as an unusually serious child when he was he wrote a letter to his descendents declaring his most cherished values wisdom and justice . in family photos , mazurenko roller skates , sails a boat , and climbs trees . average in height , with a mop of chestnut hair , he is almost always smiling . as a teen he sought out adventure he participated in political demonstrations against the ruling party and , at , started traveling abroad . he first traveled to new mexico , where he spent a year on an exchange program , and then to dublin , where he studied computer science and became fascinated with the latest western european art , fashion , music , and design . by the time mazurenko finished college and moved back to moscow in , russia had become newly prosperous . the country tentatively embraced the wider world , fostering a new generation of cosmopolitan urbanites . meanwhile , mazurenko had grown from a skinny teen into a strikingly handsome young man . blue eyed and slender , he moved confidently through the city s budding hipster class . he often dressed up to attend the parties he frequented , and in a suit he looked movie star handsome . the many friends mazurenko left behind describe him as magnetic and debonair , someone who made a lasting impression wherever he went . but he was also single , and rarely dated , instead devoting himself to the project of importing modern european style to moscow . kuyda met mazurenko in , when she was and the editor of afisha , a kind of new york magazine for a newly urbane moscow . she was writing an article about idle conversation , a freewheeling creative collective that mazurenko founded with two of his best friends , dimitri ustinov and sergey poydo . the trio seemed to be at the center of every cultural endeavor happening in moscow . they started magazines , music festivals , and club nights friends they had introduced to each other formed bands and launched companies . he was a brilliant guy , said kuyda , who was similarly ambitious . mazurenko would keep his friends up all night discussing culture and the future of russia . he was so forward thinking and charismatic , said poydo , who later moved to the united states to work with him . mazurenko became a founding figure in the modern moscow nightlife scene , where he promoted an alternative to what russians sardonically referred to as putin s glamor exclusive parties where oligarchs ordered bottle service and were chauffeured home in rolls royces . kuyda loved mazurenko s parties , impressed by his unerring sense of what he called the moment . each of his events was designed to build to a crescendo dj mark ronson might make a surprise appearance on stage to play piano , or the italo disco band glass candy might push past police to continue playing after curfew . and his parties attracted sponsors with deep pockets bacardi was a longtime client . but the parties took place against an increasingly grim backdrop . in the wake of the global financial crisis , russia experienced a resurgent nationalism , and in vladimir putin returned to lead the country . the dream of a more open russia seemed to evaporate . kuyda and mazurenko , who by then had become close friends , came to believe that their futures lay elsewhere . both became entrepreneurs , and served as each other s chief adviser as they built their companies . kuyda co founded luka , an artificial intelligence startup , and mazurenko launched stampsy , a tool for building digital magazines . kuyda moved luka from moscow to san francisco in . after a stint in new york , mazurenko followed . running a startup had worn him down , and he was prone to periods of melancholywhen stampsy faltered , mazurenko moved into a tiny alcove in kuyda s apartment to save money . mazurenko had been the consummate bon vivant in moscow , but running a startup had worn him down , and he was prone to periods of melancholy . on the days he felt depressed , kuyda took him out for surfing and oysters . it was like a flamingo living in the house , she said recently , sitting in the kitchen of the apartment she shared with mazurenko . it s very beautiful and very rare . but it doesn t really fit anywhere . kuyda hoped that in time her friend would reinvent himself , just as he always had before . and when mazurenko began talking about new projects he wanted to pursue , she took it as a positive sign . he successfully applied for an american o visa , granted to individuals of extraordinary ability or achievement , and in november he returned to moscow in order to finalize his paperwork . he never did . on november th , while he waited for the embassy to release his passport , mazurenko had brunch with some friends . it was unseasonably warm , so afterward he decided to explore the city with ustinov . he said he wanted to walk all day , ustinov said . making their way down the sidewalk , they ran into some construction , and were forced to cross the street . at the curb , ustinov stopped to check a text message on his phone , and when he looked up he saw a blur , a car driving much too quickly for the neighborhood . this is not an uncommon sight in moscow vehicles of diplomats , equipped with spotlights to signal their authority , speeding with impunity . ustinov thought it must be one of those cars , some rich government asshole and then , a blink later , saw mazurenko walking into the crosswalk , oblivious . ustinov went to cry out in warning , but it was too late . the car struck mazurenko straight on . he was rushed to a nearby hospital . to kuyda , every suggestion seemed inadequatekuyda happened to be in moscow for work on the day of the accident . when she arrived at the hospital , having gotten the news from a phone call , a handful of mazurenko s friends were already gathered in the lobby , waiting to hear his prognosis . almost everyone was in tears , but kuyda felt only shock . i didn t cry for a long time , ampnbspshe said . she went outside with some friends to smoke a cigarette , using her phone to look up the likely effects of mazurenko s injuries . then the doctor came out and told her he had died . in the weeks after mazurenko s death , friends debated the best way to preserve his memory . one person suggested making a coffee table book about his life , illustrated with photography of his legendary parties . another friend suggested a memorial website . to kuyda , every suggestion seemed inadequate . as she grieved , kuyda found herself rereading the endless text messages her friend had sent her over the years thousands of them , from the mundane to the hilarious . she smiled at mazurenko s unconventional spelling he struggled with dyslexia and at the idiosyncratic phrases with which he peppered his conversation . mazurenko was mostly indifferent to social media his facebook page was barren , he rarely tweeted , and he deleted most of his photos on instagram . his body had been cremated , leaving her no grave to visit . texts and photos were nearly all that was left of him , kuyda thought . ampnbspkuyda found herself rereading the endless text messages her friend had sent herfor two years she had been building luka , whose first product was a messenger app for interacting with bots . backed by the prestigious silicon valley startup incubator y combinator , the company began with a bot for making restaurant reservations . kuyda s co founder , philip dudchuk , has a degree in computational linguistics , and much of their team was recruited from yandex , the russian search giant . reading mazurenko s messages , it occurred to kuyda that they might serve as the basis for a different kind of bot one that mimicked an individual person s speech patterns . aided by a rapidly developing neural network , perhaps she could speak with her friend once again . she set aside for a moment the questions that were already beginning to nag at her . what if it didn t sound like him ? what if it did ? in be right back , a episode of the eerie , near future drama black mirror , a young woman named martha is devastated when her fianc e , ash , dies in a car accident . martha subscribes to a service that uses his previous online communications to create a digital avatar that mimics his personality with spooky accuracy . first it sends her text messages later it re creates his speaking voice and talks with her on the phone . eventually she pays for an upgraded version of the service that implants ash s personality into an android that looks identical to him . but ultimately martha becomes frustrated with all the subtle but important ways that the android is unlike ash cold , emotionless , passive and locks it away in an attic . not quite ash , but too much like him for her to let go , the bot leads to a grief that spans decades . kuyda saw the episode after mazurenko died , and her feelings were mixed . memorial bots even the primitive ones that are possible using today s technology seemed both inevitable and dangerous . it s definitely the future i m always for the future , she said . but is it really what s beneficial for us ? is it letting go , by forcing you to actually feel everything ? or is it just having a dead person in your attic ? where is the line ? where are we ? it screws with your brain . for a young man , mazurenko had given an unusual amount of thought to his death . known for his grandiose plans , he often told friends he would divide his will into pieces and give them away to people who didn t know one another . to read the will they would all have to meet for the first time so that mazurenko could continue bringing people together in death , just as he had strived to do in life . in fact , he died before he could make a will . mazurenko longed to see the singularity , the theoretical moment in history when artificial intelligence becomes smarter than human beings . according to the theory , superhuman intelligence might allow us to one day separate our consciousnesses from our bodies , granting us something like eternal life . there had to be a reevaluation of death and sorrowin the summer of , with stampsy almost out of cash , mazurenko applied for a y combinator fellowship proposing a new kind of cemetery that he called taiga . the dead would be buried in biodegradable capsules , and their decomposing bodies would fertilize trees that were planted on top of them , creating what he called memorial forests . a digital display at the bottom of the tree would offer biographical information about the deceased . redesigning death is a cornerstone of my abiding interest in human experiences , infrastructure , and urban planning , mazurenko wrote . he highlighted what he called a growing resistance among younger americans to traditional funerals . our customers care more about preserving their virtual identity and managing their digital estate , he wrote , than embalming their body with toxic chemicals . the idea made his mother worry that he was in trouble , but mazurenko tried to put her at ease . ampnbsp he quieted me down and said no , no , no it was a contemporary question that was very important , she said . there had to be a reevaluation of death and sorrow , and there needed to be new traditions . y combinator rejected the application . but mazurenko had identified a genuine disconnection between the way we live today and the way we grieve . modern life all but ensures that we leave behind vast digital archives text messages , photos , posts on social media and we are only beginning to consider what role they should play in mourning . in the moment , we tend to view our text messages as ephemeral . but as kuyda found after mazurenko s death , they can also be powerful tools for coping with loss . maybe , she thought , this digital estate could form the building blocks for a new type of memorial . others have had similar ideas an entrepreneur named marius ursache proposed a related service called eterni . me in , though it never launched . many of mazurenko s close friends had never before experienced the loss of someone close to them , and his death left them bereft . kuyda began reaching out to them , as delicately as possible , to ask if she could have their text messages . ten of mazurenko s friends and family members , including his parents , ultimately agreed to contribute to the project . they shared more than , lines of text covering a wide variety of subjects . she said , what if we try and see if things would work out ? said sergey fayfer , a longtime friend of mazurenko s who now works at a division of yandex . can we collect the data from the people roman had been talking to , and form a model of his conversations , to see if that actually makes sense ? the idea struck fayfer as provocative , and likely controversial . but he ultimately contributed four years of his texts with mazurenko . the team building luka are really good with natural language processing , he said . the question wasn t about the technical possibility . it was how is it going to feel emotionally ? the technology underlying kuyda s bot project dates at least as far back as , when joseph weizenbaum unveiled eliza a program that reacted to users responses to its scripts using simple keyword matching . eliza , which most famously mimicked a psychotherapist , asked you to describe your problem , searched your response for keywords , and responded accordingly , usually with another question . it was the first piece of software to pass what is known as the turing test reading a text based conversation between a computer and a person , some observers could not determine which was which . today s bots remain imperfect mimics of their human counterparts . they do not understand language in any real sense . they respond clumsily to the most basic of questions . they have no thoughts or feelings to speak of . any suggestion of human intelligence is an illusion based on mathematical probabilities . and yet recent advances in artificial intelligence have made the illusion much more powerful . artificial neural networks , which imitate the ability of the human brain to learn , have greatly improved the way software recognizes patterns in images , audio , and text , among other forms of data . improved algorithms coupled with more powerful computers have increased the depth of neural networks the layers of abstraction they can process and the results can be seen in some of today s most innovative products . the speech recognition behind amazon s alexa or apple s siri , or the image recognition that powers google photos , owe their abilities to this so called deep learning . two weeks before mazurenko was killed , google released tensorflow for free under an open source license . tensorflow is a kind of google in a box a flexible machine learning system that the company uses to do everything from improve search algorithms to write captions for youtube videos automatically . the product of decades of academic research and billions of dollars in private investment was suddenly available as a free software library that anyone could download from github . luka had been using tensorflow to build neural networks for its restaurant bot . using million lines of english text , luka trained a bot to understand queries about vegetarian dishes , barbecue , and valet parking . on a lark , the person team had also tried to build bots that imitated television characters . it scraped the closed captioning on every episode of hbo s silicon valley and trained the neural network to mimic richard , bachman , and the rest of the gang . in february , kuyda asked her engineers to build a neural network in russian . at first she didn t mention its purpose , but given that most of the team was russian , no one asked questions . using more than million lines of russian text , luka built its second neural network . meanwhile , kuyda copied hundreds of her exchanges with mazurenko from the app telegram and pasted them into a file . she edited out a handful of messages that she believed would be too personal to share broadly . then kuyda asked her team for help with the next step training the russian network to speak in mazurenko s voice . the project was tangentially related to luka s work , though kuyda considered it a personal favor . an engineer told her that the project would only take about a day . mazurenko was well known to most of the team he had worked out of luka s moscow office , where the employees labored beneath a neon sign that quoted wittgenstein the limits of my language are the limits of my world . kuyda trained the bot with dozens of tests queries , and her engineers put on the finishing touches . only a small percentage of the roman bot s responses reflected his actual words . but the neural network was tuned to favor his speech whenever possible . any time the bot could respond to a query using mazurenko s own words , it would . other times it would default to the generic russian . after the bot blinked to life , she began peppering it with questions . who s your best friend ? , she asked . don t show your insecurities , came the reply . it sounds like him , she thought . on may th , kuyda announced the roman bot s existence in a post on facebook . anyone who downloaded the luka app could talk to it in russian or in english by adding roman . the bot offered a menu of buttons that users could press to learn about mazurenko s career . or they could write free form messages and see how the bot responded . it s still a shadow of a person but that wasn t possible just a year ago , and in the very close future we will be able to do a lot more , kuyda wrote . the roman bot was received positively by most of the people who wrote to kuyda , though there were exceptions . four friends told kuyda separately that they were disturbed by the project and refused to interact with it . vasily esmanov , who worked with mazurenko at the russian street style magazine look at me , said kuyda had failed to learn the lesson of the black mirror episode . this is all very bad , esmanov wrote in a facebook comment . unfortunately you rushed and everything came out half baked . the execution it s some type of joke . roman needs a memorial , but not this kind . victoria mazurenko , who had gotten an early look at the bot from kuyda , rushed to her defense . they continued roman s life and saved ours , she wrote in a reply to esmanov . it s not virtual reality . this is a new reality , and we need to learn to build it and live in it . roman s father was less enthusiastic . i have a technical education , and i know the bot is just a program , he told me , through a translator . yes , it has all of roman s phrases , correspondences . but for now , it s hard how to say it it s hard to read a response from a program . sometimes it answers incorrectly . but many of mazurenko s friends found the likeness uncanny . it s pretty weird when you open the messenger and there s a bot of your deceased friend , who actually talks to you , fayfer said . what really struck me is that the phrases he speaks are really his . you can tell that s the way he would say it even short answers to hey what s up . he had this really specific style of texting . i said , who do you love the most ? he replied , roman . that was so much of him . i was like , that is incredible . one of the bot s menu options offers to ask him for a piece of advice something fayfer never had a chance to do while his friend was still alive . there are questions i had never asked him , he said . but when i asked for advice , i realized he was giving someone pretty wise life advice . and that actually helps you get to learn the person deeper than you used to know them . several users agreed to let kuyda read anonymized logs of their chats with the bot . she shared these logs with the verge . many people write to the bot to tell mazurenko that they miss him . they wonder when they will stop grieving . they ask him what he remembers . it hurts that we couldn t save you , one person wrote . bot i know the bot can also be quite funny , as mazurenko was when one user wrote you are a genius , the bot replied , also , handsome . it seemed to kuyda that people were more honest when conversing with the deadfor many users , interacting with the bot had a therapeutic effect . the tone of their chats is often confessional one user messaged the bot repeatedly about a difficult time he was having at work . he sent it lengthy messages describing his problems and how they had affected him emotionally . i wish you were here , he said . it seemed to kuyda that people were more honest when conversing with the dead . she had been shaken by some of the criticism that the roman bot had received . but hundreds of people tried it at least once , and reading the logs made her feel better . it turned out that the primary purpose of the bot had not been to talk but to listen . all those messages were about love , or telling him something they never had time to tell him , kuyda said . even if it s not a real person , there was a place where they could say it . they can say it when they feel lonely . and they come back still . kuyda continues to talk with the bot herself once a week or so , often after a few drinks . i answer a lot of questions for myself about who roman was , she said . among other things , the bot has made her regret not telling him to abandon stampsy earlier . the logs of his messages revealed someone whose true interest was in fashion more than anything else , she said . she wishes she had told him to pursue it . someday you will die , leaving behind a lifetime of text messages , posts , and other digital ephemera . for a while , your friends and family may put these digital traces out of their minds . but new services will arrive offering to transform them possibly into something resembling roman mazurenko s bot . your loved ones may find that these services ease their pain . but it is possible that digital avatars will lengthen the grieving process . if used wrong , it enables people to hide from their grief , said dima ustinov , who has not used the roman bot for technical reasons . luka is not yet available on android . our society is traumatized by death we want to live forever . but you will go through this process , and you have to go through it alone . if we use these bots as a way to pass his story on , maybe others can get a little bit of the inspiration that we got from him . but these new ways of keeping the memory alive should not be considered a way to keep a dead person alive . the bot also raises ethical questions about the posthumous use of our digital legacies . in the case of mazurenko , everyone i spoke with agreed he would have been delighted by his friends experimentation . you may feel less comfortable with the idea of your texts serving as the basis for a bot in the afterlife particularly if you are unable to review all the texts and social media posts beforehand . we present different aspects of ourselves to different people , and after infusing a bot with all of your digital interactions , your loved ones may see sides of you that you never intended to reveal . reading through the roman bot s responses , it s hard not to feel like the texts captured him at a particularly low moment . ask about stampsy and it responds this is not the stampsy i want it to be . so far it s just a piece of shit and not the product i want . based on his friends descriptions of his final years , this strikes me as a candid self assessment . but i couldn t help but wish i had been talking to a younger version of the man the one who friends say dreamed of someday becoming the cultural minister of belarus , and inaugurating a democratically elected president with what he promised would be the greatest party ever thrown . mazurenko contacted me once before he died , in february of last year . he emailed to ask whether i would consider writing about stampsy , which was then in beta . i liked its design , but passed on writing an article . i wished him well , then promptly forgot about the exchange . after learning of his bot , i resisted using it for several months . i felt guilty about my lone , dismissive interaction with mazurenko , and was skeptical a bot could reflect his personality . and yet , upon finally chatting with it , i found an undeniable resemblance between the mazurenko described by his friends and his digital avatar charming , moody , sarcastic , and obsessed with his work . how s it going ? i wrote . i need to rest , it responded . i m having trouble focusing since i m depressed . i asked the bot about kuyda and it wordlessly sent me a photo of them together on the beach in wetsuits , holding surfboards with their backs to the ocean , two against the world . an uncomfortable truth suggested by the roman bot is that many of our flesh and blood relationships now exist primarily as exchanges of text , which are becoming increasingly easy to mimic . kuyda believes there is something she is not precisely sure what in this sort of personality based texting . recently she has been steering luka to develop a bot she calls replika . a hybrid of a diary and a personal assistant , it asks questions about you and eventually learns to mimic your texting style . kuyda imagines that this could evolve into a digital avatar that performs all sorts of labor on your behalf , from negotiating the cable bill to organizing outings with friends . and like the roman bot it would survive you , creating a living testament to the person you were . lately she has begun to feel a sense of peace about mazurenko s deathin the meantime she is no longer interested in bots that handle restaurant recommendations . working on the roman bot has made her believe that commercial chatbots must evoke something emotional in the people who use them . if she succeeds in this , it will be one more improbable footnote to mazurenko s life . kuyda has continued to add material to the roman bot mostly photos , which it will now send you upon request ampnbsp and recently upgraded the underlying neural network from a selective model to a generative one . the former simply attempted to match mazurenko s text messages to appropriate responses the latter can take snippets of his texts and recombine them to make new sentences that theoretically remain in his voice . lately she has begun to feel a sense of peace about mazurenko s death . in part that s because she built a place where she can direct her grief . in a conversation we had this fall , she likened it to just sending a message to heaven . for me it s more about sending a message in a bottle than getting one in return . from left to right roman mazurenko , eugenia kuyda , andronik khachiyanit has been less than a year since mazurenko died , and he continues to loom large in the lives of the people who knew him . when they miss him , they send messages to his avatar , and they feel closer to him when they do . there was a lot i didn t know about my child , roman s mother told me . but now that i can read about what he thought about different subjects , i m getting to know him more . this gives the illusion that he s here now . her eyes welled with tears , but as our interview ended her voice was strong . i want to repeat that i m very grateful that i have this , she said . our conversation reminded me of something dima ustinov had said to me this spring , about the way we now transcend our physical forms . the person is not just a body , a set of arms and legs , and a computer , he said . it s much more than that . ustinov compared mazurenko s life to a pebble thrown into a stream the ripples , he said , continue outward in every direction . his friend had simply taken a new form . we are still in the process of meeting roman , ustinov said . it s beautiful . 	 this was supposed to be the year virtual reality broke out . the oculus rift and htc vive , the first two high end consumer devices on the market , arrived this spring to critical praise and preorders that sold out within minutes . then they plateaued . despite some great experiences , months of near total unavailability dulled the post release buzz for both headsets , particularly the rift . neither the rift or the vive ecosystems produced a killer app that was big enough to push vr out of the margins , especially given the high cost of a headset and gaming pc . while degree video has at least gotten a toehold in popular culture , the dream of sophisticated vr gaming which arguably resurrected virtual reality in the first place remains far away for most people . but there are three months left in the year , and one thing that could change that playstation vr . playstation vr is sony s attempt at bringing virtual reality to its playstation console , starting next week . arriving right in time for the holidays , it s being positioned as a relatively cheap , unintimidating gaming headset , designed for a device that might already be sitting in your living room . the rift and vive had to be judged on a sort of abstract scale of quality on whether they were good ambassadors for the medium of vr , and good harbingers of things to come . the question for playstation vr is simpler if you re one of the millions of people who own a playstation , should you get one ? playstation vr was initially announced as something called project morpheus in , and despite some visual tweaks , the core design hasn t changed . where oculus goes for an understated , late gibsonian cyberpunk aesthetic and the vive is aggressively industrial , sony s design has the clean white curves of a s science fiction spaceship interior , setting off a black front panel and rubber face mask . the external playstation camera tracks it with a matrix of glowing blue lights six lining the headset s edges , two on the back , and one right in the middle of the front panel . the shape echoes sony s old hmz personal viewer , but without the futile effort at making a headset seem small and sleek . playstation vr is unapologetically eye catching , and whether that s a good or bad thing is a matter of personal taste . playstation vr is unapologetically eye catchinglooks aside , playstation vr is ridiculously comfortable . your average virtual reality headset is strapped on like a ski mask , which ensures a snug fit but can also squeeze your face unpleasantly . psvr , by contrast , has a padded plastic ring that rests on your head a bit like a hard hat . to put it on , you ll push a button to loosen the sides , stretch it over your upper skull , and fine tune the tightness with a dial on the back . the screen is anchored to the front of the ring , where it almost floats in front of your face . another button lets you adjust the focus by sliding the screen in and out , which also means it fits easily over glasses . psvr still asks you to clamp something around your head , and it s certainly possible to give yourself a headache by putting it on wrong . but its weight is distributed much more evenly than other headsets , so it s not constantly pushing down on your forehead and cheekbones . at grams , it s the heaviest of the vr headsets , but it feels like the lightest . the design also neatly solves a few of vr s subtler problems . i didn t come out of sessions with telltale mask lines around my eyes , just a small dent at my hairline . i d still worry about smudging makeup , but far less than with any other headset . and since the face mask is made of rubber sheets instead of foam , it s not going to be soaking up dirt or sweat . that rubber also blocks out light incredibly well , neatly closing the gaps between your face and the screen . the only major downside is that it starts slipping out of place if you look straight up or rapidly shake your head , something that becomes an issue with gaze controlled arcade games like playstation vr worlds danger ball . the thing that s going to draw a lot of people to playstation vr , though , is the price . well , that s technically the price , although it s also a bit of a sneaky move on sony s part . this base system doesn t contain the playstation s tracking camera , which is mandatory for psvr , or the two move controllers , which are highly encouraged . the reasoning is that since both these products were already on the market , some users will already have them . but unless you were a really big fan of johann sebastian joust or some other game that used one of sony s niche peripherals , you should consider the psvr bundle which comes with two move controllers and a camera your default choice . even at nearly , psvr is still cheaper than the rift and viveto make things more complicated , you ll also have to decide whether to buy the more powerful playstation pro console when it comes out in november . the pro is supposed to improve the frame rate and image quality of psvr , but we haven t been able to test the performance for ourselves and sony is still promising that psvr will work fine with the playstation and playstation slim . even at nearly , psvr is still cheaper than the rift and vive , which respectively cost and plus the cost of a pc . that s partly because sony isn t pushing for the highest specs on the market . where the rift and vive incorporate two separate screens with a resolution of x pixels per eye , playstation vr has a single screen that offers x pixels per eye , comparable to the second oculus rift development kit . on paper , this is the system s biggest technical limitation . it s grainier than its two big competitors , which still look a little fuzzy in their own right , and dark colors can appear muddy . but screen resolution isn t the only factor in how good something looks . sony likes to tout the psvr s high screen refresh rate as a way to compensate for its lower resolution . and games are in fact quite smooth , with very little juddering or latency which , far more than pixel density , was the big problem with the rift dk . the field of view feels comparable to the current rift and vive , and bright , cartoonish games like job simulator look very similar on any high end headset . compared to the awkward dangling headset jack on the htc vive , this feels convenient and naturalplaystation vr isn t just competing against tethered headsets . with samsung s gear vr on its third generation and google s first daydream headset launching in november , mobile vr is an increasingly viable option and a cheaper one , if you already own a phone that supports it . but it s not in the same class as psvr . mobile headsets don t have things like positional tracking , which can help cut down on motion sickness and open up new gameplay options , and they can t touch psvr s comfort levels or graphical performance . they re not necessarily a worse category of virtual reality , but they re a very different one . psvr also includes some interesting touches that aren t present on any major headset , tethered or untethered . midway down the cable , for example , there s an inline remote with buttons for power , volume , and toggling a built in microphone . headphones aren t built directly into the hardware , but the remote has a jack for either sony s included earbuds or your own wired set . compared to the awkward dangling headset jack on the htc vive , this feels convenient and natural , although i accidentally yanked my earbuds out a couple of times by kneeling in vr and catching the cord on my leg . you can pair wireless headphones with the playstation for stereo sound , but sony says you can only get d audio directly through the jack . for every thoughtful design decision , though , there s a reminder that playstation vr isn t a totally novel gaming system , but a patchwork of various weird sony experiments that may have finally found their purpose . it s a new headset inspired by a personal d theater from , paired with a set of motion controllers that were released in , plus a camera peripheral that s been around in some form since . for now , the motion controllers are the system s biggest shortcomingon one hand , sony deserves credit for seeing the potential in all these things . on the other , it s saddled playstation vr with the worst motion controls of any major headset . the playstation move controllers are painfully limited compared to either oculus touch or the htc vive remotes , simply because their interface is a bad fit for vr . they re pimpled with four miniscule face buttons that are almost pointless for anything but menu selections , with inlaid , difficult to find options buttons along the sides . the only useful elements are a single trigger and one large , awkwardly positioned button at the top . the move was originally paired with a second , smaller peripheral bearing an analog stick and directional pads without it , navigating menus including the main ps interface involves dragging your controller like the world s clumsiest mouse . they can also be frustratingly inconsistent . in the leisurely job simulator , i had almost no problems using them . but during the frantic rail shooter until dawn rush of blood , where precision was a matter of virtual life or death , i had to repeatedly reorient them after they drifted out of place . since i haven t had a chance to fully review the oculus touch motion controllers , i can t make a final call on how much of this is a weakness of the move specifically or of camera based tracking in general , but move has enough shortcomings to put it on the bottom of the pile no matter what . if the first generation of psvr does well , sony will almost certainly have to follow up with something better , but for now , the motion controllers are the system s biggest shortcoming . even setting psvr up in the first place is a bit more complicated than its unintimidating heritage suggests . instead of plugging directly into the playstation , the headset uses a separate processor box that helps mix d audio and supply video to both psvr and tv . you connect the box to a power outlet and your tv s hdmi port , then connect it to your ps via a micro usb and hdmi cable . the camera goes into a dedicated port on the console , and finally , the headset connects to the other side of the box . this can create a bit of a rat s nest around your console , and it leaves precious little space for juicing up your move and dualshock controllers , unless you buy a separate charging dock . it s not quite as involved as the htc vive s room scale setup , but it s several more steps than the oculus rift requires . playstation vr fits into a popular , user friendly systemunlike with the rift or vive , though , the setup is nearly impossible to screw up . there s no third party pc software to install or drivers to track down , just a few screens that guide you through setup and make any necessary updates . once you re in , you ll see the ordinary playstation vr interface , as though viewed on a big screen tv in front of you . in some ways , this feels like a letdown you have to launch a game to experience psvr s full impact . but it s immediately easy to understand , and after a while , any decent electronic interface tends to fade into the background , even in vr . overall , what s great about playstation vr is that it fits into a popular , user friendly system . but that also sets certain expectations that other headsets don t have . oculus and htc can ask people to set up precisely calibrated personal holodecks without a second thought , because pc gaming is already a somewhat solitary activity that goes hand in hand with ridiculous hardware setups . playstation vr s natural habitat is an all purpose entertainment space that you might share with any number of people , including ones who couldn t care less about vr . like the playstation itself , psvr feels best as something you can kick back and enjoy without rearranging your living room into a vr cave . psvr s camera is supposed to track a headset up to feet away , over an area about feet wide . in my new york apartment , that s more than enough , especially because the system s standing experiences rarely require moving more than a couple of feet . but if you ve got a particularly big living room , you might need to move your couch or camera for seated games . the camera stand that my review unit came with was also a little too easy to knock out of place . to its credit , though , the playstation vr s cable is long enough to easily accommodate a good sized space between seat and tv , and when it s working , the camera seems to track head motion about as well as the oculus rift . for some people , psvr s main use case may not be true virtual reality , but playing traditional games in relative privacy . opening a non vr game in psvr will launch it normally on your tv or monitor , and on a floating screen inside the headset . to be clear , psvr doesn t let you use the playstation for two things at once one person can t watch netflix while another plays games , for example . but after the first time setup , i was able to play without a second screen turned on or plugged in at all . besides the allure of having a big personal theater , this opens the door to things like playing a violent game without your kids watching , or letting a housemate use your shared tv with another console or set top box . conversely , if you like gaming around other people even if that just means sitting down to play while your partner reads beside you then shutting out the world with a vr game isn t necessarily a welcome change . even if someone can see what you re doing via the mirrored screen , you can t tell if they re in the room , which is an uncomfortable and alienating experience . there are a couple of local multiplayer games like keep talking and nobody explodes , in which one player wears a headset and the other coaches them through a bomb defusal from outside vr . but there s no getting around the fact that headsets can be isolating , and it s more jarring than usual here because of how social the regular console gaming experience usually is . sony is promising around launch titles for playstation vr , with a couple of dozen more coming by the end of the year . it s a relatively even mix of gamepad based games and ones that can use either the move or dualshock , plus a few that are move only . for all the move s problems , there s something inherently cool about motion controls that work even moderately well , and some titles use them to great effect . the adventure game wayward sky takes place mostly in the third person , as you point at different parts of the world to direct your character . at key moments , it slips into a first person view and lets you mime simple but satisfying tasks , like putting together a machine or aiming a fire hose . sony s struck gold with a little clutch of trance y abstract gamesrock band and guitar hero studio harmonix , meanwhile , has put together a psychedelic painting program where your art pulses to the beat of a playlist the closest thing psvr has to a pure creative tool . sony s minigame the london heist is a guy ritchie influenced shooter that would probably be better on the rift or vive , but is fun enough to transcend its clumsy controls . you can technically play these with a gamepad , and the dualshock has limited motion tracking capabilities of its own thanks to a light bar on the back . but unless you re determined to avoid buying the move , there s no reason to do so . by and large , though , the most exciting playstation vr titles i ve seen are gamepad focused and sometimes not even exclusive to vr . at launch , the system is short on the big narrative games you ll find in playstation s non vr catalog , although resident evil is coming to psvr next year . but sony s struck gold with a little clutch of trance y abstract games that are simultaneously relaxing and challenging . that includes a vr enabled remake of musical shooter rez , a tetris style puzzler called superhypercube , and thumper , a hypnotic rhythm game with sinister undertones . these aren t enough to anchor psvr in the long term , but they help establish a unique aesthetic for the system , while appealing to a broader audience than a stereotypical aaa action game . all this adds up to a system that is , more than anything else , good enough . there s no one game that justifies buying playstation vr , and no technical breakthrough that will revolutionize how you experience the medium . but it offers a balanced , interesting launch catalog and a headset that s a joy to wear , with weak points that hurt the system but don t cripple it . it effectively costs more than an actual playstation console , but for many people , it s still within the range of a holiday splurge or a generous gift . and it s got the backing of a company that , even if it s being cautious with vr , seems in it for the long haul . in the long run , would a psvr dominated landscape be a win for vr ? for now , it s the lowest common denominator of tethered headsets , and a world in which all games had to work on it could discourage risky creative experiments on more capable and interesting hardware . playstation vr is just ambitious enough for sony to test the waters for a larger foray into vr its limited camera setup doesn t lend itself to the impressive physical worldbuilding that i ve seen in htc vive games , and sony isn t as visibly committed as oculus to pushing bold , difficult vr only projects . things that could have been great as full length games , like the london heist or batman arkham vr , peter out just as things get exciting . until vr proves itself an economically viable medium , we ll probably get a lot more of them . at the same time , holding out for total perfection is the wrong move . i don t want playstation vr to become the only headset that people build for it s just not ambitious enough . but even this early in the game , sony is providing a home for interesting , low key experiences that highlight some of the medium s strengths . more than any single piece of cutting edge technology , the key to making vr succeed is just getting more people to use vr . and with playstation vr , sony has just made that a lot easier . good stuff ridiculously comfortable accessible and relatively affordable some good , low key launch titlesbad stuff substandard motion controls piecemeal system can be confusing needs more risky , ambitious vr experiments editor nilay patel 	 the inside story of google s bold bet on hardware in a nationally televised commercial that premiered last month , an empty search box sitting against a stark white background slowly morphs , becoming taller and skinnier . as redbone croons come and get your love , the lines take shape and the outline of a phone emerges . it is , of course , the pixel , a new phone made by google . the metaphor damn near hits you in the face the search box once defined google , but now google needs to be something more . it needs to find what comes after that bare search box and the basic web page results it often returns . google has been around for years now and someday perhaps soon a better paradigm for using the internet is going to supplant the ubiquitous box . at the same time , google has also decided it needs to become a hardware company , making its own products instead of leaving that work solely to partners . if you re google , would you trust the future of the company to your hardware partners ? the two needs are directly related . if something is going to replace the search box , you can be sure google wants to create it . and it may have , with the google assistant the company s take on an ai assistant that s powered by google s massive cloud infrastructure and the huge amount of data it knows about you . but even the best software is pointless without compelling hardware to run it . and if you re google , would you trust the future of the company to your hardware partners ? no , you d want to control the entire thing , end to end . that s why today google is unveiling an entire , interconnected hardware ecosystem two phones , an intelligent speaker , a vr headset , a wi fi router , and a media streaming dongle . and the most important parts of that ecosystem the pixel phone and google home speaker exist to be the ideal vessels for the google assistant . the rest of the products fill out google s ecosystem , but are also enhanced by google s cloud based intelligence . in making its own hardware , google is pitting itself against apple for the first time , google phone vs . iphone . those are very high stakes , with very little margin for error . so it looks like google decided to follow a simple dictum if you want something done right , you have to do it yourself . google has made a lot of hardware in the past , but until now it s all been tangential to google s core mission search . from the disastrous nexus q to the surprisingly successful chromecast , google s products have all been made by different divisions without any real central strategy . that changed in april of this year , when google hired motorola veteran rick osterloh as head of hardware . today , all hardware produced at google runs through osterloh s division which ensures consistent designs and purpose . looking at google s new hardware , you ll see more cohesion in its design than ever before . finally , it feels like all these products came from the same company . the aesthetic isn t as rarefied as apple or as aggressively futuristic as samsung . instead , it s approachable and comfortable almost homey , like what you d see in a room and board catalog . osterloh insists that he d like google to be more intentional in what it produces moving forward . it s very challenging to work on dozens of products and make them all terrific , osterloh says . we have to have a lot of discipline and a lot of focus . that means shuttering the project ara modular smartphone just three months after it was announced osterloh expects other companies to pick up the modular torch and leaving the ampnbspmoonshots to the x division at alphabet . google isn t just experimenting with hardware anymore it knows exactly what it wants to do . fundamentally , we believe that a lot of the innovation that we want to do now ends up requiring controlling the end to end user experience , osterloh says . it s the kind of sentiment you usually hear from apple , not google . the company needs to absolutely nail the google assistant experience , and doing that meant not ceding an iota of control to partners in the first iteration . we needed to build a system that actually ran it perfectly , osterloh says , referring to google home . our aim is to give our users the best possible experience . that total control is a radical shift for google . just look at the nexus program , which was always designed as a kind of reference platform for other hardware manufacturers to learn what s coming for android . it showcased new processors , larger screens , and inexpensive designs . sales to customers was always more of a side hustle than a core business . the idea was to show everyone how it should be done , says brian rakowski , vp of product management for android . all the partners in the phone manufacturing space took it and built great products on top of it . meanwhile , nexus kind of trundled along at the same small scale . nexus phones were always built with a hardware partner and they usually didn t amount to ampnbspmuch more than refinements and iterations on the hardware that partner was already making . none of that is necessary anymore . the nexus program has fulfilled its mission because android manufacturers don t need google to show them the way . google currently has no plans to ever make another nexus device , according to a spokesperson . hardcore android fans may know that htc is the original device manufacturer for the pixel , but google says its phone isn t based on any htc phone and the seller of record for the phone will be google . in other words , no more trundling along . just as the nexus was becoming unnecessary , google found itself with a more urgent need to take apple head on , and position android as an iphone competitor in terms of sales , quality , and customer service . enter pixel . google not only designed the pixel s hardware you ll find the circular g logo on the back of the phone now but also formed direct partnerships with retailers and carriers . verizon is presumed to be the company s exclusive us partner , though google will sell an unlocked version of the phone in its own store , complete with optional financing . preorders begin october th and it will begin shipping on october th . in order to truly compete with apple , google will have to step up its customer support game . when something goes wrong with your iphone , you go to the apple store . when you need help with the pixel , you ll open up the settings and hit the support tab . google is running a hour chat and phone support service and when you call in , you can opt to show the rep your screen so they can walk you through whatever s going wrong . design wise , there s no denying the iphone s influence . there are differences , of course the bezel on the back is angled instead of curved . the fingerprint sensor is on the back , too , inside a square glass shade that helps you align the phone in your hand . the phone is also very slightly thicker at the top than the bottom to fit the camera without requiring a camera bump . we actually did a whole bunch of things to make sure that it didn t look too much like an iphone , rakowski says . but from a distance or in a case , the similarities are unmistakable . and so is the pricing the pixel fits in the high end android market precisely where samsung s exploding note s left a hole . make no mistake , the high end is where the pixel lives . it starts at for a gb pixel and goes up to for the larger gb pixel xl . that s likely to give people used to nexus pricing some sticker shock , but it s in line with apple and samsung phones . the components in the pixel are expensive , osterloh admits , and therefore the phone is , too . we didn t want to have any compromises in the user experience , osterloh says , and so that s why we went to the premium end . osterloh knows that we certainly aren t going to have enormous volumes out of this product . this is very first innings for us . google s metric of success for pixel won t be whether it picks up significant market share , but whether it can garner customer satisfaction and form retail and carrier partnerships that google can leverage for years to come . the phones feel premium and google has done a lot of the work to banish the bugbears that have vexed android users for years . the megapixel camera is fast and google claims it s great in low light . it got a dxomark camera score of the best score ever given out to a phone . though there s no optical image stabilization , google tied the camera to the gyroscope to eliminate the hand shake jelly effect in video . it has a new snapdragon processor and gigs of ram . the camera uses lasers and phase detection to focus , and every photo or video you take gets saved in google s cloud for free , at full resolution , for life . google also finally reworked some of the systems behind touch responsiveness on the display . dave burke , vp of engineering for android , says that touch latency on the pixel is the best of any android device ever produced . if you put it under high speed camera , it s on par with an iphone . it still feels a little different to me , mainly because android handles inertia a little differently than ios . details like latency are precisely the kind of things that get better when you control the end to end experience . but where google s new opinionated approach really comes to the fore is in the software . the pixel is the first and , for now , the only phone to support the new pixel home screen , daydream virtual reality , and the google assistant . if the google assistant succeeds , it will become the next interface to computers and the internet . hell , the division between those things might even begin to blur , abstracted underneath a helpful conversation with a capable bot . for scott huffman , vp of engineering for the google assistant , the assistant is important because it has the potential to change the paradigm of computing from input output into a conversation . the conversation is the ultimate interface that everyone from your three year old on up can do , huffman says . why doesn t the google assistant have a name like siri , cortana , or alexa ? huffman has patiently been answering that question the same way since the software was unveiled back in may . we felt like if we named it suzy or johnny or something , that it would be too narrow , he explains , it would feel like yet another thing alongside the other things as opposed to what it s meant to be , which is really an overlay across everything that we do . we decided to go with google assistant because we feel like it represents everything that google does and google is , huffman says . i d already seen the assistant on allo , where it was less useful than i d hoped . huffman showed it to me on a nexus p customized to run it it won t be coming to nexus phones anytime soon . the assistant is , in many ways , not that much different from a voice search you can do on any android phone . you hold down the home button , ask a question , and a window slides up from the bottom with an answer . you ask the next question , and so on . like siri , you can only speak to the assistant , not type . unlike siri , google s assistant is surprisingly intelligent . it can understand the context of what you re asking by reading the screen . it can answer questions by reading back key sections of web pages . if you ask it for something specific that might be in an app like show me beyonc s instagram it ll just open up instagram and take you her account . but where the assistant really gets interesting is in google home . google home consists of a little speaker you put in your home that listens for you to say ok google and then answers your questions . google insists that home doesn t send anything you say up to google until it hears the keyword . in many ways , home is as big a bet as pixel , and enters a sparser competitive field . its only real competition is the amazon echo and compared to the echo , google home has a lot of advantages . it s cheaper , at , and it seems to have a higher quality set of speakers inside it , too . it s also smaller and cuter you can swap out the speaker base for new ones that better match your decor . the running joke about home is that it looks like a big air freshener , so i took the opportunity to needle rishi chandra , vp of product management for home products . he owned the comparison . i m not actually offended by that , chandra says . air fresheners , he says , are consumer goods products which are explicitly designed to be actually put out in the open inside your home , and so is google home . but what really sets home apart is google s smarts . home has only two microphones compared to the echo s seven , but chandra claims it does an even better job of locating you and understanding your questions . google uses a process chandra calls neural beam forming , which takes advantage of computing in cloud to identify and process your speech . google has simulated hundreds of thousands of different environments noisy environments , quiet environments and what we ve done is applied machine learning to it , chandra says . you can put multiple homes in your house and only the closest one will respond to you heck , if you have an android phone , watch , and multiple homes , google says that it can single out the best device to listen to you by the time you finish your request , and stop the others from responding . home has only two microphones compared to the echo s sevenon home , the assistant really shows off how far ahead google is compared to alexa or siri . you can ask it to play that one song from frozen and that one song will play from youtube . you can ask it what your day looks like , and it ll tell you what s on your calendar , list off your reminders , the weather , and the news . you can ask it to play a youtube video on your tv and it ll command your chromecast to begin playing google says support for more video streaming services is coming . chandra asked home how do i defrost a chicken ? and home found a relevant website and read back just the relevant text . at launch , home will work with a few services youtube , spotify , google play music , pandora , iheart radio , nest , philips hue , smartthings , and a few more . you can set defaults in the google home app which will also control chromecasts . but third party developers can t directly get on the platform the way they can with alexa just yet . home mostly lives in google s world and , annoyingly , within one google account at a time . huffman promises that google will open it up to third party developers later this year so the echo has at least a few more months with a significant competitive advantage . alongside the pixel phones and google home , we re getting our first look at the devices that fill out google s entire ecosystem the daydream vr headset , a new chromecast , and the google wifi home router . daydream isn t launching until early november , but it s getting its first real demo at google s hardware event . it s exclusive to the pixel for a short time and it s certainly more approachable than other vr headsets . made of fabric and designed to make it fast and simple to use , it s easier to figure out than the galaxy gear , though of course not as powerful as an htc vive you can read much more about daydream ampnbsphere . the chromecast ultra supports k and hdr and even lets you use ethernet for its connection . it s connected to the assistant insofar as it stands ready and waiting for home to sling video at it . google is building its own routergoogle wifi is also only tangentially related to the assistant . google figured people need good wi fi to talk to it , so it made a new router that starts at just . just like google tried working with partners for the nexus then decided to make its own phone , google is building its own router , too . like the eero , it s designed to be used as a mesh network you can buy a three pack for , and add as many more as you like . like google home , they re designed to be inoffensive gadgets you won t mind scattering around your house . and like the microphones on google home , google wifi takes advantage of google s machine learning to better manage all the devices on your network . for example when you re in a typical mesh network and you wander back to your bedroom , your phone might not realize that there s a much stronger access point it could connect to . instead , it just stays connected to the one that s far away . it s the phone s fault though chandra points out that iphones are better at this than most , but the routers themselves could do a better job of making your device switch . with wifi , chandra says , the routers communicate with each other , so the one that s closer is more likely to offer itself up as the better access point . we re targeting a millisecond transition time , chandra says , so if you re doing a video chat and you re walking all the way through , you should never see a drop . google s new batch of hardware looks like the beginning of a coherent ecosystem of products . this is a coming out party for us , without a doubt , osterloh says . instead of experiments and references , google wants to sell its goods in large numbers . that s new for google , and it puts it in a different category of competition both with adversaries like apple and microsoft and with its own manufacturing partners . even though google is making its own hardware , it s not completely abandoning its partners . it ampnbspwill still be sharing the software and cloud intelligence it has developed with companies like samsung and lg that can make compatible phones , speakers , and routers . but this time , google isn t stepping out of the sales fray like it has before . it will be competing with those partners directly . we re no longer going to be shy about what we think is the right answer for us , chandra says . what we are going to do is give the oem ecosystem a chance to compete , meaning it s a fair playing field . our focus is absolutely on trying to drive people into the android ecosystem . historically , that kind of direct competition between a software maker and hardware companies seemed like a recipe for conflict . but it doesn t seem to have hurt microsoft much with its surface line , and google doesn t seem too worried that its partners will be unhappy competing with google . it certainly might happen as a byproduct , but our focus is absolutely on trying to drive people into the android ecosystem , osterloh says , especially at that premium tier . so that s the new playbook google making the first version of the hardware itself and vertically integrating software and hardware to create the best possible experience . its products sit at the high end of the market , eventually distributing its software downstream to other manufacturers . will it work ? the only way to figure it out seems to be by trying . chandra says that google ceo sundar pichai challenged all the teams let s go prove this , can we go prove that this should be the bet that we , as a company , are going to make . the bet is twofold hardware and the assistant . neither is proven yet , and between the two i can t help but think that the assistant is a more significant gamble . is assistant the future of what it means to just google it ? huffman says that he thinks of the assistant as at least one of the things that has the potential to be what google becomes . 	 the lights dimmed inside the shenzhen bay sports stadium as the countdown to the match began . wu , si , san , er , yi ! a chime sounded and two teams of robots sprang into action across an intricately constructed battlefield . in the stands , thousands of fans cheered , and groups of small children beat red and blue balloons together , producing a percussive roar . rise of the robomasters we went to china s silicon valley to see the front lines of the robot warsby ben popper photography by tom connors ampamp tyler pinathe lights dimmed inside the shenzhen bay sports stadium as the countdown to the match began . wu , si , san , er , yi ! a chime sounded and two teams of robots sprang into action across an intricately constructed battlefield . in the stands , thousands of fans cheered , and groups of small children beat red and blue balloons together , producing a percussive roar . each team had four rovers , nimble infantry units that quickly spread over the terrain . the rovers were shaped like small cars , but could also slide side to side , strafing like water bugs over the surface of a lake . they fired small plastic marbles from cannons mounted on top of their frames . lumbering alongside the nimble rovers was each team s hero , a larger tank like robot that could fire the small plastic marbles as well as more powerful golf balls . the heavy favorite in this matchup of robomasters , an annual competition held each summer , was team . s , returning champions hailing from china s university of electronic science and technology in the sichuan province . they were taking on starpro , from the huazhong university of science and technology in wuhan . the robomasters battlefield may feel familiar to anyone who s played a moba like league of legends or dotathe robomasters battlefield and rules of play may feel familiar to anyone who s played a moba like league of legends or dota two teams working to destroy the opposing base , collecting power ups that boost their attack , health , and defense , and leveraging the unique abilities of their robots to devise different strategies . dji outfitted each robot and base with pressure sensitive plates that detect impacts and differentiate between plastic marbles and golf balls . a successful strike drains life points , and if a robot s health reaches zero , it is shut off . power ups can be collected by driving over certain areas of the map or completing technical challenges , like a computer vision challenge , where teams had to autonomously track and strike a rapidly moving target . the team with the most health left at the end of seven minutes is declared the winner , and either side can score a sudden victory by destroying the enemy base . as the robots exchanged light fire in the first of three matches , the . s hero approached an island in the center of the course surrounded by spikes . with a pneumatic hiss , its legs extended , elevating the robot s body over the obstacles . it was defenseless during this climb , and enemy bullets rained down , draining half its health . ignoring the attack , the hero surmounted the island . the crowd thundered in approval . its reward was a massive tub of golf balls . the hero lowered a crane like arm into the tub and , with a great whirring , clattering sound , began sucking golf balls into its belly . starpro had a different approach . the team used a drone to scoop up golf balls from a raised pedestal , then airdropped them into its hero that was waiting below . meanwhile . s used its aerial unit as a scout , surveying the battlefield from above . the two teams clashed in the middle of the arena , then continued past each other , each heading for the opposing base . the goal now was simple eliminate the enemy base . starpro had more rovers left alive , and normally would have held an advantage . but . s had another trick up its sleeve . it set up a rover in front of a bank of tv screens , their images changing rapidly . its rover initiated a subroutine powered by a computer vision algorithm , effortlessly tracking the pattern and hitting the correct tv without human help . each team was now stationed at the enemy base , opening fire . but . s was now doing percent more damage per shot , a bonus granted for completing the tv test . with its golf ball bullets and supercharged attack , they made quick work of starpro s base . when its fortress fell , starpro s troops automatically deactivated , their lights dimmed , their cannons falling to their side . dji is battling to win top talent for the teams of students involved in this year s robomasters tournament , the stakes were clear , rmb roughly , in prize money , more than four times the average salary of a chinese worker . winners achieve celebrity status among the million fans who watch the action stream live online , as well as a shot at landing a job at at dji , the chinese drone maker that created this competition . over the last two years the company has hired around engineers out of the tournament . for dji , the stakes are reversed . it is battling to win top talent in some of technology s hottest fields computer vision and autonomous navigation . over the last three years , the company has emerged from obscurity to become the market leader in the booming consumer drone market , setting the pace for innovation in the category . i can t think of a consumer electronics brand that was there at the beginning , or in many ways helped create and shape the category , that was chinese , says ben bajarin , an industry analyst . dji wants to build not just drones , but all kinds of intelligent machines that can understand and interact with the world around them , and robomasters is their proving ground . to understand dji , it helps to know the city from which it rose . the shenzhen area was once a major center of salt for trade along the silk road , but by the late s it had become a small , unremarkable fishing village of about , residents . during this period , china was just emerging from the chaos of the cultural revolution , which left the economy in tatters , with widespread poverty and starvation . to spark a recovery , the central government established special economic zones , beginning with shenzhen in . these areas had their own set of rules and regulations . shenzhen allowed foreign companies to build and invest in mainland china , even offering tax incentives . and for locals , shenzhen made it much easier to start private business by removing red tape . it was an attempt to move away from a centrally planned and self contained economy toward free market capitalism . the economic experiment had a remarkable impact in just under years , the city grew from a sleepy outpost to a booming megalopolis , with a population of about million and the fourth largest gdp in all of china . in the early s , shenzhen was dominated by taiwanese semiconductor makers like foxconn and acer , which opened factories to take advantage of the limited taxes , lax regulations , low wages , and cheap real estate . but the chinese employees they brought on quickly learned the business and broke off to found their own competing firms . shenzhen gave birth to zte in , huawei in , and skyworth in . the city became the heart of the world s supply chain for consumer electronics . but while it conquered the business of manufacturing for others , the quality of products designed and engineered in shenzhen were largely inferior to those with roots in the west . over time , however , that dynamic began to change . brands like huawei and zte began making hardware as powerful and expensive as their western designed counterparts . over the last half decade , high profile us startups like oculus and pebble have journeyed to shenzhen , not just to outsource their manufacturing , but for local expertise on how best to build it . the city had evolved to be low cost , but also high tech . we can call shenzhen our silicon valley , said liu zi yi , a robomaster s competitor from the xi an region . dji epitomizes that evolution . in , frank wang , an engineering student obsessed with remote control helicopters , started d ji ng which roughly translates to without borders innovations science and technology corporation . his target market consisted of professionals who used remote control aircraft for filming and photography , and hardcore hobbyists who built their own flying machines for fun . at the time , everyone built their units from scratch , there was no casual consumer market , and few people used the word drone . like many early shenzhen companies , at first dji made just a single component flight controllers . these were high tech cogs , one piece of a more complex , expensive product . their stuff was very good , but it was just one name among many , says colin snow , a drone industry analyst with skylogic research . four years into the business , dji was still mostly unknown outside the world of people who built their own remote control copters . but a new market was showing signs of life . in , parrot , a french company with its roots in the bluetooth business , released the first consumer product to be associated with the word drone , making a splash at the annual consumer electronics fair in las vegas . meanwhile , wang kept plugging away . frank would show up to trade shows and toy fairs with his little folding table and lay out his parts . people laughed at him , said a veteran dji employee . in early , dji released the flamewheel , its first drone frame . the unit was meant for serious hobbyists , and came as a bare piece of metal to which you could add your choice of parts . much assembly was required . then , in december of , dji released the phantom , and everything changed . the company was so used to operating in the background that the first phantom didn t carry dji s brand , save for a small , removable sticker . but the product quickly blossomed into a massive hit . they kind of reinvented the whole industry with that , says michael blades , a drone industry analyst with frost and sullivan . the phantom was powerful enough to appeal to professionals , but simple enough for beginners . it had serious range and stability , but required no assembly out of the box . that really bridged the gap between a toy and tool , says blades . in the four years since , dji has emerged as the clear industry leader . they became the pound gorilla . dji s products now proudly bear its logo , and the company s small white quadcopters have become the platonic ideal of a drone appearing in everything from south park to jason bourne . blades estimates that dji will do around . billion in revenue this year , and silicon valley venture capitalists have invested in the company at an billion valuation . according to data analysis by skylogic research , dji has around percent of the market for consumer drones in the us its nearest competitor , yuneec , has less than percent . last year , the company returned to the nuremberg toy fair , the first place outside china wang had traveled to sell his wares . dji commanded the largest booth on the entire show floor , a statement to those who had laughed at him years ago . nobody can beat their cost structure . dji is also poised to carve out a strong position in the market for commercial drones . two thirds of faa applications to use commercial drones in the us list dji as the unit of choice . its phantoms are already working on construction sites , and it recently released a , drone built for spraying crops . drones are being rapidly adopted by police , firefighters , real estate agents , insurance inspectors , farmers , and industrial utilities all businesses that can benefit from the cheap , accurate aerial imaging that dji promises . pricewaterhousecoopers estimates that the drone industry will grow from a few billion dollars this year to more than billion by . the booming market has attracted plenty of competition . from intel to gopro , large companies that just a few years ago had no dog in the race are now investing heavily in consumer drones . meanwhile , titans like amazon and google are aiming to build their own fleets of delivery drones . but dji has two big advantages over every western competitor though it sells the majority of its units in the us and europe , it employs the majority of its more than , engineers in shenzhen , where wages are lower than silicon valley . nobody can beat their cost structure , said snow . and they dedicate almost a third of those engineers to pure research and development . that workforce allows dji to push a furious pace of innovation . in the time it took american competitors like d robotics and gopro to release a single drone , dji has released four . we ll have a meeting to discuss the design or features of a certain product , and we ll come up with an idea or a change , says adam najberg , dji s head of communications . an hour or two later we ll have a fresh prototype of the unit , just off the factory floor , still warm to the touch . the second match between . s and starpro began like the first . the . s hero made a beeline to the island and began filling up on golf balls . but this time , instead of focusing their fire on the hero as it climbed to the island , starpro hunted for . s rovers instead . they managed to take out two of them before the . s hero filled up on golf balls and made it off the island and back into combat . the . s and starpro teams operated their robots from a small booth on the raised stage behind the battlefield . the audience could see the engineers faces projected onto giant screens above each team s hut , but the players controlling the robots could not see out the window in front of them was made of an opaque glass . this ensured that they had to navigate using the camera feed from their rovers and hero , in addition to the high level view from their team s drone camera . the . s hero tried again to destroy the enemy base , but it didn t have the damage boost from the computer vision test . it ran out of ammunition , and had to head back to the island . as it returned to the battlefield , the starpro hero drove underneath it , trapping it in limbo over the obstacle course , leaving its back wheels spinning helplessly a few inches off the ground . the crowd went wild . it was the perfect counter to the highly technical hero that had so far dominated the competition . everything now came down to the third and final match . the games had been running for three days straight at this point , with battles raging for hours a day . the hallway surrounding the arena had been made into a makeshift camps for competitors . engineers soldered broken parts back together , sending small plumes of smoke into the air . others slept on the ground beside their battered bots , spare styrofoam tucked under their heads for pillows . it was clear the students were willing to work extraordinarily hard , but they were doing it on their own terms . over the last decade young chinese have become increasingly unwilling to embrace the brutal grind of life on the factory floor , to take the kind of manufacturing industry jobs that gave rise to shenzhen and laid the foundation for dji . there was a circular irony here . to compensate for rising wages and an aging workforce , many factories are looking to automate their production , turning to the same robotic technologies at the heart of this competition . president xi jinping has called for a robot revolution and promised billion in subsidies to shenzhen s regional province for this transition . many young , well educated chinese will find work creating , controlling , and tending to these autonomous laborers at companies like dji . many students saw robomasters as a chance to move beyond the rote curriculum of their university and prepare for the more creative future . robomasters began in as an internal competition , a chance for the engineers to blow off steam while still working on technology core to dji s business . it was small scale , held inside dji s office with a makeshift course . the second year , it was integrated with a summer camp dji hosted for college age engineers interning at the company . last year , it opened to the public , and teams from universities across china , as well as a few teams from abroad , signed up . it began experimenting with a more lavish production , building out the battlefield with lights , music , and live announcers . it was a hit , widely covered by chinese media , and so this year dji went even bigger . the company says it spent around million on the tournament , although several employees told me privately that the number was closer to million . months before the finals in shenzhen , employees fanned out across the country to help organize regional contests between teams . dji engineers produced custom components for the thousands of fighting units that competed the company even commissioned an anime series , set to air on chinese tv this fall , about a nerdy teen who finds his calling , and his courage , behind the wheel of a rover . dji must tussle with international giants like baidu and didi , uber , and amazonwhy all the effort and expense for a competition that doesn t , at least directly , help sell any drones ? the simplest answer is recruitment . as dji forges a path forward in hardware development , it must tussle with international giants like baidu and didi , uber and amazon , all of whom want top talent in robotics , computer vision , and autonomous navigation . dji is also setting itself up to be the default robotics platform . almost every major robotics program at a chinese university uses dji s infrastructure to educate their students . in effect , a rising generation of engineers is being trained to work on dji products , and to think of the company s equipment as the gold standard . but robomasters is also a passion project for frank wang , dji s founder and ceo . the year old is now worth billions , and has proven himself as a brilliant engineer and a ruthless manager . but in many ways the competition is a reflection of a simple truth about wang he loves playing with robots building them , flying them , and watching them fight . a large lcd screen on the front of the skyworth semiconductor building plays a short anime film on loop . in it , a young boy falls in love with a remote control helicopter . but as he grows up , the drudgery of college and an office job choke his passion . a suffocating storm of papers envelops him , dragging him down to hellish landscape . he stands at the edge of a cliff , unsure how to go on . and then he makes the leap of faith , breaking free of his suit and tie , falling toward a lake of fire . at the last second he catches hold of a small white drone , which saves him from his plunge , and carries him aloft . wang s favorite episode featured a little red helicopterthe inspiration for the cartoon is frank wang , who as a little boy loved the illustrated series loosely translated as brainstorming grandpa . the cartoon starred an elderly macgyver type who helped kids to get out of jams through feats of clever engineering . wang s favorite episode featured a little red helicopter , and he went on to collect model aircraft and remote control copters . growing up in a middle class family in hangzhou , he dreamt of attending a prestigious technical college in the us like stanford or mit , but he didn t quite have the grades . instead , he studied electronic engineering at the hong kong university of science ampamp technology . wang was a mediocre student in college as well , but he used his time at school to work on his passion his senior thesis was building a flight controller for a miniature helicopter . that project barely got off the ground , but it impressed his professor , who encouraged him to try graduate school and helped him find a scholarship . in wang left academia for good , moving to shenzhen and using what was left of scholarship money to start a new company , dji . located on the st floor , wang s office commands a broad view of shenzhen s ever changing skyline . it s adorned with plastic replicas of fighter jets and origami phantom drones . toy mechs line one bookshelf , and plastic figurines of vintage propeller planes are arranged carefully on his desk . he displays the usual ceo reading material the art of war , hatching twitter , steve jobs , ayn rand but also highly technical textbooks on subjects like superalloys , radio navigation , flow induced vibrations , and high temperature coatings . dressed in a white button down and dark slacks , wang sported a soul patch and large glasses , which added a slightly hip air to his otherwise boyish enthusiasm . though wang s team insisted our conversation focus on robomasters , and that he would only speak in mandarin , wang s enthusiasm soon got the better of him . after a few minutes , he dropped the mandarin entirely and spoke in english , pushing the conversation to a faster pace , and roving far and wide across subjects beyond the competition . i asked what he felt the purpose of robomasters was . for engineers , they do not have a stage , a competition , to become loved by lots of people , to show their wisdom , show their precision . the tournament was designed to make stars out of nerdy college students , and in doing so , boost interest in the field . if we can put engineering and entertainment together , not only can they entertain , they can educate lots of people . not all would win , but even those who lost could go on to be engineers , innovators , and entrepreneurs , a side effect wang felt was good for society . the tournament was designed to make stars out of nerdy college students , and in doing so , boost interest in the field . robomasters is a war game , and wang repeatedly emphasized the importance of aggression , a trait he believed was fundamental to dji . very aggressive people are concentrated here , without the heritage of the bad culture . so the new things can grow in this kind of environment . wang contrasted the the practical and hypercompetitive nature of shenzhen to the bourgeois pleasures of shanghai or the bureaucratic power of beijing . so maybe it s the spirit , the future of the chinese spirit , is what i m thinking . aggression was a central part of wang s approach to innovation at dji . a former employee who worked at dji for years told me it was a very burnout , six days a week minimum , competition based , environment . robomasters , the employee said , was a fitting entrance exam for dji . pitting teams against each other and having one win is how product development works inside of dji . wang didn t try to hide this . sometimes a smart decision will make a lot of people unhappy , he told me . if we let the company employees elect the leader i would never be elected , because i am too tough . what works in shenzhen , however , may not be as successful around the world . dji has opened offices in europe and the united states , but several employees said turnover has been high . as to exactly what product dji might build next , wang was coy . i think vision is really the key to enable new applications for robots . that is why we want to integrate it into our competition . and this is also the future of our company . dji drones use computer vision to sense and avoid obstacles as they fly . the drones , and dji s handheld camera , the osmo , can also recognize and track subjects . tap on the athlete or racecar you want in your shot , and the device will keep them in frame without you having to move a muscle . we first use the vision in the drone , but later we can expand to other applications , like autonomous driving , agriculture , autonomous cherry picking , this kind of thing . lots of human , very labor intensive things can be replaced by cheap , vision enabled robots , said wang . the crowd was jubilant before the third and final match between . s and starpro . it was the first time any team had given . s serious competition , and losing the final round meant the team would be eliminated from the tournament . the stands were full of families , many with young children who stared , mouths agape , at the giant robots projected onto screens above the battlefield , and screamed with glee whenever a unit toppled over , spilling plastic marbles across the turf . film crews from local tv news were on hand to interview players , and young bloggers posted updates from their phones to the chinese equivalents of facebook , twitter , and youtube . the match opened slowly . both teams danced around the middle , moving warily , like heavyweight boxers cautious about stepping into the range of knockout punch . at the minute mark , both teams exchanged shots at close range , losing two rovers each . the . s placed one of its rovers to take the computer vision test , but was driven off by enemy fire before it could finish . slowly the teams whittled down each other s infantry until only the two hero bots remained . starpro gave chase . its hero , less than half the size of the massive . s robot , seemed to have its opponent on the ropes . the . s took a half dozen shots to its backside , and a nervous , confused murmur swept across the stadium . the two heroes came tumbling over a hill and crashed into a pedestal , rubbing paint like nascar drivers jockeying for space . and then , with just over a minute on the clock , the . s hero finally turned to fight . four quick shots from its golf ball cannon and the starpro hero went dark . a day later , . s went on to win the competition for the second year in a row several of its team members were subsequently hired by dji . i spoke with junru chen , the team leader of . s , who had spent months preparing for the championship . his shirt was soaked in sweat and pieces of gold confetti from the trophy celebration were sprinkled throughout his hair . now that it was finally over , we are very excited , he said but also relieved . we are very excited , he said but also relieved . the goal of robomasters , in his mind , was to look for people who were technology addicts and test them under the most extreme conditions . it takes the form of competitions to unleash our potential , he told me . what would he build with that potential i asked ? what future did he envision ? he said the goal was to integrate robots more deeply into the lives of average people , the jetson s fantasy of robotic butlers and maids . to design machines which help people achieve some goals , first the robots need to listen and see , chen said . computer vision is a very important field for us to achieve a smart lifestyle in the future . right now robomasters lets dji sift through some of china s top engineering talent , but the company is hoping to expand the tournament around the globe . i chatted with betty vogeley , a student the university of washington , the only team from outside of asia to compete in robomasters to date . we haven t been doing so well , as far as winning any games , she said with a laugh . we re known as the team whose wheels fall off . vogeley has been competing in robotics events across the us for the last six years , but had never experienced anything close to this challenge . this is everything combined . it calls for so many diverse talents , there is just nothing like it . she was eager to play host to qualifying tournament that would give us teams a chance to practice before the finals . to make it competitive , we need to bring a regional tournament to north america . i caught up with liu zi yi , from the xi an team . he and his classmates had traveled two days by train to arrive at the competition , because flying was too expensive . and they had sunk their own savings into the parts needed for these robots , even borrowing from friends and family . but he didn t seem too upset by the loss . the contestants at robomasters saw shenzhen and dji as way to make a break with the past , and to secure a good future in a rapidly changing economy . the city i am from , it is very traditional , very conservative , said liu . everyone was very focused on following the rote , academic curriculum , the safe career path . if the past of the city is good enough , they can keep this . they say , this is enough . for a city as young as shenzhen , they have nothing to lose . it seemed unlikely that he would find a job with dji following his team s performance , but liu was eager to try his own luck as an entrepreneur . wang s story had clearly seduced many of the young men and women here . they were eager to work for him , or to follow his example , trying to build companies that thrived by innovating faster than the competition , not copying or undercutting them . dji changed the image of chinese companies in the mind of foreigners , said liu . it is the first , but it won t be the last . video by tom connors , tyler pina , andrew marino , william joelproduced by frank bidesign by james barehamedited by michael zelenko	 the iphone and plus are deeply unusual devices . they are full of aggressive breaks from convention while wrapped in cases that look almost exactly like their two direct predecessors . even that continuity of design is a break from convention after almost a decade of apple s steady two year iphone update pattern , merely retaining the same design for a third straight year plays against expectations . inside that case , everything else about the iphone is a decisive statement about the future . the dual cameras on the iphone plus promise to usher in a new era in mobile photography . the iconic iphone home button is no longer a physical button , but instead a sophisticated ballet of pressure sensors and haptic vibration motors that simulate the feel of a button . the new a fusion processor blends two high power cores that rival laptop performance with two low power cores that combine with a much larger battery to extend run time by up to two hours . and , yes , apple has removed the headphone jack . everything else about the iphone is a decisive statement about the futureremoving the headphone jack is an act of pure confidence from apple , which is the only company in tech that can set off a sea changes in the industry by aggressively dropping various technologies from its products . floppy drives , optical drives , its own proprietary pin ipod connector , flash , even usb apple decides that it s time to move on , and it has a massive installed base of customers that love and trust the company who make it happen . and now it s decided that yikes the headphone jack is over . after using the iphone and plus for about a week , it s clear to me that apple has forceful , but considered opinions about how the next generation of phones should fit into our lives . but it s also clear that the iphone is a transitional step to that vision of the future , not a complete expression of it . the question for would be upgraders is simple is all of the latent promise in this phone worth the inconvenience of that transition ? designthere s really no getting around it the iphone and plus look more or less exactly like the iphone and plus from . they are now water resistant , which is nice , although they re not fully waterproof keep them submerged in a meter of water for more than minutes and things might not go your way . samsung s galaxy s and note are technically even more water resistant , but i think it s basically a push you can get these phones casually wet now without catastrophe , and that s a big win . if you want to go snorkeling with your iphone , you should probably get a case anyhow . once you put the iphone in a case , it looks exactly like an iphone apart from the water resistance , there are three main external differences between the and first , the antenna lines on the back have been tweaked and colored to blend into the body on the matte black and glossy jet black models , which is a welcome refinement . the antennas remain a dull gray color on the silver , gold , and rose gold variants apple says there are limits on what colors can be applied . second , the camera bump has been enlarged and more artfully curved into the rear casing , which looks particularly handsome on the smaller phone with a single camera . and third here it is again there s no headphone jack . but really , once you put the iphone in a case , it looks exactly like an iphone . and if you get a jet black model , you ll want to get it into a case immediately my jet black review unit scratched and scuffed almost instantly , and the only time it s remained fingerprint free is when we literally handled it with white gloves for the photo and video shoots accompanying this review . apple is being unusually open about the propensity of the jet black finish to scratch , but beyond that , i d get the matte black anyway it just looks meaner . the iphone has always been one of the more utilitarian designs in apple history , and a smoothed out camera bump and less visible antennas don t really change that . apple s competition is getting better at making beautiful phones , and nothing about the iphone s design exceeds the rest of the industry . the iphone plus in particular is actually falling behind its large screened competition the plus was always a bit of a surfboard , and new devices like the galaxy note fit enormous displays into much smaller , tighter packages . too bad about the explosions , though . this is still a phone that looks best in a case . home button , display , and speakersthe iphone s new home button will elicit instant reaction from people it s much more different than you might think . the button no longer moves at all it s totally solid , just like newer macbook trackpads . a linear vibration unit that apple calls the taptic engine jolts when you apply pressure to the button , tricking your brain into feeling a click . it s nothing like the clumsy haptic feedback on other phones , which i ve always disliked it really does feel like a click . this system works tremendously well on macbooks , but on the iphone it feels like the entire bottom of the phone is clicking , not like you re pushing a button . you can set the haptic feedback to one of three force settings that make it feel like a harder or stronger click , but it s definitely still strange , especially if the phone is lying down on a table instead of in your hand and you can see that you re just pushing against nothing . it feels like the entire bottom of the phone is clickingi m sort of okay with all this , but other people who ve tried my review units really don t like it . there s something about a really great button , and the iphone home button was an all time great button . apple says it switched up the home button to make it more customizable and more durable there s a lot of people with the software button floating around their iphone screens but it ll take some adjustment to really get used to . you ll have to try it to decide for yourself . the taptic engine also adds all sorts of other fun feedback to ios when you drop the notification shade down , the phone does a little bump , for example . it makes it feel like the software on the screen has real weight and inertia , and i love it . third party apps can use the taptic engine as well , and i m really hoping the industry adds support faster than the slow , somewhat muted rollout of not very useful d touch support . taptic engine feedback is the first really valuable new ui concept i ve seen on phones in years , while d touch always seemed like more of a gimmick . it s strange that the iphone s won t get these features even though it has a taptic engine apple says the unit in the iphone has been revised and made more precise , but it s still an odd omission . d touch is still present on the iphone s display , and the display itself is improved . it s not as insane as the k and k oled panels that have been popping up on android phones , but it s a sharp , bright , and beautiful lcd , and sharp , bright , beautiful lcds are very nice to look at . my review unit is also noticeably warmer than the iphone s display , which i ve come to appreciate . the display can show a wider range of colors nowyou won t notice it in most apps , but the display can show a wider range of colors now , which is really obvious when you look at photos taken by the iphone s camera which now also captures a wider range of colors . photos taken by the iphone look ridiculously good on the iphone display you can tell the difference between a photo and a s photo on the s screen almost instantly . that s the only place you ll really see the benefit of the new screen for now , but it s another place where app developers can really take advantage of powerful new hardware . instagram has already announced an update to support wide color let s hope others follow suit . apart from the revised camera , the new home button , the screen , and heyo ! the headphone jack , the other notable external hardware change to the iphone is the addition of stereo speakers . one speaker is at the bottom of the phone , as it has been , and the other is actually integrated into the earpiece . they re much louder than before , and sound decent , with better treble performance in particular . they re never going to replace real speakers , but you can watch a bunch of youtube videos or snapchats and not get annoyed , and conference calls are dramatically improved . okay , i ve made you wait long enough . let s talk about that headphone jack , shall we ? lightning strikesso there s no headphone jack on the iphone . apple says it needed to take out the headphone jack so it could make space for better cameras , the taptic engine even though the s also had a taptic engine , and perhaps most importantly , a bigger battery . it was also easier to make a phone with one less hole in it water resistant , but apple tells me that it wasn t a huge factor . apple ships a pair of its earpods headphones with a lightning connector in the box , as well as a lightning to . mm dongle so you can use your traditional headphones . you re not totally out of luck if you have a big investment in corded headphones , but you re going to want to stock up on those adapters if you regularly plug your phone into a car or have a variety of headphones you like to use the dongle is small enough that it s not obtrusive , but also small enough so that it s destined to get lost if you move it around a lot . at , the headphone dongle is the cheapest apple hardware you can buy the company thinks people will just buy a few and keep them permanently attached to older headphones . and i m sure third parties will come up with a million other options , although it ll be hard to beat . the lightning earpods are exactly like apple s regular earpods , which is to say that they sound average to bad and fit either fine or not great depending on your ears . competitors like lg and htc ship much higher quality headphones with their flagship phones , and apple owns beats , so it s just really hard to understand why it s still shipping such decidedly mediocre headphones with the iphone . especially when the company is trying to get everyone to be enthusiastic about the move away from . mm . but here we are . of course , the real move apple s trying to make is to wireless audio , and the company also gave me a preproduction set of its airpods wireless earbuds to try out . i can t fully review them here since they re not final , but they worked well they re basically bluetooth headphones that pair easier and faster with apple s products because of a proprietary controller chip called the w and special software built into ios , macos , and watchos . once you pair the airpods with one apple device , they can seamlessly switch to all the others , which is very cool . but airpods sound just like earpods because they re basically earpods without wires , so what you re getting for your is convenience and early adopter status , not necessarily sound quality . i asked apple if dr . dre or jimmy iovine consulted on the sound or design of the airpods and there was a lot of demurring . i don t know why beats is putting out new wireless headphones that have the w chip in them and apple is putting out airpods that sound just like earpods when there s such obvious corporate collaboration opportunity there , but two of the three new beats models charge via micro usb and one charges via lightning , so searching for order in this universe remains an entirely futile exercise . more importantly , it s disappointing that apple didn t put more work into making wireless audio a better overall experience on the iphone . the company s own new w headphones get the fancy new pairing support , but other bluetooth headphones and speakers still use the same somewhat flaky bluetooth setup interface as before . and airplay feels all but abandoned it was already getting less and less competitive over time , and the iphone and ios don t seem to offer any noticeable improvements . i ve been spending some serious time really thinking about when and where i use the headphone jack , and it turns out that i already do much of my music listening wirelessly bluetooth in the car , an amazon echo , a few sonos speakers , a couple bluetooth speakers here and there . this is about as messy and unintuitive as it gets , but it s not too far off the mainstream . i could buy a nice set of bluetooth headphones that also support corded audio for watching movies on planes and basically be covered , but i won t get any of apple s improvements to the wireless experience unless i buy a beats solo with the w in it . it s disappointing that apple didn t put more work into making wireless audio a better overall experiencethat is the definition of ecosystem lock in , and it s incredibly frustrating . apple took away an established open standard in favor of new technologies , but instead of making the experience of using those new technologies better across the board , it made every third party wireless audio product a second class citizen of the apple ecosystem . if apple is serious about wireless audio , it s going to have to allow other companies to use the newer , better bluetooth support in ios that enhances its own w products , and it s going to have to make managing bluetooth devices a lot nicer than it currently is . and if apple is really serious about wireless audio , it will allow third parties to extend the airplay interface just like it allows third parties to extend siri and imessage an iphone without a headphone jack needs to have dead simple integrations with all kinds of wireless speaker systems , whether they re from sonos or samsung or amazon . to make wireless audio happen , apple has to do the work of opening up and making the experience of connecting to any audio system on the iphone as simple and frustration free as pushing a button as simple as wired audio has always been . apple says it hasn t yet had any serious conversations about opening or extending its wireless audio interfaces , but that it s committed to a wireless world , so let s hope the company moves quickly . it would also be nice if apple would put out an adapter that lets you simultaneously charge your phone and listen to music that isn t the size of a vga dongle , because i have no intention of letting this ridiculous belkin thing anywhere near my bag . there s a huge opportunity for third party accessory makers to fill all the gaps left by the removal of the headphone jack , but it s also clear that the first wave of accessories is going to be a little clumsy while everyone learns exactly what those gaps are and how best to fill them . and if mophie isn t working on a battery case with a headphone jack , customers should start picketing the company . if you squint , it s possible to see a future iphone that has no wires at all an iphone that does everything wirelessly , including charging . but the iphone is not that iphone . in fact , right now you need more wires , dongles , and adapters to make it work with the rest of your life than ever before . i love that stuff it s part of the thrill of being an early adopter . but if you don t want to devote even a moment s effort toward figuring out how to do something as simple as charge your phone and listen to audio at the same time , it might be worth waiting for things to settle into place . camerasone of my favorite recurring bits at iphone introductions is when phil schiller notes , correctly , that the iphone camera is likely the best camera most people will ever own . he s been saying it fairly regularly since the iphone s came out in , and he said it again last week when he introduced the iphone camera . this is an incredible fact , as is the fact that a huge number of people now quietly upgrade to a better camera on a fairly regular basis , and then use the hell out of that camera . the explosion in mobile photography is one of the most revolutionary aspects of the entire smartphone revolution , and the general excellence of the iphone camera over time is a big reason why . the iphone represents another upgrade over the iphone s there s a new , faster f . lens , the addition of optical image stabilization , a new four color true tone flash , and wider color capture . this all adds up to a decent improvement , but the iphone s was already operating at the top of the scale , bested only recently by the latest cameras in the galaxy s and note . in low light , that faster lens and optical image stabilization means that the significantly outperforms the s . but compared to the iphone s , the iphone is a step improvement , not a major leap . click on individual images to see full widththe attempt at a major leap is on the iphone plus . instead of a single lens and sensor , the plus has two the same f . mm wide angle lens as the iphone , and an f . mm telephoto lens . these cameras operate simultaneously they re always working together . right now , what this means is that you can switch to a true x zoom by tapping on a button , which is very nice . you can also digitally zoom the x lens to x , where the telephoto takes over , and then digitally zoom the x lens to x . digital zoom is still digital zoom anything past x definitely looks like what you d expect from grainy digital zoom . and , well , that s all it really does right now . zooming is great , but that s not the only reason to put dual cameras on a phone . other phones with dual cameras , like the huawei honor , let you do all kinds of wild focus and depth of field adjustments , and some even let you refocus the image after the fact , like a lytro camera . the effects can be a little fake looking , but they re the sort of thing dual cameras enable . but the iphone plus doesn t do any of that , although a forthcoming software update will enable a portrait mode that blurs the background into what looks like a very nice bokeh . click on individual images to see full widtheven that is just scratching the surface of what can be done with two cameras on a phone with as much processing power as the iphone plus , and i m really hoping apple allows third party developers to tap into the system and experiment with possibilities like refocusing and perspective shifts . but for now , you get zooming . we spent a lot of time shooting with the plus , and it gets noticeably warm when you use the cameras for an extended period it takes a lot of processing power to meld those two cameras into a single unit . i m very curious to see the impact on heat and battery life when apple enables features beyond zooming . apple has been blowing up iphone photos to billboard sizes and crowing about its cameras for years now , so at this point the opportunity for improvement is fairly small . i took a few photos with the iphone plus and the iphone s plus under decent light and asked people to tell them apart on a laptop screen . it was pretty hard for most everyone , although the definitely has more vibrant colors and a noticeably shallower depth of field because of the brighter lens . you can tell if you know what to look for , but the difference in most shots will be imperceptible in an instagram or facebook feed . click on individual images to see full widthfront cameras are almost more important than rear cameras in our instagram stories world , and the iphone s front camera is excellent , with a new megapixel sensor replacing the megapixel unit in the s . the lens is not quite as wide angle as samsung s cameras , but it s bright , sharp , and the retina flash is still a terrific idea that was absolutely worth lifting from snapchat . it s a solid improvement , and a welcome one . we conducted some pretty extensive camera testing against a samsung galaxy note , an iphone s plus , a fuji xt , and a canon d mkiii you can see the results for yourself . the iphone and plus clearly hold their own , but i don t think they blow the pack away . that might all change when apple starts taking more advantage of the dual cameras , but for now , i don t think the plus will keep anyone away from a mirrorless rig . which is exactly what i said about the iphone s last year . performancethe iphone has the new a fusion chip , another product from apple s industry leading chip design team . it s a new design with four cores two high performance cores , and two low power cores that use less battery power during everyday tasks . it s lightning fast , of course , with early benchmarks indicating that the a fusion is faster than even the a x in the ipad pro . but in my super boring day to day twitter facebook gmail slack safari usage , the iphone plus wasn t really all that much faster than the a chip in the iphone s plus likely because i wasn t pushing the processor enough to use the high performance cores . it s impressive that apple was able to create a more efficient processor that delivers the same perceived performance as the previous generation while using less power , but that also means that in everyday use i didn t see anything like the performance leaps that were so noticeable in previous iphone updates . still , faster is better , and once app developers start targeting the a fusion , we might see a new wave of apps that harness its raw power . but that s a familiar waiting game we ve been playing with ever faster ios devices for years now . apple claims that a combination of a larger battery that fills some of the space formerly used by the headphone jack , the more efficient processor , and ios improvements allows the iphone to run for two more hours than the iphone s , and the plus to go for an hour longer than the s plus . that was mostly borne out in my day to day testing , which saw the smaller phone run for about hours of medium usage and the larger iphone plus go for about hours . under a heavier load , i get the sense that battery life will be more like the s models , but those extra hours will be meaningful for those desperate moments on the way home from work . ios speaking of ios , it s wonderful . seriously , it s the nicest ios update in a long time , with a clear sense of how you should flow between operations and a much more inviting visual design . we ll have much more about ios in a forthcoming review , but know that it has a slick new version of imessage with all kinds of new features , a new version of siri that can be extended by third party apps , better integration with smart home devices , a much improved control center , better music and news apps , and a ton of other new features . as an aside my personal favorite ios tweak is that apple has gotten rid of slide to unlock because the touch id sensor on the s and is so fast sliding to the right from the lock screen now brings you to a widget screen . you unlock the phone just by pressing the home button , which is enough time for touch id to recognize your fingerprint . apple s slide to unlock patent was at the center of many of their lawsuits against android phone makers , and i once made an entire video exploring how android phones were carefully designed around that patent . and now it s gone , because apple figured out a better idea that s genuinely useful . conclusiondown to brass tacks do all of the new features of the iphone make up for the inconvenience of the missing headphone jack ? this may or may not surprise you , but i don t think so not yet . the iphone and plus are legitimately among the most interesting , opinionated , powerful phones apple has ever shipped , and the most confident expressions of the company s vision in a long time . ios is excellent , the cameras are better , and the performance is phenomenal . and the batteries last longer . these are terrific phones . these are terrific phonesbut they are also incomplete . the most interesting feature of the iphone plus new dual camera isn t shipping at launch . apple s making a big bet on imessage and siri apps in ios but it hasn t paid off yet . apps haven t been updated to use the taptic engine or the new wide color gamut display . the entire ecosystem of new headphones and adapters required to make use of lightning and wireless audio is just getting off the ground . only apple or beats headphones offer the best wireless audio experience , and you might not like how they sound or fit . by the time developers even come close to hitting the performance limits of the a fusion chip , apple will be shipping the a fusion pro with six blades . the entire time i was using the iphone , i felt like i had a prototype of next year s rumored drastic iphone redesign disguised as an iphone . all those bold bets on the future are legitimately exciting , but here in the present using the iphone in a case feels a lot like using a iphone s with a weirder home button and more adapters . but they are also incompleteif you need a new phone right now , sure , buy an iphone . the little one starts at for a mercifully doubled gb of storage and ranges up to for gb , and the plus starts at for gb and goes up to for gb . make sure you factor in the extra cost of headphone adapters or bluetooth headphones , because you ll end up needing them . you ll be fine , and your photos will be better . but unless you re eager and ready to live the early adopter life , you won t actually be missing out on much if you don t get an iphone . this is an iphone that lays a marker in tech history , and it will serve as the foundation for many important changes to how phones work and integrate into our lives . we re going to remember the iphone . it s going to be the next iphones that actually build a useful future on that foundation . iphone and plusgood stuffwater resistanceimproved camerasbetter battery lifegreat displaytaptic engine feedback is neatdual camera zoom on the plus is greatbad stufflack of headphone jack is inconvenientjet black model scratches easilylooks just like an iphone in a casewireless audio ecosystem is immature donglelifeiphone plus design feels big compared to competitionother iphone plus dual camera features haven t shipped yet 	 my first morning in altamonte springs , florida , i was faced with a dilemma how to travel the two miles from my hotel to city hall without a car . walking would take nearly an hour in the sweltering june heat . taking a bus would entail waiting up to half hour at a stop with little shelter from the forecasted thunderstorms , followed by a looping detour to the local mall . the trip could potentially take longer than walking . welcome to uberville uber wants to take over public transit , one small town at a timeby spencer woodman illustration by jude buffummy first morning in altamonte springs , florida , i was faced with a dilemma how to travel the two miles from my hotel to city hall without a car . walking would take nearly an hour in the sweltering june heat . taking a bus would entail waiting up to a half hour at a stop with little shelter from the forecasted thunderstorms , followed by a looping detour to the local mall . the trip could potentially take longer than walking . i was on my way to meet frank martz , altamonte s city manager . for nearly two decades , martz had fought to overhaul altamonte s transit system with a fleet of demand responsive public busses . he called the plan flexbus , and it would use custom designed software to optimize routes for vehicles that riders would order from kiosks or even desktop computers . martz saw flexbus as the key to transforming altamonte , a loose agglomeration of palm tree lined strip malls and culs de sac a few miles north of orlando , into a thriving and walkable destination . despite martz s persistent lobbying , bureaucratic delays and disagreements with the regional transit authority stalled the project for years , martz says . finally last october , the federal transit administration withdrew millions in vital funding . flexbus was dead . but the transit landscape had changed since martz began his quest . in the years before flexbus was founded , some of silicon valley s most prominent companies had begun offering on demand transportation reminiscent of martz s vision . so just weeks after burying flexbus , martz called uber . his inquiry was blunt did the company want to make altamonte the world s first public transportation system based on ride share technology ? martz s proposal would make the suburb of altamonte an unlikely test bed for one future of public transit . it would also raise questions about whether such a future can serve everyone equally , and force martz to navigate between the transparency of public office and the demands of a multibillion dollar company with a penchant for secrecy . by the time martz called uber , less radical versions of his proposal had begun proliferating across the county . as bloomberg noted last month , both uber and lyft have been striking agreements with transit agencies , mostly for so called first last mile programs meant to shuttle commuters to bus or train stations . since last year , uber has scored public transit agreements with san francisco , atlanta , philadelphia , dallas , cincinnati , and pittsburgh , among other cities . uber and lyft have also been edging into niche public transportation services , like transit for disabled people or low income residents who need rides to work or the grocery store . last month officials in washington , dc ampnbspproposed having uber respond to some calls for ambulances . even google s alphabet , through its sidewalk labs program , has joined the transit bonanza . the company recently offered to overhaul transit in columbus , ohio with a system that sets parking prices based on demand and funnels low income commuters into subsidized ride share vehicles . these companies are arriving at an opportune time for cities , many of which are struggling just to fund existing transit service , much less expand it to meet the needs of growing numbers of urban commuters . both uber and lyft tell the verge that the past year has seen a surge in public officials interested in giving the companies taxpayer dollars for public transit contracts . for the companies , it s an appealing new way to establish themselves as vital infrastructure , especially in low density communities like altamonte where running traditional mass transit can be expensive . given the pace at which these partnerships are coming together , it s possible to imagine ride hail companies taking on the role of all encompassing , smartphone driven public transit providers , one town at a time . last month , officials in washington , dc proposed having uber respond to some calls for ambulancesbut for some transit advocates , the embrace of uber and its competitors risks undermining civic ideals of accessibility and transparency . in altamonte , there are already signs that these concerns could be warranted . the pilot program is unusable for people without a smartphone or credit card , and the company attempted to have the city sign an unusually far reaching nondisclosure agreement . ultimately , critics worry that if these programs succeed , they could pluck the affluent commuters who wield real political influence off trains and busses , leading to a crisis of declining ridership and decreasing clout for traditional public transportation . uber has so far been pitching itself as a supplement to existing transit programs rather than a replacement . but in june of last year , for the company s five year anniversary , uber ceo travis kalanick envisioned a future where increasing efficiency would make uber cost competitive not just with owning a car , but with traditional mass transit . when drivers drop off a customer only to pick up another , chained together in a perpetual trip , kalanick said , not only is it much less expensive than taking a cab or owning a car , it has the potential to be as affordable as taking a subway , or a bus , or other means of transportation . and that s what we believe is the real game changer . those are the things we ll be working on in years to come . with the help of public subsidies , that future is coming fast . the speed with which uber has entered the public transit sector has stunned industry activists . it s happening very quickly , says lawrence hanley , the international president of the amalgamated transit union . it s like a tsunami . i didn t have an hour to spare getting across town to meet martz , so government uber was the obvious choice . opening the app , i noticed a new option had appeared next to uberx an altamonte car . upon being scooped up by an off duty drug counselor in a sleek chrysler , it became clear that the app had so seamlessly incorporated the municipal transit program as to , aside from the car name , wholly hide its civic underpinning . it was uber as usual in every way , but cheaper . indeed , most of the uber drivers who shuttled me around town that week told me they had no idea their rides were being subsidized by the government . it wasn t until i arrived at city hall that i fully understood the aggressively suburban layout of altamonte . i had imagined martz s office as being inside a stately administrative building somewhere central , but though it s technically a municipality , altamonte has nothing resembling a center . its low slung city hall sits anonymously amid a cluster of one story gray brick buildings off the six lane state road , largely hidden by the altamonte executive center strip mall . the issue of transit usage was not about infrastructure . . . it s about convenience and control . martz led me into his conference room and took a seat in front of a floor to ceiling city map , which , because of altamonte s curlicue suburban street scheme , could double as patterned wallpaper . he wasted little time in noting , with a prideful note of irony , that the building that once housed the regional commuter rail headquarters was where he had conceived the first fully smartphone driven public transit network . a former minor league baseball player , martz has a sturdy frame and speaks with prim efficiency , but he slips into exuberance when discussing his long delayed success in bringing demand responsive public transit to altamonte . we recognized this much earlier than most , that the issue of transit usage was not about infrastructure , martz said . it s about convenience and control . when martz dialed uber in november , the company jumped at his inquiry . within two weeks of the call , an uber manager flew from washington , dc to orlando to meet with him , he says . after two months of discussions , uber sent martz a chart laying out the possible future of their partnership . at a subsidy rate of percent and assuming the ridership would grow annually by percent uber would receive roughly a million dollars per year from the city . a potential indication of uber s aspirations , the chart also included a scenario in which altamonte would pay uber a full percent subsidy , putting the town on the hook for up to nearly million in ride share funding over a two year span . uber also sent martz a document instructing that its logo should be treated with respect and laying out in anxious detail what that entails . in promoting the program , martz was forbidden from placing the uber logo anywhere that could degrade our brand , including on doormats or anywhere else where it could be trodden on on things like napkins or paper plates that would be quickly thrown away on dartboards or urinals on food , which , the document explains , will be sliced , broken , eaten , and is associated with the feces it will later become or on underwear , condoms , or anything else that would link uber and sexual situations . martz settled on a percent subsidy for any trip within altamonte , and percent for rides to and from the city s commuter rail station . martz foresees the yearlong pilot costing taxpayers less than a hundred thousand dollars , far cheaper than building a new bus system . nor does it involve navigating the regional transit authority or negotiating with potentially unionized public employees . uber ridership within altamonte exploded , rising tenfoldin the final days of february , the city cemented the details of its new public transit system , and on march th , it announced the pilot . the response shocked even martz in the weeks following the launch , uber ridership within altamonte exploded , rising tenfold , martz told me . calls cascaded in from officials in other cities curious about martz s experimentjust weeks after the march launch , the neighboring , more affluent suburb of maitland began considering an identical pilot program . by july , it and three other cities in the northern orlando area had approved copycat uber deals , bringing more than a hundred thousand of the region s residents into the sphere of uber run public transit . interest in martz s deal was not limited to central florida , either . martz said transit officials from los angeles , boulder , and boston have called him for information on the partnership . during my time in altamonte , the government backed ubers worked just as intended . the two mile ride to city hall came out to around two dollars more than the local bus system , but taking a fraction of the time . on a sweltering wednesday afternoon , i visited some of altamonte s train and bus stations to get a sense of its non uber transit options . the altamonte station of the new greater orlando commuter rail system , known as sunrail , lies on a desolately commercial intersection of state road populated on its other three sides by a citgo station , a funeral home , and a bright yellow cash advance service touting itself as almost a bank . the station was completely empty when i got there . eventually , a train arrived and a trickle of people debarked and meandered toward the adjoining bus depot . one of them was todd harrold , a year old resident of nearby sanford , which has also approved an altamonte style subsidy . he had just stepped off sunrail with his bicycle and was headed to the mall to look for a new pair of glasses . he had planned to take the bus , but finding it would be a half hour wait , decided to bike the two miles down the six lane highway . it s minutes to bike not bad if i don t get hit , he said . harrold has no smartphone and has never been able to use uber . unlike taxis , uber isn t required to provide services for disabled passengersmore than half a dozen residents i spoke with in altamonte had been shut out of the city s new transit system for various reasons some lacked credit cards or smartphones , while others were disabled and would have difficulty getting in a regular car . unlike taxis , uber isn t required to provide services for disabled passengers . at a bus station near the freight area of the altamonte mall , i spoke with a homeless man who has no credit card or smartphone , a wheelchair bound woman waiting for the bus , and a man with a severely cracked motorola lg onto which he d downloaded an uber app that could not get past its undulating loading page . like harrold , they were all effectively left behind by the city s new transit system , and would take the lynx bus home that day . some transit advocates fear that such stories will become more common in a world of uberized public transport . quality public transportation is just that public and it s the fundamental reason transit agencies are required to make an effort to reach out to people with disabilities , people without bank accounts , and people without smartphones , says jacob anbinder , a spokesperson for the transitcenter , a foundation dedicated to improving urban mobility . as uber finds itself entering into contracts that require it to act as a provider of public transportation , the company will have to adapt to serve this same broad market of riders . for altamonte s pilot project , this has not yet been the case . the city s contract with uber includes nothing regarding the access of people with disabilities or those without smartphones . you ve got the city deciding that they re going to subsidize the easiest to serve , able bodied young people going out for beer and wings . nor does the contract mention the local taxi company , which is required by federal law to serve disabled customers . you ve got the city deciding that they re going to subsidize the easiest to serve , able bodied young people going out for beer and wings , said roger chapin , the vice president of public affairs at mears transportation , orlando s decades old cab company , who says he learned about altamonte s uber deal through the local newspaper . uber acknowledges its services aren t as accessible as they could be , but says it is fast evolving . andrew salzberg , head of transportation policy and research at uber , pointed to experiments the company has launched to deploy fleets of wheelchair accessible ubers , and noted that in pinellas county , florida , uber is testing a call in dispatch service for low income residents who will be able to access the system with or without smartphones . we re not at the final answer to these problems , salzberg told me , but we re getting to the right places through a bunch of initiatives . martz acknowledged that some people would be denied access to altamonte s uber system , but said that a one size fits all mode of transit would be too inefficient , and that people without smartphones have alternatives , like the public bus system . he also pointed to a lynx run transit service that disabled altamonte residents can call upon . in discussing the accessibility gaps in his transit system , martz described it as a matter of consumer choice . a hunter using a bow and arrow will not feed his family as efficiently as a hunter with a gun , martz told me . and there are still plenty of transportation choices , although not as good , for those people who don t have smartphone access . users have to make the choice , and i think that s the beauty of our pilot . instead of jamming tech or infrastructure down the throats of potential users , we ve provided just one more of them . users will make the choice that s best for them . if they prefer to not have a smartphone that s the life they choose to live . on january th , a partnership specialist at uber sent martz s colleague a nondisclosure agreement and asked for an e signature . the nda was broad in scope , requiring altamonte keep secret any technical or business information regarding uber , or else face a potential lawsuit that could put the city on the hook for attorney fees and civil damages . it would also mean that a taxpayer funded program could potentially violate the spirit , if not the letter , of the state s transparency laws . martz responded immediately , asking a different uber official whether the company would reconsider . r emember we are a government in the sunshine , martz told an uber general manager for florida . so some of the codicils here are not lawful . martz quickly prevailed in getting uber to drop the nda , but a few weeks later , something odd popped up in a draft of the public transit agreement altamonte would sign with uber . in a proviso toward the bottom of the agreement , uber granted itself a privilege to field public records requests that the city receives regarding its partnership . in the event city receives a public record law request for documents that uber considers trade secret or otherwise confidential , the final contract reads , the city agrees to promptly notify uber of said request and shall not make an immediate disclosure . in san francisco , data that lyft or uber gives the city is under seal and thus reportedly hidden even from city transportation plannersuber s penchant for secrecy can put it at odds with conventions of government transparency . in other cities , the company has convinced regulators to allow it to hide its ridership data uber s agreement with boston requires the city to keep uber s ridership data under wraps , even stipulating that the company will pay the city s litigation costs in a fight ampnbspto keep that data confidential . in san francisco , data that lyft or uber gives the city is under seal and thus reportedly hidden even from city transportation planners . for public transit partnerships that allot tax dollars to private companies , a wide degree of openness about ridership data is standard , says anbinder of transitcenter . we like to say you can t manage what you don t measure . ridership data can also shed light on whether a transit system is benefiting an entire community or just a part of it . where and when are trips ending ? asks mariah montgomery , a campaign strategist at the partnership for working families , which has pressed uber for ridership data . that data . . . allows you to see where there is a need , and also gives you a sense of whether they are serving all neighborhoods equitably . an uber spokesperson told the verge that asking public agencies to sign ndas is not a standard company practice . and uber s salzberg acknowledged that his company has been less forthcoming with ridership data than some of its older competitors , but said that times have changed and competition has intensified . yellow cabs have been great about this in the past , salzberg said , adding that such companies often held monopolies over their markets , making the release of data of little competitive concern . there s a different competitive situation for data that makes it different for us to be as transparent as things were before . when i asked martz for altamonte s ridership data , he politely declined , citing uber s preference for confidentiality as well as a florida state court ruling on uber s ridership data . sometimes the thing that matters most is moving people , not being able to find every piece of paper , he said . martz says that he , a few members of his senior staff , and city commissioners are allowed to review the altamonte ridership data , but not the general public . they just want to keep it under wraps . uber s desire for confidentiality in its dealings with public agencies extends beyond ridership data . last month , a transit official in pinellas county named chris cochran told me about an initiative in which uber would experiment with a call in dispatch system for riders who lack smartphones . cochran s openness came off as routine he was a public official simply talking about a partnership his agency was negotiating . but shortly after i asked uber about the program , i received an email from cochran . uber had contacted him , urging him not to release the name of the initiative even though it was technically a matter of the public record . cochran feared that the very act of releasing the uber product name ubercentral before the official launch could have killed the entire partnership . we just don t want to ampnbspjeopardize ampnbspour partnership by not at least trying to prevent that from going out , cochran said , later adding that , they just want to keep it under ampnbspwraps . like martz , cochran came to uber after facing a setback in a major push to widen pinellas county s existing mass transit options . in , his agency failed to pass a cent sales tax that would have expanded bus service and created a light rail system , and instead was forced to cut back the existing bus system . i also asked for ridership data from the local transit authority in pinellas county regarding its deal with uber to subsidize trips to local bus stations . citing a state statute governing trade secret exemptions to government records , a spokesperson denied the request . after several days in altamonte , i went to pinellas county to see how one of uber s first partnerships with a public transit agency was faring . like many of the company s early efforts , uber had attempted to bridge gaps in the existing transit infrastructure , offering discounted rides to and from bus stations . parking on a street in a tucked away , working class neighborhood on the outskirts of st . petersburg , i summoned an uber to take me to a bus station just under a mile away . a few minutes later , a driver appeared in an immaculate kia soul and whisked me to the walmart bus stop . largely subsidized by the county , the trip cost only . . my experience was smooth , but in june cochran of the psta told me that the program s ridership had been modest . it has not been a huge success in terms of ridership numbers , said cochran . i can be upfront about that . the whole idea of first mile last mile is really overblown . in the case of altamonte , the city s first last mile initiative , which offers a discount of percent when traveling to train stations , has lagged far behind the city s main uber program . the monstrous majority of subsidized uber rides in altamonte , martz says are intra community trips . the experiences of pinellas county and altamonte springs comport with the observations of jon orcutt , director of communications and advocacy at the transit center . the whole idea of first mile last mile is really overblown , says orcutt . it misses the point that most people that use transit most often live and work near it . uber tells a different story , saying that its rides to and from transit stations bridge a key gap . salzberg , uber s transportation policy official , says this role fits perfectly with the company s mission of getting more people into fewer cars , and with transit agencies need to maintain ridership . and salzberg says , uber may not need public transit dollars to influence the sector . even in cities without partnerships with public transit agencies , customers have begun relying on uber to shuttle them to and from commuter rail stations , salzberg says . and that s happening without us promoting it it just made sense . yet this month the bay area suburb of dublin will launch an altamonte style program with uber and lyft , offering subsidized fares capped at rides throughout the project area , rather than a first last mile incentive . in fact , thanks to the program , the local transit agency reportedly cut a low ridership bus route . subsidies or not , if uber can drive its price low enough , at a certain point it could start to look more like a replacement for mass transit than a supplement to it . recently the company has struck out on its own , experimenting with big picture alternatives to public transit even in cities that have yet to fund its services . in february uber reportedly offered its fixed route uberhop rides for just in seattle , a significant savings over buses . in may , as washington , dc was preparing for more subway shutdowns due to maintenance , uber announced it would expand its uberpool program throughout the agency s service area , pitching itself as a congestion reducing alternative to the city s faltering transit system . uber s popularity in the city apparently got the attention of a dc transit official , who said that the need for late night service is lower since people are using ride hailing services . thanks to the program , in dublin the local transit agency reportedly cut a low ridership bus routein new york , where uber has skirmished with mayor bill de blasio and where the metropolitan transit authority has blamed it and lyft for million in lost revenue , uber rolled out a summertime monthly pass granting commuters unlimited uber rides during morning and evening rush hours . at per month , the price significantly undercuts the mta s prices for someone riding the subway twice daily , though its hours and coverage area are more limited . that cost may be further driven down through a partnership with wageworks that was announced this week , which will let new york riders pay for uberpool using pretax dollars . of course , all these cost cuts will pale in comparison to what uber will be able to do once it replaces human drivers with autonomous vehicles , which the company recently began testing in pittsburgh . with or without the cooperation of public agencies , uber is becoming a new transit provider for at least a segment of the population . for cities like new york with extensive transit systems , this could mean a new front in the uber wars or a new era of private public collaboration in transit . either way , the rise of ride sharing will spell major changes in how the country s largest transit systems move people . yet , as officials from both uber and lyft emphasized in speaking with me , america s largest cities could be mere sideshows compared to smaller towns and suburbs . and some experts say that the highest density subway and bus lines could not be replaced by uber anyway , arguing that it would cause too much roadway congestion . but the vast majority of americans live in places more like car dominated altamonte than hyperdense manhattan . that is an emerging area where you can expect to see more activity , said emily castor , director of transportation policy at lyft . castor says lyft is very interested in propagating the altamonte model across the country and sees it as an opportunity to grow lyft in suburban areas rather than just the urban core . uber s saltzberg noted that only or percent of total trips in the us are done via public transit and asserts that uber wants to be a tool in the toolkit for cities that are trying to make better transportation choices . despite lingering concerns over transparency and accessibility , the earliest results of uber s altamonte experiment show a considerable demand for uber in government . as soon as next year , martz said , the five neighboring cities that have signed copycat deals could create a seamless network of uber subsidies that will allow riders to traverse the region on the tax funded ubers . and edward l . johnson , the head of the greater orlando regional transit system , lynx which services more than . million residents in an area roughly the size of delaware says his agency is hoping to soon begin incorporating ride share companies into its offerings , possibly with an across the board subsidy similar to altamonte s . with flexbus , martz says he had failed to make the regional transit authority budge . now , thanks to uber , projects are racing ahead , and martz doesn t seem surprised . uber had brought to the market a very workable solution , martz told me . the choice was obvious to us . produced by frank bidesign by james barehamedited by josh dzieza	 how lenovo brought a dream design to life rewriting the tablet how lenovo brought a dream design to lifeby dan seifert photography by sean o kanetablets were supposed to be the future . they were supposed to get us off the desk and away from the laptop , and usher us into a touch enabled world of productivity and entertainment . a dream of computing where our devices seamlessly blend between activities and go wherever we need them to . but the tablets we know , the ipads and surfaces of the world , haven t really lived up to that dream , whether it s because doing actual work on them is harder than it should be , or because they are barely different than the pcs we ve used for years . really , what we ve always wanted is the thing that microsoft never made the courier . it was the perfect vessel for our hopes thin , light , and adaptable to whatever we needed it to do . you could touch it , you could write on it , you could fold it , just like a book . but the courier never made it out of microsoft s labs , never got past the concept stages , and never fulfilled the dream it laid out . what we imagine is often better than what we get . but now , seven years later , lenovo is introducing a new take on the tablet computer . no , lenovo didn t make a courier , but its new yoga book might inspire the same reactions . it s about the size and shape of a hardcover children s book , has two panels attached by a hinge , and can be used with your fingers or with its included pen . it even does some tricks with the pen that we ve never seen before , like letting you write with real ink and have it all digitized . lenovo didn t set out to build just another tablet with the yoga book it wanted to make something that was better for getting work done than what is already out there . but in the process , it made a computer that s both futuristic and relatable at the same time , just like the original courier concept . i wanted to use the yoga book from the first time i laid eyes on it , and if you re anything like me , you will , too . and unlike the courier , you will actually be able to buy the yoga book . lenovo s entire brand has been built around productivity , anchored by workhorses like the storied thinkpad line of business laptops . but the company acknowledges that productivity as it s been defined historically is changing . so says jeff meredith , vice president of lenovo s android chrome computing business group , who set out with the goal to think about how tablets could be more productive in the way that phones are instead of the way pcs are . we tried to flip that on its head a little bit , he says , we find many people doing more on their phones than on their pc . so the comfort level with a touch based keyboard and a more mobile mindset should not be perceived as not appropriate for productivity . if people are using phones more , meredith argues , then tablets should act more like them . i hesitate to even call the yoga book a tablet , because we really think it s something else , he says . for the longest time we just called it the book i had this idea of a book we ended up calling it the yoga book , but for the longest time we just called it the book . we really wanted to hit a form factor that folded , and when you were carrying it , it looked like a book . and not a big beefy novel , but a thin magazine almost type of form factor , he says . one of his favorite ways to describe the yoga book is to liken it to a children s book , specifically , dr . seuss the cat in the hat . we were very adamant about staying true to this concept of almost ridiculously thin and light , and that s the characteristic that we wanted to deliver , he saysit shouldn t surprise you to hear that lenovo takes a research driven approach to product development . where apple sometimes gives the impression that all of its products come from a singular genius steve jobs , then later jony ive , meredith is up front about lenovo s use of research . development on the yoga book started nearly three years ago in a brainstorm , but lenovo tested every idea it had through user research . the company learned that younger people were already using tablets for productivity , even though many tablets weren t designed expressly for that purpose . we went and looked at college campuses and about of students that we observed in a lecture hall were taking notes or interacting a lot of them were actually using a tablet , typing on the tablet , and taking notes on the tablet . that guided lenovo on how to build its own spin on a productivity tablet , and it was not to just build a laptop that also had a touchscreen . we wanted to find an angle that came from a mobile direction as opposed to being a straight pc replacement , says meredith , alluding to the pc like approaches that other tablet makers have used . he didn t say it so i will lenovo didn t want to just build another surface clone the company already makes one of those , after all . half of the yoga book is what you d expect from a modern tablet it has a . inch , p touchscreen display , megapixel camera , gb of ram , gb of storage , and a microsd card slot . some markets will get an lte option in addition to the wi fi only model . all of that is encased in a slim metal frame that could pass for any generic tablet in . about the only surprising thing about the specs is the intel atom processor , a rarity among tablets in it s a small reminder that lenovo has been working on the yoga book for a long time . the touch panel doubles as a keyboard and writing surface but it s the other half of the yoga book that makes it special and different from the many tablets already out there . where you might expect there to be a physical keyboard or even a second screen , instead lenovo opted for a specialized , touch sensitive panel . open up the yoga book , and you ll see a flat , black expanse . dimly glowing lights outline a keyboard and trackpad , or you can tap a button and it switches into a pen recognition mode , powered by wacom technology . because it s a wacom surface , you can even put a stack of paper on top of the panel and write notes with real ink that are instantly digitized . the panel is attached to the screen with a hinge comprised of different pieces and can be rotated behind the display entirely , similar to how the keyboard on lenovo s yoga laptop line works . when the panel is folded back behind the display , the yoga book is still thin and light enough to be easily used for reading , gaming , watching video , or doing other entertainment activities that are commonly associated with tablets . when closed , the whole thing is under mm thick , putting it much closer to the realm of a smartphone or tablet without a keyboard than a laptop . when you carry it around , closed , it feels much smaller than it has any right to . it isn t quite the dr . seuss book meredith talks about , but it s close enough . typing on the yoga book s halo keyboard is much closer to typing directly on a touchscreen than using a traditional keyboard . it replaces physical keys with some haptic feedback , but because it s just a touch panel , lenovo can build smartphone tricks into it . it supports autocorrect , and word suggestions , of course . and also like many smartphone virtual keyboards , the yoga book can adapt to your typing style over time and adjust the size of tap targets accordingly . it wasn t this way from the start , though . one of the original yoga book concepts featured two screens , just like the courier . but two full touchscreens made the device too heavy and compromised battery life . we certainly wanted to have the keyboard , and to achieve the thinness that we wanted in the panel , the keyboard panel , we looked at an array of different options and settled on this touch based keyboard , says meredith . truthfully , this is where we ve iterated the most on this product . lenovo spent a year and a half tuning the performance and experience of the keyboard , utilizing various teams across the world to determine how it worked with various languages and character sets . that led to different developments in features such as word suggestions , which are presented differently for asian languages than latin based ones . we did a lot of usage testing and we found that a person and younger can adapt fully to the keyboard and be typing at speeds consistent with what they type on a traditional keyboard within minutes to minutes , meredith claims . but somebody who s and up , they take a couple of hours before they re getting a consistent kind of error rate and speed . sorry , gen xers . but perhaps the older among us might like the yoga book s other feature the ability to automatically digitize notes you take on any pad of paper . the decision to find a way to work with good old paper came , again , from user research instead of divine inspiration if you look at a lot of the devices that have pen capability on them today , where you re writing on glass , says meredith , the percentage of people that actually use it is quite low . the solution lenovo came up with for note taking is as unique as the keyboard . the same panel that can act as a full keyboard and trackpad can also become a writing surface . the yoga book comes with an ink insert for its stylus and a stack of note paper that magnetically attaches to the touch panel . anything you write on the paper pad will be captured digitally , even when the screen is off . there s no scanning or taking pictures of your notes to save them digitally , and switching between writing and typing is as simple as tapping a button . it s lenovo s way of letting you have the best of both worlds a familiar ink and paper writing experience and the archival capabilities of digital notes . and if you prefer a different pad of paper , virtually anything that s less than an inch thick should work . or , forget the paper , switch the pen back to a stylus the process is fiddly , and you can take notes or draw directly on the panel . the stylus is pressure sensitive up to , levels and lenovo included apps that can record your notes , even with the screen off and flipped around the back . it all might sound like a little much , but the clean design of the hardware sort of guides your understanding of what you can do on the device . as long as the software lives up to the promise of the hardware , it could be a really good experience . but software , as always , is the hard part . originally , the yoga book was designed to work with android , but a few months into development , lenovo decided to also make a windows version . the hardware between the two versions is the same , with minor tweaks to the keyboard layout for each platform . building two versions of the yoga book muddies the mobile first message a bit , especially since windows has a more traditional desktop feel than android . it s one of the few points in the yoga book s development where it seems that a business position lenovo makes a lot of windows computers and its research showed certain markets prefer windows over android took precedence over the best product decision . either way , building a windows model didn t seem to require a lot of effort aside from customizing the keyboard layout , lenovo didn t tailor the windows version to fit the yoga book s hardware much at all , as the software pieces were largely already there . the pen s note taking features work with microsoft s onenote , and the keyboard , trackpad , and touchscreen work just as you would expect them to on any windows laptop . but android is a different beast , and lenovo did add a number of things to it in order to take advantage of the yoga book s hardware . the yoga book will be launching with android . marshmallow , which doesn t offer any sort of split screen multitasking , so lenovo rolled its own multi window feature . android is on the roadmap for next spring , and lenovo says it will deliver security updates as google provides them . the approach lenovo used to handle multitasking seems smart , though . if an app comes with both a phone and tablet layout , you can shrink its window down to the phone version and move it around the display wherever you want . meredith says that about to percent of android tablet apps work with the feature . lenovo built its own note taking app for capturing handwritten notes with the yoga book s stylus . the company also added a windows style task bar to the bottom to make it easier to switch between apps and a handful of gestures to manage the multi window features . software is where lenovo faces its biggest challenge with the yoga book , especially since it is relying on platforms made by other companies . not only does lenovo have to make sure the yoga book s software experience matches its unique hardware , it also has to get people to buy an android or windows tablet in a flattening market that s been dominated by the ipad . those are hurdles that even the most successful smartphone companies have not been able to jump with their tablets . the yoga book s pricing could help a bit . the android version will start at , while the windows model will be about more when the device hits shelves this october . that s expensive for an android tablet these days , but then nobody s made a huge effort create an innovative android tablet since google s pixel c and even then , you could argue , the effort was half hearted . the pen , paper , and keyboard of course are all included , which is different from the apple s ipad pro , which is more expensive and doesn t include any of those productivity accessories . lenovo also understands that this won t be the device for everybody , and that it s attempting to hit a particular niche . for certain , some people will say i m a heavy user of the office suite or i need adobe this won t be the device for them , says meredith . the lion s share of people that do relatively light productivity but also want something that has all of the entertainment capability , i think this ll be a good fit . software challenges aside , lenovo has managed to create a computer that doesn t feel derivative instead it seems like a genuinely new kind of thing . it looks and feels like a book in a way that no other computer or tablet device i ve tried has ever managed to pull off . the yoga book dream hinges entirely on its execution it also managed to stick to its original concept , even though its development period was significantly longer than most of the company s products . we tried our best to stay dialed into what we initially set as our objective and worked hard to get there , says meredith . it s remarkable how much the end product resembles the original prototypes and development models . this yoga book is just the first in a family of products lenovo plans to roll out , and other versions with various screen sizes will be released . the company started with the inch model because that s the most popular tablet size , but meredith says that future versions will stay true to the touch keyboard , writing capabilities , and thin and light design pioneered by the first model . i can t say whether lenovo was able to nail the software on the yoga book we ll need to actually review it before i can do that . but if the software is great and that s a big if it could mean that we have a new kind of device that nestles in between phones and traditional tablets . a device that s personal and capable , entertaining and productive , entirely new , yet familiar at the same time . it surely won t live up to the fantasies the courier inspired , but the courier was never really real . the yoga book is . produced by frank bidesign by james barehamedited by dieter bohnvideo by phil esposito , mark linsangan , and andrew marino	 the cows were the first to go because cows are big , and killing them was easy . the ranchers on santa cruz island had been killing cattle for more than century already . rounded up , marched onto ships and motored miles across the pacific to mainland california , the cows were slaughtered , just like they d been slaughtered for a hundred years , or longer even . by the early s , the cows were gone . so were nearly all the ranchers . all queens must die on santa cruz island , they killed the cows , sheep , and bees . now it s time to finish the jobby ryan bradley photography by john francis petersthe cows were the first to go because cows are big , and killing them was easy . the ranchers on santa cruz island had been killing cattle for more than a century already . rounded up , marched onto ships and motored miles across the pacific to mainland california , the cows were slaughtered , just like they d been slaughtered for a hundred years , or longer even . by the early s , the cows were gone . so were nearly all the ranchers . the national park system is turning , and the verge is celebrating with wilderness week a look at the natural world , its freaky critters , and its future . the sheep were trickier . there were a lot more of them , something like , , grazing over square miles of mountainous island covered in dense chaparral , little oak woodlands , deep canyons , towering cliffs , and some of the largest sea caves in the world . a great landscape to hide in . the nature conservancy which owns about three quarters of the island set about eradicating the sheep in . by , the conservancy had killed at least , of them , but some sheep survived on santa cruz into the s . by , the island began to open up , as part of the five island channel islands national park . the sheep carcasses dotting the landscape were not so great for public relations , and photos of wounded sheep and orphaned lambs made it into the papers and nightly news . the national park service paid to have the remaining sheep quickly rounded up and shipped across the channel . the program to remove the bees was far more tactically rigorous for five years , beginning in , scientists carefully mapped all the colonies , killing off the easy ones . in , they introduced a parasitic mite to take care of the rest . by , only one colony was left , on top of a grade named matzana . within seven months , that was gone , too . the snipers tracked the collared judas pigs back to their kindthe pigs were the trickiest . or trickiest yet . they d been on the island since the mid th century , brought over by the first ranchers , and had long gone feral . the parks service and conservancy closed off most of the island to the public beginning in , called in teams of new zealand snipers and helicopter pilots and , within a year , had killed , of them . over the next few months , some of the remaining pigs were captured and radio collared . pigs are social , and extremely smart . the snipers tracked the collared , so called judas pigs back to their kind and , only if and when they could destroy a group all at once , opened fire . any pig left alive , even wounded , would become all the more skittish and difficult to find . it would teach others to fear helicopters overhead . some of the last remaining island pigs had changed their habits entirely . one judas seemed to have turned amphibian . when a helicopter team flew by the patch of coastline where the radio collar told them it should be , they found a cave high up on a cliff . a harnessed sniper descended into the cave and , when the pig charged out of the dankness , he put it down . santa cruz island was declared pig free by . in , it was declared turkey free , too . the nature conservancy was tantalizingly close to its goal to restore santa cruz island to something approximating its prehistoric , virgin state . there was but one invasive animal remaining , the toughest and hardiest creature of them all . for years , no one had figured out how to kill it . for half a century , no one even knew it was there . but it was , in the millions . and now the conservationists turned to face their most tenacious foe the argentine ant . imagine an ant long delicate legs a slim , dark , reddish brown body and antennae segmented times . its crawl or march or whatever you want to call it is distinctive more of a scurry . and it isn t alone . it s surrounded by its sisters , a line of ants in front and behind , ready to swarm or attack or raid . they are relentless , these ants , which is why when you picture an ant the type you go to war with every summer , summer after summer , in your kitchen and bathroom and backyard the ant you are picturing is almost certainly linepithema humile , the argentine ant . the argentine ant is one of the most successful invasive creatures on earth . their colonies appear on every continent but antarctica , and many , many islands in between . they are so pervasive that the first of their species collected , named , and properly identified weren t even in their native paran river drainage , which stretches across northern argentina , uruguay , paraguay , and southern brazil . no , the first argentine ants were identified on madeira , an island located a few hundred miles off the coast of morocco , in the mid th century . within a decade or two , they were spotted in portugal , then spain , southern france , italy , and the port of new orleans . trade globalized , and the argentine ants colonized . they reached the canary islands and azores by ship , and most of the southeastern united states and california by rail , likely carried in the dirt of potted plants . by , argentines were in belfast , eking out the colder months in the warm walls of human homes . they can live pretty much anywhere , so long as there are humans and our climate controlled structures . they have been found in greenhouses and inside zoos throughout the midwest and into canada . southern california and the mediterranean feel like home , though colonies have been found ampnbspin apartments as far north as sandnes , norway . they wreak special havoc on islands , because most island ecosystems haven t seen anything like them before . hawaii had no native ants at all until trade and europeans brought them . argentines landed in the middle of the th century and ran rampant on oahu and maui . they ve become the most dominant ant on bermuda , too , pushing out a species of carpenter ant and so decimating the indigenous bermuda ant that it was long thought extinct until , in , an intern at the bermuda aquarium museum and zoo found a colony hiding inside an exhibit . the large supercolony , it turns out , is a global superpowerpart of the argentine ant s success comes from its particularly relentless aggression . the paran river drainage is one of the more ant choked regions in the world , and argentines evolved to be the elbows out , bare knuckle brawlers of the insect kingdom . overseas , colonies spread freely through territories filled with weaker , ill prepared ants , or no ants at all , and the argentines rarely encounter a foe that can match them , save for other colonies of argentines or fire ants , another paran invasive . but another aspect of the species success overseas is its uniquely extended and frighteningly vast version of sisterhood the supercolony . a colony of ants is a very large family of females . the genetic bond between certain colonies of argentine ants is particularly strong . it s so strong that a worker from one colony can be plucked up and deposited into another , hundreds of miles away , and she will act as if she s right at home , surrounded by family , which , in a way , she is . throughout california , from san diego to san francisco , the argentine ants form one enormous sisterhood , or colony , or supercolony . the california supercolony is known in scientific literature as the large supercolony . but recent studies suggest that it is even larger than it was long assumed to be . the lineage of the california colony is the same as colonies along the northern mediterranean coastline and southern japan . the large supercolony , it turns out , is a global superpower . decades ago , it made landfall on santa cruz island . christina boser arrived on santa cruz fresh off her ecology dissertation and ready to help breed the island s foxes , which had been on the brink of extinction . instead , she got handed the list of invasive species to remove . the argentine ants were all that remained animal wise , though there were still plenty of invasive plants . i m an animal person , boser told me . so i got ants . that was seven years ago . she s spent most of that time learning the ants ways and how to effectively poison them without harming other , noninvasive critters . the nature conservancy s island eradication programs have always focused on benefiting an ecosystem as a whole , but it is particularly concerned with invasives that tip the ecological balance in such a way that it threatens native wildlife with outright extinction . boser needed to poison all the queens at onceisland eradications are always high stakes , high wire endeavors you get , more or less , one big shot at taking out a whole species . then you wait , sometimes years , to see if the invader has truly been eliminated or has , instead , come back . the coming back from the dead is called the lazarus effect . often all it takes is one pregnant female or a breeding pair to undo years of planning and millions of spent dollars . in the ants case , one stalwart queen stowed away underground could undo everything boser had been plotting . boser , extremely practical and one of those humans for whom the normal rules regarding reserves of energy and focus seem not to apply , had met an equally relentless foe . how do you eradicate tens of millions , if not billions , of tiny insects that live under several dozen square miles of extremely rugged terrain ? killing each ant would be an impossible task . but kill the queen and you initiate a colony collapse , for the queen is the only source of new ants . only , argentine ant colonies often boast several queens , so even the ant s central weakness required a comprehensive plan of attack boser needed to poison all the queens at once . if she did that , santa cruz would be one step closer to perfection . you re looking at this landscape , you re looking at millions of ants around one oak tree , and you re thinking how do you affect them all ? boser said to me . how do you get an ant to do what i want them to do ? christina bosershe had argentines in her backyard , of course , so she began her initial research and development there . most poisoning systems acted too fast , killing ants either upon contact or soon after . boser finally hit upon little gel beads , the kind used by florists in watery bouquets . biodegradable , they soaked up the sugar water cut with poison , and kept their shape long enough , allowing the ants time to swarm and haul them homeward , back to the queens . best of all , the sugar water bait balls took advantage of two quirks of the argentine ants behavior . all ants live in a chemical world governed by pheromones . argentines , in particular , are excellent at recruiting telling other workers , via chemical scent , that there s a valuable food source here , and getting many of their nest mates to follow . those nest mates then lay more pheromones , and soon enough a swarm forms , be it around a dead cockroach , potato chip , or poisoned gel ball . the ants , craving carbohydrates , would swarm all over the poison . particularly this time of year . summer in california is argentine ant season . it s when they re most on the march , hunting for food , invading kitchens and bathrooms . the ants are out of sync with the native flora and fauna of their adopted homes in coastal california , where nearly everything native has bloomed and died by july , if not earlier . the hills are dusty brown and gray and ready to burn . most native ants , and many native insects , lie low or go dormant during the dog days . the argentines , however , are roaming , hungry , and vulnerable . boser moved her research from her backyard to a hillside near an old orchard on the island , not far from where the ants first made landfall sometime in the late s or early s . the ants had probably been carried to santa cruz by a navy vessel hauling construction material , and soon colonized the wash and dry creek bed leading down to the small harbor . decades passed , and the ants slowly worked their way up the wash , up into the orchard , then onto the hill beyond . but it wasn t until when a biologist working in the old orchard reached up to a branch and came back down with argentines scuttling all over his hand . oh shoot , he thought , these aren t supposed to be here . he added them to the list which , years later , was handed to boser . after years of plotting and planning , boser hoped to strike the indomitable ants a killing blow . maybe . she wasn t going to promise anything . ecology is really , really messy , she said . then she invited me out to the island to see the mess . off the starboard bow on the twin hulled double decker ferry that shuttles back and forth from ventura to santa cruz island , a pod of common dolphins worked a school of fish , and children leaning over the railing screamed , delighted . an old ranch hand was telling me how he missed bow hunting the sheep it had been good business , leading hunting parties . he d worked on santa cruz for years , but now that all the game was gone he mostly fixed the old rusted army trucks used by the scientists to bounce around from one study site to another . the old hand leaned back , tipped his cap down over his eyes , and dozed off for the rest of the three hour trip . up ahead , through the marine haze , the outline of the island emerged . its easternmost edge flattened out to a broad anchorage where the school kids and practically everyone else onboard would be let off . this was the national park side of the island . another five miles or so west along the coast we came to another anchorage , which led to a rocky , rough beach filled with sea detritus , and an even rougher wash leading into the island s interior . at this landing , visitors need an escort , or a special permit , and are required to carefully wipe their shoes and check for stowaway species . this was the nature conservancy portion of the island . it was a fine looking ant , i said . probably the finest ant i d ever seenboser drove us up the wash toward the center of the island where we met david holway , an ecologist from the university of california , san diego , who specialized in ants argentines in particular . he was out in the field , searching for native ants in the shade of an old oak tree , and as he walked up to greet us he was distracted by a line of ants in the road . he squatted down and motioned us over . these are harvester ants , he said . extremely rare . the ants crossed the road , carrying bits of grass into their nest . that s why they re called harvesters , holway said . they re bringing plant material back , dispersing seeds . they re incredibly important to these ecosystems . there are ant species on santa cruz , holway said , though none were completely unique to the island . it s likely that several species ended up on the island after being blown across about miles across the channel in the fall , when the santa ana winds blast offshore from california s inland deserts , down the mountains , and out to sea . many of the species on santa cruz were like these harvesters nearly gone from mainland california , pushed out by argentines , but still fairly common here . in a sense , the place had become a kind of ark for threatened native ants . we followed holway to an island scrub oak a shrunken down , twisted up variety unique to the channel islands . another of the island s endemics , a blue jay called the island scrub jay , featured short , stubby wings and was bad at flying . it made its home in these oaks , too . holway beat at the dense , low lying branches of the scrub with a special net , called a beating net , perfect for dislodging insects from the canopy . bits of oak fell into the net , then a jumping spider , and then an ant . ah . yes . camponotus maritimus , a carpenter ant endemic to california . they re gorgeous , holway said . it was a fine looking ant , i said . probably the finest ant i d ever seen . notice the two tones on the body , holway said . and the nice legs . they ve got great legs , boser said . i nodded . hours later , back at the old ranch where the nature conservancy ran its operations , a helicopter pilot and boser went over the plan of attack for the gel pellet dispersal tomorrow morning . the system boser has devised required two fork lifts , huge tubes filled with the gel pellets , a large metal chute , and the copter for dispersal . it was a complicated system , but it was the least complicated of the different systems boser had devised . plus , it hinged primarily on gravity to get the pellets from the chute into the bucket and gravity , boser said , was more reliable than any machine . the next morning , on our way over to the landing strip and staging ground , we passed through huge strands of dried up fennel , covering whole hillsides , and a grove of eucalyptus both stubborn invaders like the argentine ants . the fennel had spread considerably after the sheep were dispatched . they d kept the plant in check . we passed by old pens where the island foxes had been bred when they were on the brink of extinction an event caused by a complicated cocktail of invaders golden eagles had been drawn to the island by piglets , which were easy prey , and welcomed as a check on the pig population . but then observers realized that the eagles were feasting on the native foxes too , and it was nearly too late to save them . in the endlessly intricate dance of keeping ecosystems balanced , the enemy of an enemy can turn friend then foe overnight . approaching the old airfield , on the branch of a dying , dried up oak , a prideful scrub jay hopped and flapped as if in hopes of scaring us off . nearby , i began to see the mess of ecology and conservation in action . the first tub of beads had been poured into the chute , but was leaking out of a small gap at the chute s end . boser and a few others were staring up as a sticky mess of sugary beads fell into their faces . maybe some rubber , to jam up in there ? boser said . the graduate students , in army surplus pilot jumpsuits , began shoveling the fallen beads , breaking the sugar water into a slurry and sending little droplets splattering . a ranch manager hopped down from his forklift and made quick work of an old hose , cutting bits of it to close in around the gap . with the gear patched , the helicopter pilot lifted off , tightly turning around and hovering with the bucket just under the chute , kicking up small bits of sugar water slurry before flying off down the coast , a few ridges over . as he made his first line , the tiny poison pellets shot out from the bucket , catching the sunlight and shimmering , diamond like . by his fifth run , the patch had failed , and the gel bead slurry trickled out again . boser sighed and walked back up toward the pellet tubs , near the small citrus grove where the ants were first discovered . the ants were still there , of course . for years she d been tromping across these steep hills , dense with sage and mustard , running from wasps , looking for ant colonies , calculating the probability of their persistence even after mass aerial poisoning . if they fixed the chute , if the coverage was good , and if they did this again every month for another four months , for two full summers , she d calculated that they had a very good chance of killing off the ants , close to . percent . not perfect , but close enough . the evening before the ant eradication began , i hiked up one side of the small valley where the old ranch spread , climbing one of the two mountain ranges that make up santa cruz island . i walked up toward the north side , dark red with volcanic rock like burnt sienna . the south side , farther from the mainland , was green gray sedimentary and ancient it had been the ocean floor millions of years ago . i went through the valley slowly at first , watching the island foxes as they came out into the fallow fields to hunt . then faster , passing up through a tiny pine forest , hearing mourning doves coo loudly at one another among the strange bonsai tangle of the scrub oaks . up through a hillside swept with blooming buckwheat , all dusty yellows and pinks , blurred along the ridge with the hazy evening sky . it became very silent , then the dry brush rustled , and an island fox trotted out and stared at me for a spell , sniffing the evening air before losing interest and trotting back into the chaparral . i peered down at the far side of the valley to a small dirt airfield and beyond , to the old port where the ants had first arrived , and where the war on the ants was about to begin . i thought then of what the conservancy was saving . like most species that end up native to an island , the santa cruz island foxes had become , in their way , unique . it isn t quite its own species it could , for example , mate with other island foxes on the other channel islands , and create viable offspring . but still , on each of the channel islands the foxes were undergoing the long , slow process of speciation . foxes on santa cruz , which is farther north and chillier than most of the islands , have thicker coats in richer colors . their personalities are different , too , more curious and docile . given enough time , the santa cruz island fox could in all likelihood shift from subspecies to full blown species . the uncomfortable truth is that the foxes . . . were almost certainly brought to the island by humans toobut the uncomfortable truth is that the foxes so ingrained in the idea of the native ecology here were almost certainly brought to the island by humans too . like the argentine ants , they came by boat . unlike the ants , it wasn t the military , the boat wasn t motorized , and it was a long time ago . a native american tribe , the chumash , likely brought them over on long , canoe like ships called tomols that they used to cross the channel for nearly , years . they brought dogs , too . the dogs they used for hunting , but the foxes , it seems , were kept around because they were cute and companionable more cat than doglike . when boser told me this , i asked her why foxes were considered native but the argentine ants were not . was the distinction of native vs . invasive simply one of time ? where do you draw the line ? i asked her . do you go back years ? two hundred ? no , no , she said . naming dates gets you in a lot of trouble , drawing firm lines like that . the best she could do , both as an employee of the nature conservancy and an ecologist , was to value biodiversity above all , right up there with the overall health of the ecosystem . the argentines presented a threat not simply to several ant species , but other types of flora and fauna as well the flowers that needed their seeds moved by the harvester ants the bees that were harassed off of flowers run over by argentines or the health of the soil , even . holway had told me that the argentine ants were poor soil excavators , preferring to raid other ant colonies and move in rather than dig out their own nests . soil turnover is important , he emphasized , as it aerates the earth , benefiting not just the plants around it but also species living in the soil . the argentines seemed uninterested in digging , and the soil and plants were worse off for it . it reminded me of a line from wendell berry s essay conservation and local economy if we speak of a healthy community , we cannot be speaking of a community that is merely human . we are talking about a neighborhood of humans in a place , plus the place itself its soil , its water , its air , and all the families and tribes of nonhuman creatures that belong to it . it made me think of dominating , invasive species as bad neighbors , and the ranchers who had brought along the pigs and cows and sheep as bad neighbors , too . had the chumash been good neighbors ? and what about the humans on the island today ? and the argentine ants ? though they weren t immediately threatening a species with extinction , they did pose a threat to the balance of the place . still , the eradication effort seemed extreme , like a grand experiment in whole system ecology . by trying to turn the island back into what it once was , undoing the human hand with more human hands , where were we going ? aggressive warmongers , successfully spread out across the continents , forming global superpowers it seemed to me we shared more in common with the argentine ants than was comfortable to admit , and that in doing battle against the ants we d come close to the crux of conservation and our ideas of what is natural and of what nature should be . the thing is , everything about island eradications is already pretty extreme the amount of planning , the cost , the fact that it s typically a last resort , brad keitt , the director of conservation at island conservation , told me . island conservation is a nonprofit that does nothing but prevent extinctions on islands by removing invasive species . islands , keitt said , represent less than percent of the earth s land mass , but account for percent of its biodiversity . about percent of all species currently threatened with extinction are on islands , and two thirds of those threats are from invasive species brought by humans . it was , keitt said , not just a question of good stewardship but our moral imperative to do everything in our power to stop these extinctions and protect biodiversity . eradications are simply the most cost effective approach , he said . it s living , it s changing , it s a whole system , not anything like a museum or a zoo . at one point , while we waited for the dispersal chute to be fixed , i called the nature conservancy s restoration efforts museum like and boser pushed back . that s completely wrong , she said . it s living , it s changing , it s a whole system , not anything like a museum or a zoo . we still have so much to learn from it . she brought up a recent finding among the island s scrub jays groups of birds on the same island had developed different sized beaks . some of the jays preferred the pines , and their beaks were longer and pointier , while others who lived and foraged in the scrub oak had developed more blunt edged beaks . that birds on the same island living within several yards of one another could begin to develop such different traits flew right in the face of darwin s finches , and the whole concept of how species became species due to geographical separation . this wasn t geographical separation . this was habitual separation . similar changes might be happening with the ants , or the bees , or any number of other species on santa cruz , but we d never know if we allowed invasives like the argentine ants to take over and dwindle their populations . boser told me that eradication efforts happening on the far northwest side of santa cruz island the side few visitors get to see had brought about the most remarkable change of all cleared of invasives , the island s native flora and fauna had returned beyond anyone s expectations . she d show me what she meant before i caught a ferry back to the mainland . she d arranged a helicopter ride , to show me the part of the island that had been returned to a near prehistoric , perfect state . on my last day on the island , we climbed into the helicopter and took off from a fallow field in the island s central valley , and swept up the sea cave pocked coast toward the most rugged swaths . the landscape was almost entirely vertical , cliffs and canyons leading to rocky coastline . there were no argentine ants here , no eucalyptus trees or fennel , no judas pigs or cattle . i was seeing the island as it would have been years ago , perhaps . except , of course , there were people here back then , so this was something different , older , more primordial . we flew over a small beach filled with sea lions , and down near a dark canyon , dense with ferns . we flew up a sea cliff and saw an eagle s nest in the distance . a bald eagle soared off from it , the bird s white head gleaming against the dark sea . it was a stunning sight , and surprising . the bald eagles had been killed off sometime in the late s or early s , first by hunters , then by ddt . now they d been brought back from beyond the grave . from to , eagles were released until , at last , a pair produced a chick . the island has eight nesting pairs , untouched since . it cost about , a year for years to secure their future on santa cruz island , releasing bird after bird until they gained a foothold . it was a hard battle to undo past misdeeds . but the bald eagles were good neighbors . marine hunters , they didn t seem to go after the island foxes , and kept the golden eagles at bay . and they were thriving , which shouldn t have come as a surprise . after all , they were natives to the land once before . produced by frank bidesign by james barehamedited by michael zelenko	 steven yang quit his job at google in the summer of to build the products he felt the world needed a line of reasonably priced accessories that would be better than the ones you could buy from apple and other big name brands . these accessories batteries , cables , chargers would solve our most persistent gadget problem by letting us stay powered on at all times . there were just a few problems yang knew nothing about starting a company , building consumer electronics , or selling products . i was a software engineer all my life at google . i didn t know anyone in the electronics manufacturing world , yang tells me over skype from his office in shenzhen , china . but he started the company regardless , thanks in no small part to his previous experience with amazon s sellers marketplace , a platform for third party companies and tiny one or two person teams interested in selling directly to consumers . he named the company anker , after the german word for ship anchor . the steady rise of the company s profile is proof that it s possible to meet one very specific consumer need and ride that waveanker has since become the most popular brand of portable battery packs on amazon . portable chargers had a bit of a standout moment last summer , when players of the wildly popular and battery hogging pok mon go could be seen roaming the streets , their phones constantly plugged in . but these accessories have existed for years as a remedy for our battery woes since the standard smartphone tends to last no more than a day on a single charge . so in airports , the back of cabs , and on city streets we re plugging into lithium ion slabs in our pockets and bags to stay connected . the market for portable battery packs generated million in the months ending in march in the us alone . the brands behind these packs are largely anonymous kmashi , jackery , and imuto and they often stay that way . except anker . the steady rise of the company s profile is proof that it s possible to meet one very specific consumer need and ride that wave as it continues to ripple out to other markets . a majority of anker s sales come from cables and wall chargers , and it s now moving into the smart home and auto market anywhere a plug and a cable can solve a problem . yang and his team started a company with the sole purpose of selling a better third party accessory . but they stumbled onto a more lucrative reality mobile phones , once niche luxury items , are now ubiquitous centerpieces of our digital lives . each of these phones , and all the products that connect to them , need their own cable and plug . and each and every day these devices die before we want them to . powercore . if there s anything you should know about smartphone development over the last years , it s this batteries are not lasting longer . phones may be thinner and faster , with larger screens and better cameras , but they don t stay powered for longer than a day , perhaps hours at best . the culprit is the fundamental science of lithium ion batteries , which are tremendous at storing energy but only within limited size and capacity constraints . the lithium ion batteries we have today operate at about a fifth of their potential storage capacity , says lynden archer , a professor of chemical engineering at cornell university . and yet that s still at about percent of the maximum potential today s battery science allows . a breakthrough would require a new paradigm , he says . a huge part of anker s success is the fact that our batteries don t last long enough . that stagnation has allowed anker to flourish . a huge part of anker s success is the fact that our batteries don t last long enough , says joanna stern , a technology columnist and gadget reviewer for the wall street journal . they saw that accessories needed to be made to address customers pain points . they re making the chargers , the cases , the cords and they re making it for affordable prices so you can have one of these in every place you are . mobile battery packs weren t the company s initial goal . in the late s , yang identified a consumer need not being met well built , reliable laptop battery replacements . you have a dell or hp laptop let s assume you got it in and in the battery is dying and you want to get a new one , he says . back then you had two choices buy directly from dell or hp , with a high price tag , or buy a white label battery that s cheap but poorly made . which one do i want to buy ? asks yang . the answer is neither of them . yang saw a desire for a better type of accessory one that wouldn t cost as much as a replacement straight from the original manufacturer , but that would be of a high enough quality to earn consumers trust . before he could sell that product , he needed to figure out how to make it . it was a long and painful process . after he quit his job at google in july , anker took months just to prototype its first laptop battery . that was even after yang and the core team moved to shenzhen to find reliable manufacturing partners . i knew that if i stayed in california and had people fedex me prototypes in a week , it was just not going to work , he says . many hardware companies , especially crowdfunded ones in the us , learn that lesson the hard way , missing deadlines and hitting snags that lead to months long delays . a solid supply chain is so crucial to a hardware company s survival that there s an entire consulting industry around helping startups find suppliers and set expectations . critical to avoiding these pitfalls was dongpong zhao , google s then head of sales in china . zhao joined anker in early , and helped yang build out the company s supply chain . anker was made up of around ten people at the time . think of it as a small family business instead of like an actual company , yang says . the company tirelessly built out a supply chain in its first year and began testing its first products the laptop chargers and batteries it would begin selling direct to consumers on amazon . we were able to make cellphone battery cells that actually had slightly better capacity . that got us quite the reputation . from there , anker ventured into smartphone batteries with a replacement unit for the htc sensation . we were able to make cellphone battery cells that actually had slightly better capacity , yang says . that got us quite the reputation . early on , anker developed close relationships with suppliers in asia , including panasonic and anode supplier btr , to help test and quickly develop new batteries . yang says he and anker s small team definitely saw the explosion of smart devices as its biggest and most obvious opportunity , and anker started aggressively expanding into portable battery packs , wall chargers , and cables . by the end of , after shifting more resources toward portable chargers , yang says anker went from selling to , products per day . the challenge wasn t selling products , yang says . it was making products and making sure they were high quality as well . that s why we spent a majority of our effort on r ampampd and product development . the company does a majority of its sales directly to consumers over amazon marketplace , where a combination of strong reviews , low prices , and prominent placement in search rankings can turn a single product into a lucrative line . for the accessories market , which tends to piggyback off trends in mainstream consumer electronics , a true breakthrough is rare . but anker found one in charging , based on the realization that while batteries may not be improving , charging time certainly was . according a study conducted last year by phonearena , it took more than two hours on average to charge a device to percent in . today , it can be done in almost half the time . so anker set out to make the fastest chargers available . take the powerport , a matte black rectangle no larger than a deck of playing cards , with five usb ports . when it was first introduced in , it was the only accessory on the market capable of charging five devices simultaneously at optimal speed . or the company s standard powercore portable charger , roughly the size of a credit card and just under one inch thick a white block encasing , mah of lithium ion battery cells . it has four pinholes that light up in led blue when you press an elliptical button on the top to check its remaining charge . it can refill a depleted iphone in just over minutes nearly four times over before it needs to be recharged . most anker charging products have one signature the poweriq logo . launched in , the company s proprietary charging standard is now present on nearly all of its batteries and wall plugs . the technology , carried by a small chip inside each charger , identifies whatever device is being plugged in , be it an iphone plus , google pixel , or an ipad pro . inch , in order to detect and deliver the maximum current the product allows . anker says the technology can shave hours off the amount of time it takes to reach a full charge . a next generation version of the chip , a sequel to poweriq , is slated to start shipping in new anker charging products later this year , allowing for smaller and lighter accessories . on top of its products technical advantages , anker banks on looks to make its chargers stand out . brand manager elisa lu says every device s packaging is carefully thought out from the moment customers receive the product , to when they open it and use it . devices come in a white and light blue box with the name anker printed in all caps across the front . inside is a meticulously packaged arrangement of lightweight cardboard . anker products carry that new gadget smell a blend of peculiar odors from the evaporation of chemical compounds in the plastics and the epoxy coatings of the device . beside its red cables , which anker offers in both standard and braided nylon versions , and a single one off red battery pack , the company sells products in only two color options black and white . all this has a strategic business purpose . when our consumers receive our products , we want to make sure they know they are getting it from a reliable and trustworthy company , lu says . brand trust is a pivotal consideration when purchasing what may seem like random electronics off amazon . inside the the box with anker s larger products , you ll also find a small square piece of paper with two questions are you happy , or are you unhappy ? if you re unhappy , a block of text instructs you to contact anker customer support via phone , email , or on its website . if you re satisfied , it asks you to tell your friends or family . better yet , leave an amazon review . powercore slim . in many ways , anker s success is born from the failures of premier manufacturers like apple and samsung . where those companies introduce points of friction like ever thinner devices with short battery lives anker offers a remedy . my feeling is that anker is a success because apple offers such subpar and expensive accessories , says stern , who s often recommended anker products in her wsj column . it may be surprising that apple sat idly as the accessory market ballooned around it it took the company years to develop its own battery case for the iphone to compete with mophie . but apple has always favored high margins on premium products , even the cables and earbuds it sells in the apple store . this has given ample room to companies like anker , with the low overhead of an e commerce business , to sell similar products of near identical quality for to cheaper . and where apple and others failed to develop products of their own like multi port wall plugs and portable chargers , anker saw the opportunity and capitalized on it . the company is quick to fill gaps created by smartphone manufacturers . when apple removed the headphone jack on the iphone , for instance , anker saw a giant opportunity to begin producing new dongles and other cable adapters to help consumers adjust . but mastering amazon was the real key to securing anker s future . search for a generic accessory like cellphone wall charger or lightning cable and you ll find the anker brand high up in the search resultsif you head over to amazon . com right now and peruse the retailer s most popular smartphone accessories and you ll find anker products at the top . search for a generic accessory like cellphone wall charger or lightning cable and you ll find the anker brand high up in the search results , typically with a . or star rating . in fact , anker products take up the first five slots on amazon s list of best selling portable batteries . and alongside the ratings , you ll find thousands of customer reviews reviews that the company scans meticulously for ideas on how to improve their development process . two years before he left google , yang became intimately familiar with amazon s marketplace when he built an automated system for a friend who was selling third party products on amazon as a side business . it essentially took care of aspects of the business like inventory , logistics and fulfillment , and sales tracking . it took me two months , evenings and weekends , to develop this system , yang explained in a video produced by amazon last year to promote entrepreneurship on its platform . within a month , she was fulfilling orders a day . building this system gave yang invaluable insight into how third party selling on amazon functioned . he discovered what worked and what didn t , and how entire brands could crop up overnight and fade into obscurity the next day . anker thrived by borrowing infrastructure from amazon and relying on engineering and support in china . amazon provides loads of services financial services , fulfillment . it actually makes selling a low barrier thing , yang says . although the company attempted to handle its own fulfillment in its early days , it eventually discovered it could not compete with what amazon offered . now , about percent of anker s products are listed as fulfilled by amazon . you can build an online retail business off amazon , but making sure your products get exposure is the hard part . the biggest challenge for anker is not sales . it s customer perception , yang says . people think they need apple s cube charger and stock cable . teaching people that there is a superior product out there , and then convincing them to keep buying , is anker s core challenge . amazon reviews were really enormously helpful , yang says . the amazon reviews just come and come automatically . powerline usb c to usb . . silicon valley is full of breathless mission statements designed to inspire and justify the power and influence of technology , like apple s famous think different slogan , and google s ominous and now defunct don t be evil mantra . facebook , back in , celebrated its billion user milestone with an ad comparing the social network to chairs , bridges , and even nations . anker has never aspired to such grand ambitions . at anker , we can t exactly help you unwind , the company admits on its amazon sellers page . instead , anker takes a more straightforward approach by solving the inevitable problems technology creates . say goodbye to first world tech woes like oppressive low batteries and limited ports , the page says . say hello to an easier , smarter life . yang is trying to extend this simple philosophy to categories like headphones , speakers , phone cases , and now smart home appliances under a new brand called eufy . launched last september , eufy is anker s avenue for selling things like roomba clones , desk lamps , and bathroom scales . expanding into more product categories is a logical evolution for anker , but it s also a response to a looming existential threat yang says he foresees a future where portable chargers won t be necessary due to advancements in both fast charging and wireless charging . i think we all agree that the portable charger isn t forever , yang says . but consumers will always need wall plugs and cables , and anker sees its goal now as keeping pace with changing standards , like the introduction of usb c . powercore . in the meantime , yang says it s diversifying with a future expansion into audio , smart home , and automotive product lines . anker already produces bluetooth headphones and speakers , but it has aspirations to compete with the likes of harman kardon and bose . key to the success of those products is moving to brick and mortar retailers . terrence wang , the company s chief marketing officer hired from procter ampamp gamble in , says having a presence in best buy and walmart , a process that began last year , is the next stage of anker s evolution . expanding from online to offline is critical actually , wang says . we are trying to get as many people to know that they have a simple , convenient , portable , fast solution rather than just have to bring their own charger wherever they go . that s the original brand vision . the company s focus on storefront retail is a response to a second very real threat dependence on a direct to consumer , online only model . the company has found it difficult these days to launch new products on amazon . older products have thousands of reviews , while newer ones need to earn placement in the search rankings and collect testimonials before more cautious buyers pull the trigger . we re seeing a bit of a dilemma on that one , yang says . to a lot of people , the original charger and the original cable are the only means to charge their devices . the company is also struggling with its complex product line , with a dizzying number of choices that may alienate consumers who are looking for a simple choice . we re converging to this generation approach , yang says . so we ll try to release a generation of products every to months . choosing which products to promote at best buy , which to discontinue , and where to put resources for the future are all part of anker s growing pains . the company s success hinges on convincing or educating their consumers about the value of what they re offering . yang likes to tell a story about a moment he sees play out on repeat every single time he s at an airport , anywhere on the planet . he sees people , smartphones in hand , rushing from outlet to outlet , looking for space with the little apple cube in their hands and running out of options . to a lot of people , the original charger and the original cable are the only means to charge their devices , in their mind , he says . i look at those people and i always want to go up to them and talk to them . instead , yang and the anker team started conducting an annual consumer survey . it has only one question how often does your smartphone run out of battery ? once every day ? once a week ? once a month ? or perhaps never ? forty percent of people say their battery ran out at least once last week , another percent say at least once last month , yang says . as long as these numbers don t go down , i think we have a lot of work to do . 	 inside the test flight of facebook s first internet drone at am , in the dark morning hours of june th , mark zuckerberg woke up and got on a plane . he was traveling to an aviation testing facility in yuma , az , where a small facebook team had been working on a secret project . their mission to design , build , and launch a high altitude solar powered plane , in the hopes that one day a fleet of the aircraft would deliver internet access around the world . facebook read our full interview with mark zuckerbergzuckerberg arrived at the yuma proving ground before dawn . a lot of the team was really nervous about me coming , zuckerberg said in an interview with the verge . a core group of roughly two dozen people work on the drone , named aquila uh key luh , in locations from southern california to the united kingdom . for months , they had been working in rotations in yuma , a small desert city in southwestern arizona known primarily for its brutal summer temperatures . on this day , aquila would have its first functional test flight the goal consisted of taking off safely , stabilizing in the air , and flying for at least minutes before landing . i just felt this is such an important milestone for the company , and for connecting the world , that i have to be there , zuckerberg says . for facebook , aquila is more than a proof of concept . it s a linchpin of the company s plan to bring the internet to all billion people on earth , regardless of their income or where they live . doing so will lift millions of people out of poverty , zuckerberg says , improving education and health globally along the way . but it will also enable the next generation of facebook s services in artificial intelligence , virtual reality , and more . this next era of tech will require higher bandwidth and more reliable connections than we have today , and drones can help deliver both . the road to a vr version of facebook begins where aquila leaves the runway . image courtesy of facebookas the sun rose over the desert , a crane lifted aquila onto the dolly structure that would propel it into the sky . the drone has a tremendous wingspan feet , compared to a boeing s feet . and yet facebook engineered aquila to be as light as possible to permit ultra long flights . built with carbon fiber , the latest iteration of the drone weighs around pounds about half as much as a smart car . on the ground , facebook s employees were elated some wiped away tearsa remote control operator activated the dolly , and aquila began rumbling down the runway . the plane is attached to the dolly with four straps . when it reached sufficient speed , pyrotechnic cable cutters known as squibs cut through the straps , and aquila lifted into the air , where it floated up its test altitude of , feet and stabilized . on the ground , facebook s employees were elated some wiped away tears . it was this incredibly emotional moment for everyone on the team who s poured their lives into this for two years , zuckerberg said . watching from below , zuckerberg was struck by aquila s deliberate , unhurried pace . it flies really slowly , he said two weeks later , at facebook s headquarters in menlo park , ca . most times when people are designing planes , they re designing them to get people or things from place to place , so there s no real advantage to moving slowly . but if your goal is to stay in the air for a long period of time , then you want to use as little energy as possible which means going as slowly as you physically can , while not falling out of the air . flying between , and , feet , aquila uses lasers to transmit data to other aircraft as well as receivers on the ground that then convert signals into internet access . flight manualokay but why a plane ? there are lots of ways to bring the internet to people that don t involve designing your own drone . there are satellites , which are good at delivering internet access to wide geographical areas . but they re only effective in areas with low population density too many users can gobble up the bandwidth in a hurry . there are cellular towers , which excel at connecting dense urban populations . but building enough cellular towers to cover the entire earth is considered too expensive and impractical , even for facebook . if the drones could be built cheaply enough , they would one day dot the skiesin , zuckerberg wrote a paper analyzing various methods of internet delivery . high altitude drones , he said , could serve a huge audience of people who live in medium sized cities or on the outskirts of urban areas . they fly closer to the ground than satellites , meaning their signals are stronger and more useful to larger populations . and they fly above regulated airspace , making them easier to deploy . if facebook could build a drone that gathered most of its power from the sun , zuckerberg reasoned , it could fly for days . a laser communications system could deliver high speed internet to base stations on the ground , connecting everyone within kilometers . the planes would be easier to maneuver than , say , balloons a method embraced by google , which has embarked on its own global connectivity crusade with project loon . last year google challenged facebook more directly with project titan , a solar powered internet delivery drone of its own . if the drones could be built cheaply enough , they would one day dot the skies , and become a critical piece of the global internet infrastructure . and so months ago , zuckerberg set an ambitious goal to release a functional version of aquila in just a couple years . he personally recruited experts from nasa s jet propulsion laboratory and mit s media lab , among other places , to bring his vision to life . as part of the project , facebook spent nearly million to acquire the team behind ascenta , an aviation consultancy led by andy cox . cox is a mechanical engineer who previously worked on a team that kept a solar powered drone in the sky for two weeks still a world record . after facebook acquired his consultancy , cox became zuckerberg s top lieutenant on the aquila project . the team works out of a warehouse in bridgewater , miles west of london . aquila used , watts of energy the equivalent output of five strong cyclistsas recounted in wired earlier this year , building a working model of aquila put the team in daily battle with the laws of physics . early on , it attempted to launch aquila with a hot air balloon . a planned test flight date of october was pushed back , and then pushed back again . attempts to fly a foot scale model of aquila were hampered by el ni o storms . but by june th of this year , the team had overcome those hurdles . at cruise altitude , aquila was using just , watts of energy the equivalent output of five strong cyclists , zuckerberg says . the company hoped aquila would successfully remain aloft for half an hour . but it was so stable that they kept it in the air for minutes before landing it safely . facebook image courtesy of facebookthe hard partin its first flight , aquila exceeded engineers expectations for its energy efficiency . more test flights are planned , aimed at flying aquila faster , higher , and longer , says jay parikh , facebook s vice president of engineering , in a blog post today . and then aquila will have its next big test flying with the payload , as facebook calls the laser communication system that a team is building in woodland hills , ca . in july , the team announced that its lasers could deliver data at tens of gigabits per second , about times faster than the previous standard . and the lasers are quite precise , able to target an area the size of a dime from miles away . the lasers connect with base stations on the ground to supply internet access . facebook says the system has performed well in independent tests . when will a fleet of aquila drones bring data to the world ? facebook won t say . there are several technical challenges remaining in getting aquila to reliably fly day stretches . the team hasn t yet implemented solar panels on the prototype the test flight plane ran using batteries only . the team is still working out how to build batteries with a density high enough to sustain lengthy missions . then there s the cost facebook says aquila needs to be much cheaper if the world is going to deploy a fleet of them . we need to develop more efficient on board power and communication systems ensure the aircraft are resilient to structural damage to reduce maintenance costs and able to stay aloft for long periods of time to keep fleet numbers low and minimize the amount of human supervision associated with their operation , cox wrote in a blog post today . aquila is also likely to face regulatory obstacles , which could rival the laws of physics in terms of the challenges they present . facebook and google have teamed up to work with authorities , such as the federal aviation administration , to get permission for test flights and obtain access to the spectrum they need to serve data . aquila s lasers are able to target an area the size of a dime from miles awayfacebook says it doesn t plan to use aquila to build its own cellular network . instead , zuckerberg says , it wants to license the technology or even give it away to telecommunications companies , governments , and nonprofits . in emergency situations , he says , facebook could direct its fleet to troubled regions to bolster internet access for hospitals and nonprofit centers . but it remains unclear how governments will receive facebook s latest idea for connecting the world . the company s efforts at diplomacy have sometimes been clumsy indian regulators banned free basics , facebook s effort to provide some internet services for free , on the grounds that giving the company control over the included services violates net neutrality . bringing more people onto the internet , after all , is a way of bringing more people onto facebook and regulators have worried that the company s end goal is to simply replace the open web for most users , while reaping the rewards in advertising dollars . zuckerberg says the company has learned from its failure in india one he hopes is temporary . we ve learned a lot about how we need to interact with governments and the political system and regulators , and build support in order to have these things work . and i think we ll take those lessons forward , he said . solar powered planes will raise additional regulatory issues , he says . but when i meet world leaders , a lot folks are really excited about this , because you want your people to be online , and you want more opportunities . and connectivity is one of the biggest ways that people get access to opportunities . image courtesy of facebookthe path forward for aquila isn t totally clear , and it s bound to encounter more bumps along the way . but zuckerberg is resolute billions of people who can t access the internet deserve it . and for facebook to achieve his long term vision , everyone is going to need access to more bandwidth than they have today . a single test flight represents a tiny step toward getting there . but it also gives facebook a dramatic success to rally around . i think the future is going to be thousands of solar powered planes on the outskirts of cities and places where people live , and that s gonna make connectivity both available and cheaper , zuckerberg says . and , i think , can help play an important role in closing this gap of getting more than a billion people online . this is an early milestone , but it s a big one . zuckerberg smiled . it s not something you necessarily expect facebook to do because we re not an aerospace company , he said . but i guess we re becoming one . creditsdesign james bareham developers frank bi , ryan mark editor michael zelenko copy editor kara verlaney transcription matthew davis video kimberly mas	 mark zuckerberg on his plan to bring the internet to every human on earth by nearly any measure , facebook has had a remarkable year . more than . billion people use the service every month , making it the world s largest social network by a considerable margin . its advertising business has grown significantly faster than analyst expectations , powered by sophisticated targeting capabilities that rivals struggle to match . and in april , ceo mark zuckerberg laid out an ambitious year vision that places the company at the frontier of computer science , making aggressive moves in bringing artificial intelligence and virtual reality to the mainstream . facebook takes flightread our account of aquila s inaugural flightand yet what zuckerberg talks about most these days , in meetings with world leaders or at his live town hall q ampampa sessions , is basic internet connectivity . in august , facebook announced the creation of internet . org , the company s sometimes controversial initiative to bring online services to underserved areas . since then , facebook s connectivity efforts have expanded greatly . it released open source blueprints for telecommunications infrastructure in an effort to drive down data costs . it s testing terragraph , which augments terrestrial cellular networks with new millimeter wave technology that delivers data times faster than existing wi fi networks . and it continues to expand its free basics program despite setbacks . in india , regulators banned the program , arguing that because facebook has the final say over which services can be part of free basics , it violates net neutrality principles . facebook believes aquila could be a powerful tool in bringing internet access to the entire worldthen then there s aquila , a wild project to design , build , and launch an aircraft that can beam down internet access to millions of people from , feet in the air . if facebook succeeds at its ultimate goal of keeping aquila drones aloft and delivering data for day periods , the company believes it will have a powerful new tool in bringing internet access to the entire world . google , which has undertaken a similar effort called project titan , seems to agree . the companies are collaborating to address regulatory issues raised by the drones . on the occasion of aquila s first successful test flight , facebook invited me to its headquarters in menlo park to meet zuckerberg and discuss the aircraft , connectivity , and how those efforts will power the next generation of facebook services . because while facebook s connectivity mission begins by ensuring the entire world has internet access , it doesn t end there . zuckerberg believes that you can t have the best artificial intelligence or virtual reality services until you bring the internet to everyone who doesn t have it and dramatically improve the internet for everyone who already does . facebook asked that we keep the discussion to the company s next years a fair trade , i thought , for a chance at asking zuckerberg about far future versions of facebook . and so we talked about the obstacles facebook faces in building internet infrastructure , the role the company hopes to play in developing ar , and why vr is likely to define the next generation of computing . we also talked about zuckerberg s year long effort to build an ai that powers his home , and the trouble with using bots to operate your toaster . but we didn t cover everything . there are still some basic questions about the manner in which facebook hopes to provides the internet to the world . who builds the infrastructure ? who pays for the data ? and then there s the question that dogs all of the company s connectivity initiatives to what extent is facebook providing internet access , and to what extent is it simply providing access to facebook ? after all , connecting billion people to the internet should be hugely beneficial to facebook s core advertising business . the fact that facebook presents its internet efforts as an unalloyed public good , and not also a strategic necessity for the company , can fuel suspicions that facebook has ulterior motives . whatever else facebook does going forward , zuckerberg said , it starts with a connected worldbut in our discussion , zuckerberg spoke with deep conviction about the benefits that programs like free basics were already bringing to the world s poor . as i was on my way out , he stopped me to ask if he could say a bit more about why he s spending so much of his time on connectivity projects . the internet really does bring so many opportunities to people , he said . there are all these studies that show that for every people that get on the internet , about one person gets lifted out of poverty , and almost one new job gets created . if you re talking about billion people who are not on the internet , spreading internet connectivity is clearly one of the biggest things we can do to improve the quality of life for so many people around the world . zuckerberg added that direct investment in education and health is critical . but i think one thing that a lot of people miss is that if you re living in a town that doesn t have a good school , then the internet actually is your best bet for getting a good education , he said . and if you re living in a place that doesn t have a good doctor , then the internet is your best bet for being able to look up what a condition might be . whatever else facebook does going forward , he said , it starts with a connected world . if we make progress on this , it will be one of the great things that our generation can do to improve lives around the world . zuckerberg and i spoke for more than minutes at facebook s headquarters , accompanied by a member of his communications team . below , you can read the interview , edited for length and clarity . you can also use the table of contents to skip to specific subjects we discussed . and for an exclusive account of the launch of aquila , check out our story facebook takes flight . bringing the world online launching aquila terragraph , and improving connectivity the lessons of free basics artificial intelligence , and zuckerberg s robot butler bots of the future facebook s bet on virtual reality the challenges of augmented reality bringing the world onlinecasey newtonyou re making huge investments in bringing the world online . what are the big challenges ahead ? mark zuckerbergso , the mission of the company is to make the whole world more open and connected , and at some point that means helping to connect people to the internet so they can connect to all the people they care about using services on the internet . when we started off in a college dorm room you don t think about such things . you re just trying to build something useful , and figure if a small portion of the people who are already on the internet use it , then that s really good . but years into the journey of building facebook , we connected about a billion people and we realized that our real mission wasn t to connect one seventh of the world , it was to connect the whole world . and now we re this bigger company and have these resources that we can use to solve some of these more fundamental technology problems , like getting the more than half of the world who s not on the internet onto the internet . so we started looking at the problem and trying to understand , what are all the obstacles that are preventing people from being on the internet ? our real mission wasn t to connect one seventh of the world , it was to connect the whole world for the billion people who are not on the internet today , there are three major obstacles . the first is availability of networks . that is , even if they had a phone , they can t get a signal because there s no fiber , or there s no mobile broadband network where they are . that s about . billion people . to go after them , you need to build really affordable new kinds of networks through solar powered planes , satellites , that kind of work . then , there s affordability of the network . there s another billion or so people where technically there may be a signal that they can pick up , but they can t afford to use it . there are really two solutions to that one is to make data cheaper , and the other is to use less data . we re working on both of those . in terms of using less data , facebook s apps are some of the most used apps in the world . just making our own apps more efficient , and making the frameworks that we use open source so other big apps can use them too goes a long way . in terms of the cost of data , we re working on stuff like tip telecom infra project , making open source software available for running telco networks like our open compute project , which we ve done internally . it saved us billions of dollars , and if we can save the telco industry billions of dollars , then in a competitive market that will be passed along to consumers in the form of lower data prices . and then the third pillar , which is in a lot of ways the biggest , is about a couple billion people . for them , the issue is not availability , or affordability , but awareness . they can pick up a signal on a phone , and they can actually afford it , but maybe they didn t grow up with the internet , or they haven t used a computer . if you ask them , do you want to pay for a data plan to use the internet ? the first question you get back is , what do i get with that ? that s where programs like free basics come in , so people can get access to some free services . what we see is that as soon as people see the value of the internet , within a month , half of people who use free basics end up paying for full access to the internet . so , those are the three big issues availability , affordability , and awareness , and we have big projects on all those . those are the three big issues availability , affordability , and awareness , and we have big projects on all those today , the big milestone is around availability . if you want to connect these . billion people who don t have a network , you can t use the same solutions today that are unaffordable for telcos . the approach of stringing fiber and building out these ground base station towers , that s very expensive . and if you re getting into a more rural area , or even a less dense suburb on the outskirts of a city , that s not necessarily going to be economically sustainable for telcos . so we needed to build something that was cheaper . and what we came to was building these solar powered planes , which are basically cellphone towers in the sky . they re pretty cheap to build , and they can fly for months at a time , and beam down internet to people . you know , if you told me when i was getting started with facebook that one day we would build planes , i would ve told you that you were crazy . but this is now an important thing for us to do to fulfill this mission of connecting everyone in the world . we re bringing our move fast culture to this problem , and i m really impressed with our team s work . we re not a plane company , but within a little more than two years of having this idea and starting to build the team , we now have a plane which has flown for an hour and a half . it s just a really big milestone on this path to connecting everyone . from left mark zuckerberg , facebook founder and ceo jay parikh , global head of infrastructure and engineering kathryn cook , technical program manager for aquila yael maguire , head of connectivity la image courtesy of facebook launching aquilaso june th , aquila had its first test flight out in yuma . read our full account of the launch here . what can you tell me about the experience of being there ? what were you thinking about as all of this was happening ? well the first thing is , it worked , right ? laughs i mean , a lot of times these things don t work the first time . and you know , a lot of the team was really nervous about me coming . i just felt like this is such an important milestone for the company and for connecting the world , that i have to be there . it s worth it for me to wake up at am and fly down to arizona , to the middle of the desert , to be there for this even if it didn t work . but it did , and that was amazing . it was this incredibly emotional moment for everyone on the team who s poured their lives into this for two years . we re on the path to breaking the world record for the longest uav flight in history because it needs to be able to stand there for months in order to be this base station in the sky . it s worth it for me to wake up at am and fly down to arizona even if it didn t work . but it did . so , it was a very emotional moment . and then the other things that strike you it s big . we were trying to get a picture to capture the scale of it , and we couldn t . zuckerberg points to a somewhat awkward photograph of facebook executives standing in front of aquila , which barely fits in the frame . this is fine , but this doesn t really give you a sense that this thing has a wingspan bigger than a yet it s so light , because it s carbon fiber . it s a pretty amazing thing to look at . then i d say what was a little bit counterintuitive is it flies really slowly . we re all conditioned to think that things in the sky move quickly , right ? most times when people are designing planes , they re designing them to get people or things from a place to a place , so there s no real advantage to moving slowly . but if your goal is to stay in the air for a long period of time , then you want to use as little energy as possible , which means going as slowly as you physically can while not falling out of the air . i think aquila goes about or miles an hour , with a power output which is around , watts . to put that in perspective , the tour de france is happening right now . a good cyclist will output watts . so you re talking about five cyclists being all of the power that this huge plane consumes not only to fly , but to beam down connectivity at really fast speeds that break records as well . give me a sense of how far along the aquila project is . what s next for it ? this was the first test , and it was really successful . we intended to fly it for minutes , and it was doing so well that we actually kept it up for minutes . one thing that really excited the team and me is that the design ended up being even more efficient than we d guessed , and it used even less power to stay up than we thought . we did pick up a lot of telemetry and data , and there were some things that we want to tweak . we ll do another test flight , and at some point soon we ll test the solar powered plane with the communications payload in it . that way we can test it actually beaming down connectivity . we ve tested that piece separately that s a lot easier to test without the plane . that whole side of things is really awesome , too . we have this laser communications system which can beam data at tens of gigabits per second , which is times faster than anything that s existed before . at some point we re going to put these pieces together and there ll be a couple more test flights . but the milestone that we re really going after is , can this break the record for the longest endurance uav ? once you have that , then i think we re ready to build thousands of them , and work with telcos and governments all around the world to connect people on the outskirts of cities , and rural areas , and in disaster zones , and wherever you can t get traditional connectivity to today . what are the implications of drones like aquila in emergency situations ? a few years ago there was the ebola epidemic in western africa , and one of the big things that people needed was mobile connectivity and data . facebook paid to get a bunch of connectivity from satellites there . but in the future i think what you d really want to do is send a plane over there , and then tens of gigabits should be enough for the hospitals and emergency centers . that that s going to be an important use case in the future . what do you hope the aquila project will have achieved in a few years ? we re not an aerospace company . but i guess we re becoming one . it s going to be cheap to build these , and i think the future is going to be thousands of solar powered planes on the outskirts of places where people live . that s going to make connectivity both much more available and cheaper . and , i think , it can help play an important role in closing this gap and getting more than a billion people online . this is an early milestone , but it s a big one . it s not something you necessarily expect facebook to do , because we re not an aerospace company . but i guess we re becoming one . and how will you get so many planes in the air ? we re not planning on building a network . what we want to do is prove that this works , and then figure out ways to license the technology or give it away so that telcos and governments and nonprofits and crisis areas can offer this . that s the vision . i think it s really exciting . terragraph , and improving connectivitythis year facebook also introduced terragraph , which is designed to supplement local cellular networks with millimeter wave technology . what effects do you hope terragraph has when it goes live in san jose , ca , later this year ? and assuming people love it , how will you think about scaling it ? i think g and terragraph in general are going to be very important for both increasing bandwidth and decreasing latency . that s important for some of the other things i think we re going to want in the future , like live video , where you can broadcast to people and then interact with them live no matter where they are in the world in just a second . virtual reality is an important one that we think about virtual reality is all about presence and feeling like you re there with the person . in order for that to work , the network needs to be able to download a huge amount of information instantaneously , and there can t be latency . in order for vr to work , the network needs to be able to download a huge amount of information instantaneously . i think when most people think about virtual reality , they think about games or degree video experiences . but i think about things like a doctor doing surgery remotely , which is already happening today in some cases . you want the best doctor in the world to be able to do a surgery no matter where it is . increasingly , we re using micro robotics and different devices that doctors are controlling , but you also need high bandwidth and low latency . i think that s a really exciting future use case that can improve health outcomes and safety , that is based on connectivity and virtual reality . that s the kind of thing i get excited about . and then there are more day to day use cases like , you go to the warriors game or a concert or sports event , and the connectivity is overwhelmed because you have that one base station for that area . there s a spike in density and there isn t a match between how much bandwidth is available and how many people are there trying to pull it . in the future , when you have things like terragraph that can produce and have much higher throughput of bandwidth , i think the days of going to a sports stadium or a concert and not being able to post your photo or video online are done . that s a more day to day thing that people can look forward to . facebook image courtesy of facebook the lessons of free basicsyou also mentioned free basics , and it strikes me that everything we talked about today is going to require some kind of partnership with the government . given some of the debate that free basics has raised around net neutrality , i want to know what you ve learned from that debate , and how it s informed how you re going to approach your other connectivity projects . you re right that all of these things will involve partnerships with the industry , and telcos , and governments and nonprofits , in a lot of cases . with free basics , we worked with all of them . overall free basics has been very successful , right ? it s live in countries , and we ve connected more than million people through internet . org . that s a good start . you hear a lot about companies offering some wi fi hotspots or something , but we re talking about tens of millions of people getting online . that s a big deal , and it s growing quickly . you hear a lot about companies offering some wi fi hotspots we re talking about tens of millions of people . we have had setbacks in a couple of countries , india of course being the biggest . with a billion people in india not online , it s the most important country to get right . we ve learned a lot about how we need to interact with governments and the political system and regulators , and build support in order to have these things work . and i think we ll take those lessons forward on the future work we re doing in free basics , which by the way is continuing to roll out around the world . one day , once we ve shown that it s a successful program around the world , i hope that we ll get another chance to come back to india and offer it there , too . but partnerships are also going to be important for all these other things too . self flying , solar powered planes have a lot of problems that are similar to self driving cars , and i think we ll have to work out what the framework is for that . ai , and zuckerberg s robot butlerlet me ask a little bit about ai . at the start of this year you wrote about wanting to build an ai to manage your home . how s that project going , and how is it informing the way you think about ai being useful in facebook s own products ? it s going well , and i m planning on doing a demo soon . i have it to the point where i can control everything in the house . it can control the lights , the temperature , the doors . it can make me toast . how does it make you toast ? well , the real question is not how it makes me toast , that s actually easy you hook up an internet powered device to the power and you trigger it . the real question , which is actually the more challenging ai problem , is when to make me toast . in the morning i m writing all these emails , and i go for a run , and my meetings start at different times , and so i ve built this whole thing which figures out from where i am am i out ? am i on a run ? when s the right time to make me toast and then tell me . that still needs some work , but all the stuff is working . one of the things that s been pretty fun is using all the ai tools that we ve developed at facebook so far , just seeing how much progress we ve made on image recognition and face recognition and object recognition and voice recognition and language understanding . the bot framework that the messenger team is building has been really cool . if i hadn t done this home ai project , i probably wouldn t have had a reason to get into the code on those , which now i have . even if i m asking sometimes silly questions , i get to know more of the people , and i use more of the code . that , i think , is helpful . at home , i think the biggest impact has been that i ve wrested control of the thermostat from priscilla . everyone laughs this isn t magic , right ? it s math and statistics and pattern recognition at f , you talked about ai as a way to build systems that are better than humans at perception seeing , hearing , and understanding language . facebook can already describe the contents of photos and translate my posts into many languages at once . as you think a decade ahead , where else do you think ai can improve in terms of perception ? and which do you find most exciting ? i think ai breaks out into two big categories . there s pattern recognition , and then there s this broader , amorphous category of general intelligence and unsupervised learning which , frankly , we don t understand that much about . most of the things that we ve made progress with today are complex pattern recognition systems . there s a lot of debate in society about , is ai going to do good or harm ? but i think pattern recognition will be extremely helpful in so many ways , from being able to tell a blind person what is in an image , to being able to read something to someone who is deaf or just can t turn the volume on on their phone right now . or , being able to diagnose diseases better , or better identifying drugs that might treat a disease , or drive cars more safely . this stuff is really going to save people s lives . it s important to keep in mind that this isn t magic , right ? it s math and statistics and pattern recognition and using a lot of data in different data sets . it s not going to get away from us it s all stuff that will just improve people s lives . the thing that s probably most exciting to me is that when one team makes progress on making these pattern matching systems better , and we figure out how to make deep neural nets converge at layers something that people hadn t done before then we publish that paper and other companies and teams can take that advance and now their systems are diagnosing diseases better , or driving cars better . that s part of what s so exciting . it s really important to have this perspective that we re still in the phase of pattern matching . at a very basic level , this is really good , and not something that we should be afraid of pushing further . the verge bots of the futureincreasingly , ai is moving into action bots like the ones you introduced at f are performing real world tasks . but some people , myself included , have complained that conversational bots can feel slower than other interfaces . how do you see conversational interfaces evolving over the next several years ? well , let me tell you where we came from which is every month , many millions of people will message a business page on facebook to ask questions about that business . increasingly , businesses are using their facebook page as their main presence , and if you want to reach a business , messaging them on facebook is a great way to do that . but you can imagine that having that business respond might take hours , or in some cases , a day . so one of the first applications and things that we started looking at was researching , can we build an ai system that looks at the answers that a business is giving to people and start to predict for a certain category of questions what the answers will be ? we realized that we actually could in a lot of cases . and as a business responds faster , people message it more . so one thing that we re starting to think about is if we can move businesses away from manual responses to automated ones , then that actually is dramatically faster than what people have had before . i don t think conversation is the best way to interact with everything . is some tailored ui going to be better than a conversational interface ? maybe in some cases . i don t think conversation is the best way to interact with everything , but i think this could literally be or a times better than the way people interface with businesses today . and qualitatively , too , whether it s faster or not , i don t know anyone who likes calling businesses for customer support or making reservations , because it s uncomfortable , and you have to give your full attention , and it s synchronous . just being able to send a message , whether it s you talking to it , or sending a voice clip , or typing something quick , and getting the answer back as soon as possible , whether it s a couple of seconds later or a couple of minutes later i think that s a big improvement in people s lives . that s what i see and that s what i m excited about . i m somewhat ashamed to admit to you that i primarily use facebook m in cases where i would otherwise have to pick up a phone . i think that s probably not very different from other people . james bareham image courtesy of facebook facebook s bet on virtual realitythis spring , facebook showed off demonstrations of social presence bringing people together from across the world in a virtual space . it feels very sci fi to me , but you ve got a working demo . can you talk about the implications of this kind of technology , especially once you reach super high resolutions and low latency ? vr is important for a couple of big reasons . the first is that our mission is to give everyone the power to share their experience as best as possible , and to help everyone understand what s going around the world . technology allows that to happen at increasing levels of richness . if you go back or years , most of what people shared online and most of what you read was probably text . and now almost everything has photos , and photos are becoming a very primary way that people communicate . and as the networks get better , we re getting videos , too . now you can post a video without it taking minutes to upload , you can watch a video without it taking seconds to buffer , and it s starting to be a good experience . so videos are starting to be one of , if not the main , ways that people interact and consume content online . our lived experience isn t video . it s not a small d frame , it s this d world . but that s not the end of the line there s always more , and our lived experience isn t video . it s not a small d frame , it s this d world . you want to be able to capture that , and you want to be able to map it out digitally , whether that s in a game where you re creating the landscape , or in a video where you re capturing it . i think this is just the next logical extension in how we express and experience the world . i think you ll do that in vr with a headset , and you ll do that in interfaces like facebook and messenger and whatsapp , in the way that we have degree videos in news feed today . it s not necessarily the full experience of having a headset , but it s still really good and gives you the sense of what being there is . the other big trend for vr is that every or years , there s a new major computer paradigm . these are usually defined by their interface , and how they interact with the world . if you go back to the s , we had these big servers that you almost needed a degree to be able to use . in the s , we got desktop computers which were pretty clunky , but they were efficient enough that they made work better , so people used them primarily as a productivity tool . but they were kind of using a mouse over here to change something over there . then we got the web , which made it so that data could flow to multiple different computers more easily . we got phones , and phones are really the first mainstream computing platform . people really like it , but that s not the end of the line , either . there s going to be something more . just like now with phones , we have them with us all the time and they re more natural than computers in so many ways , vr and ar are going to be even more natural . all of these limitations with the phone , you have to take it out of your pocket , it s kind of awkward you won t have that . you ll just have glasses , or eventually contact lenses . you ll be able to look around and see different things and interact with by using your hands and reaching out and grabbing stuff . that , i think , is the next logical step for how we ll interact with this . we re really excited about pushing both of those trends forward . the challenges of augmented realitywe ve seen a lot of your plans for vr , but not much about ar . what role do you want facebook to play in advancing ar , and might it involve your new hardware division ? we re working on ar research . the reason we started working on vr first is the technology is ready . you can build a vr headset that is affordable . and people are really using them people use them week after week , and spend a lot of time with them and have all these different experiences . you can make that because it works with phones . even rift , which is a bit more expensive , can use a lot of phone components , and that s why it s hundreds of dollars and not thousands or tens of thousands of dollars . with ar , there s still more science questions that need to be worked out , and i m optimistic that we ll have the answers to that pretty soon . within the next five or years , we ll have versions of that that are maybe where rift is today , for ar . but , there s no doubt in my mind that vr is easier to build and bring to a lot of people , and that s why we re are starting here on the product side . but we re also researching ar very seriously , too . creditsdesign james bareham developers frank bi , ryan mark editor michael zelenko copy editor kara verlaney transcription matthew davis video kimberly mas	 tara had struck gold . after spending a lazy saturday afternoon browsing through the dating app she was currently experimenting with , she hit it off with a nice sounding guy , and the two exchanged real names and numbers . she found herself googling stuart , a brit living in amsterdam . he worked at a startup he was visiting new york on business . i was like , oh , he s kind of cute eat , pay , lovea new app lets women charge for a night out . will dating join the on demand economy ? by emily yoshida illustrations by beady eyes tara had struck gold . after spending a lazy saturday afternoon browsing through the dating app she was currently experimenting with , she hit it off with a nice sounding guy , and the two exchanged real names and numbers . she found herself googling stuart , a brit living in amsterdam . he worked at a startup he was visiting new york on business . i was like , oh , he s kind of cute neither had plans that night , so they started figuring out where they could meet up for a drink . when tara suggested a restaurant in midtown manhattan , stuart was into it okay cool , my hotel is super close to there , he messaged back . the mention of the hotel gave tara pause , and she asked him what exactly he had in mind . we can go back after and have some fun , he said . tara hesitated . this guy seemed nice and normal and safe and she was down for a fun night out with a visiting stranger , but she drew a hard line when it came to sex on the first date . i was like , listen , i don t know who you ve met on this app , but i m not going to fuck you , i m sorry , she says . her match was taken aback . oh , he responded . i thought that was the expectation . these kinds of conflicting agendas will be familiar to anyone who s done much tindering or bumbling or okcupiding , where one person s one night stand is another person s chance at finding the one . but tara wasn t using any of these apps . this was ohlala , and stuart had already agreed to pay tara for their date . the ohlala headquarters are located on a sleepy block in the prenzlauer berg neighborhood of berlin , in an old prewar building one block from where the wall once stood . though you wouldn t know it from walking down the pin drop quiet residential street , the neighborhood has become home to several startups including soundcloud , which has an office a couple floors down from ohlala . when i arrive , there s a mood of weary intensity among the eight or so team members present . pia poppenreiter , the company s ceo , stands and greets me with a rushed hug . you picked a great day to visit , she says , in a voice that suggests more cigarettes than hours of sleep . search hashtag escortgate on twitter . i do so as we step out to the balcony and she lights up a marlboro red . a pink ohlala banner tied to the railing billows silently behind her . launched in august , ohlala is a web based app that facilitates what it calls instant paid dating . male users post offers for dates , consisting of a time , a duration , and how much money they re willing to pay a typical offer is from hours at an average price of . while the request is up , women can decide whether or not they d like that person to be able to contact them . crucially , women are not visible to men before they initiate conversation it s the inverse of the backpage listings to which it s often compared . here , the buyers must come forward first . from there , the couple can chat and discuss the whens and wheres of their impending dates , as well as a payment method and their boundaries , if they so please . in app payment is currently in the works , the team tells me . when the terms are agreed upon , the chat is logged , and presumably both parties are incentivized to show up . though its on demand model has earned ohlala the label uber for escorts , the company insists it isn t an escort agency , or even operating in the adult entertainment space . as i scrolled through the escortgate hashtag , i started to piece together an unraveling scandalas i scrolled through the largely german escortgate hashtag , one bing translation at a time , i started to piece together an unraveling scandal . that week berlin had been host to the noah conference , an invite only event comparable to code conference or disrupt back in the states . according to multiple reports , the gala party two nights earlier had been characterized by a high number of attractive , glamorously dressed women who flirted aggressively with the male attendees and handed out business cards . it was concluded that these women were escorts , and that they had come to the party at the behest of ohlala . several women were rumored to be carrying credit card readers . glued to her twitter feed as we sit on the deck , poppenreiter dismisses the credit card part , at least , as ridiculous . but , she says , it s true , to some extent . we did invite people to the noah party , but it was more my friends . her all female guerrilla marketing team were dressed up , sure it was a party , after all . several in the group were ohlala users , but poppenreiter puts those numbers in the low single digits . poppenreiter herself did not join them . i was exhausted , i was at the conference the whole day . there s no question the group was pulling off a stunt . a leaked facebook invitation for the party within a party encouraged invitees to grab a drink and mingle with men who crave the finer things in life . a publicity stunt involving a controversial app doesn t sound like the stuff of trending topics , until you consider noah s abysmal female attendance rate at this year s event , only out of its speakers were women . the presence of escorts at the evening events have long been a wink wink assumption . by symbolically associating themselves with these women , ohlala s party crashers made the company a scapegoat for these rumors . but they also got people s attention . poppenreiter had already released a statement earlier in the day in response to the outcry , apologizing for letting things get out of hand . but part of me can t help but wonder if this was exactly what she had planned . according to poppenreiter , ohlala seeks to improve upon two perceived flaws that tinder and other dating apps often fall into . first , the in app chats that go nowhere or worse , promising matches who ghost on you . as more results oriented users of tinder or okcupid can attest , if you ve logged on with the objective to meet up with someone that night , you can often be left frustrated . with ohlala , everyone wants something , and everyone s on a tight schedule . ohlala isn t really an uber for escorts , it s a taskrabbit for emotional laborand then there s expectation management . people use tinder or okcupid for everything from nsa hookups to long term relationship hunting , but there s a high likelihood that you and the person you re courting electronically might not be on the same page , even if both of you put casual dating in your looking for field . the chat stage of ohlala prompts you to be up front and clear about what you want . if you are definitely not open to having sex on your date , you can establish that there . if you want to bring a third , you can propose that as well . either way , the goal is to get exactly what you want that night . getting exactly what you want as quickly as possible is the general goal of countless other startups . but because the what in this situation isn t cars or b nh m but human companions , ohlala , and other apps that facilitate paid dating , are most easily understood in terms of sex work . this isn t a huge roadblock in germany , where the app first launched , and where sex work is legal . but in february of this year , ohlala crossed the atlantic and launched in new york city , where not only are the laws different , but social interface is as well . sure , sex workers and escorts can find plenty of work here , but it remains to be seen if we re comfortable calling that dating . in poppenreiter s vision , ohlala is an app for any woman who thinks she ought to be compensated for her time and efforts when she goes out with someone . it seeks to turn leisure time a precious , dwindling commodity into billable hours . in that sense , poppenreiter s right her app isn t really an uber for escorts . it s a taskrabbit for emotional labor . perhaps that makes it more radical than anything else with its tasteful design and young , hip founder , ohlala suggests a world in which there s no kind of woman who sells her time and affection , because every woman could be that kind of woman . pia poppenreiter is hardly a stranger to provocation . the first time i met her was at an ohlala party at sxsw , where she held court while inviting guests to draw interpretive vaginas on sketch pads distributed around the bar . you are going to come . let us tell you when , the pastel pink party invitation read . but the second time we meet , i barely recognize her . in her casually conservative street clothes chambray button down , messy updo she looks more like a j . crew model or lauren conrad acolyte than the bawdy berlin cybermadam whose name elicits you can t be serious emoji eyebrow raises on german twitter in german poppenreiter can roughly translate to fuck rider . poppenreiter was born in schauersberg , austria , a town of about , people , and the kind of village where everyone knows your name and your business . she originally came to berlin for grad school to study business ethics after a year of working in finance in frankfurt . she was in between jobs , and out at night with some friends , when she noticed sex workers looking for customers on the icy cold streets . it was , apps like seamless and handy were starting to introduce an on demand lifestyle to the modern city dweller and the whole process of waiting around on street corners struck her as rather impractical . she struck up a conversation with the women and got the idea for her first startup . sex workers waiting around on street corners struck her as rather impracticalpeppr is a service that functions like a smart backpage , allowing escorts and prostitutes to list their services , prices , and photos in a searchable , location specific interface . payment is processed through the app , and clients and pepprs can negotiate the specifics in the in app chat . poppenreiter researched her user base relentlessly , spending months in berlin s streets and brothels talking to sex workers and figuring out what her potential customers needed . when it launched in germany in april , peppr was met with scandalized headlines from around the world , and a huge amount of buzz . but only months later , poppenreiter was backing out of the company . i was overwhelmed being the ceo , she says . i had no experience as such . the viral storm and influx of users to the tiny startup proved to be a mixed blessing . we weren t ready , as a team , as a product , nothing . shortly after stepping down she was back out there , mixing it up at an axel springer networking event . it was there that she met torsten st ber , a computer science researcher turned startup founder who would become the cto of ohlala . his artificial intelligence company was floundering , and he was looking for his next move . when pia showed up at the party , whispers spread oh , that s the peppr woman . that s the founder of the prostitution app . st ber himself had never heard of her or peppr before . i said , what ? someone s doing this ? he was a little wary of her at first , but they got to talking , and something clicked . i said from the very first day we met that we would be great co founders , poppenreiter says , in a told you so kind of voice . this was late . by march , less than a year after peppr s launch , the two had started work on ohlala . at first glance , ohlala could just be seen as peppr with a different color scheme . but the ways in which it differs are telling . for one , there is no way for women to pay for dates with men , or for same sex dates to occur . i ask several times about when that upgrade can be expected each time the response is eventually . there s the aforementioned female initiated communication process . but what pia would probably consider its biggest innovation is its time limit . each open date request only lasts minutes once a couple starts chatting they have one hour to decide whether or not to go on a date . using it was a panic inducing experience , even when i was only looking for male users to interview for this piece . which was largely unsuccessful lol ! seriously ! this is just like any other dating app . nothing special , said one user to my journalistic inquiry . our most urgent needs are usually driven by either hunger or horninessthe time limit doesn t help ohlala s totally not a sex app claims . we are humans our most urgent , time sensitive needs are usually driven by either hunger or horniness . it s hard to imagine a situation in which i d only give someone minutes to decide whether or not to have a stimulating conversation with me over a nice chianti . but other people are perhaps more likely to be drawn in by the promise of such instantaneous interaction , with or without sex people who are or consider themselves to be very busy , very important , and very impatient . poppenreiter isn t a terribly patient person , which can be a helpful trait in the startup world . she literally cut her losses when she sensed peppr wouldn t pan out . when ohlala expanded to new york city , it was a similarly impulsive development . we were a very small team at that time , i think just six or seven people , st ber says . and we said that we wanted to be done within two months going to a new continent , filing a new corporation , checking the legal situation . the legal situation , of course , is less permissive in new york than in berlin . but the cultural situation is really what poppenreiter is trying to disrupt , despite the fact that the team did no substantial market research before coming to the states . during our conversation she s careful not to use words like escort or sex worker when describing the women who might use ohlala the app s website states in no uncertain terms that escorts are not welcome to use the service . everything about the site s tasteful pastels screams this is normal ! this is for you , normal girl ! we re all normal ! we all charge money for dates ! but no matter how much poppenreiter may be trying to redefine our attitudes around paid dating , in the united states , what she s selling exists in the same legal loophole as escort agencies . charging money for a date is still charging money for a date , whether it s your sole source of income or not , and it s hard to unseat centuries of religious and moral baggage that come with the american dream . you can tell yourself you re just a resourceful girl looking to offset the cost of cab fare and a personal trainer , but in the eyes of the law , you may as well be a hooker . tara is not a hooker . nor is she an escort . she s a matchmaker , as it so happens , specializing in the sugar dating niche . she found out about ohlala in the course professional research , and signed up hoping to use it to find eligible women for her wealthy male clients to meet . when i realized i couldn t , ohlala s structure means that there s no way for women to contact other women i thought , well , maybe i ll just meet cool guys . many male users assume she s an escort , and kick off the chat by asking for nude photoswhen i talk to her , on a balmy afternoon in manhattan s bryant park , she just finished lunch at koi . she sports oversized prada sunglasses and a patent leather chanel bag . she s an animated , mile a minute talker it s easy to imagine her being great on first dates . she s just been using ohlala for a couple months , but so far , she says , it s more rubbing me the wrong way than the right way . many of the male users assume from the jump that she s an escort , and kick off the chat by asking for nude photos and specific sex acts . there s also a transparency imbalance ohlala boasts about its verification process , but far more women than men bother to add photos something i can corroborate , having spent time on both sides of the app s gender line . i hate that guys who have unverified profiles will say i need you to send more pictures . i need to see what you look like , tara says . which leads to another issue . tara s black , and she s experienced a fair amount of prejudice on the site and in a more blatant way than she s experienced on tinder . i don t think it s racism , she says of most guys behavior . the racism comes when they re hateful . they re not hateful , they just don t know , and they don t say it right . one potential suitor , after ending their chat abruptly , came back to apologize he didn t mean to be rude , it s just that he didn t like african american girls . tara appreciates ohlala s underlying philosophy , but in practice she s found it to be much more dicey . they say to you , as a woman you have all the power , you can either accept or deny something . you lead the conversation , you only agree to what you accept . but it s hard to feel like you have all that power and agency ohlala promotes when a gray silhouette is hounding you for nudes . guys will go , well look at the site you re on . obviously i expect this . i m like , you know what ? you re right ! i just leave the chat . because what can i say ? poppenreiter prefers the term paid date to describe what ohlala provides its users . she claims the reason for this is as philosophical as it is legal you can t use an old word for a new idea , she s said to me , and at least a dozen other publications she talked to during the app s us launch . the idea of paid dating is hardly newbut the idea of paid dating is hardly new . and if it is , it s just as new as the idea of dating itself . in her book labor of love the invention of dating , moira weigel explains how dating as we know it today rose up around the turn of the century as a working class practicality a way for urban singles living in cramped family apartments and boarding houses to get out and spend their wages while enjoying a little romance . middle and upper class singles were relegated to the practice of calling a formalized form of courtship largely conducted under the watchful eye of a parent . but the market was far from equal despite the record numbers of women entering the workforce , the belief remained widespread that they were working not to support themselves but only to supplement the earnings of fathers or husbands , weigel writes . employers used this misconception as an excuse to pay women far less than they paid men . less than half as much , on average which meant when it came to spending money on leisure , women did not have nearly as much financial freedom as men did . accepting dates with men primarily as a way to get out of the boarding house for the evening was very common among the textile workers and seamstresses of new york city . wage equality in the united states has slowly crept toward parity over the course of the last century , but when it comes to the big bucks , men still vastly outpace women . according to a report this year , only one out of five ceos in the us is female , and only percent of the world s board seats are occupied by women . the numbers for women of color drop even more precipitously . at the same time , female targeted consumer culture has only intensified since the turn of the millennium , along with our growing access to the lives of the rich and or famous via tabloid journalism and social media . we always were aware that there were people who had better , more expensive things than we did , but now images of them stream past our eyes every day . maybe this serves as inspiration for some to work harder for that next raise , but the fast track to the high life as portrayed by the kardashians or whatever affluent lifestyle porn floats your boat is to date up . having a relationship with someone you might not otherwise pursue , the thinking goes , is a small price to pay for your material self realization . sites like seekingarrangement have profited off these appetites , and helped perpetuate the notion that rich men want to date gorgeous young women , and gorgeous young women want to stay in five star hotels and wear celine . brandon wade , founder of seekingarrangement , has become somewhat of a mogul in the field of transactional dating , having launched a network of compensated dating sites . in many ways , he s the anti pia his sites are unapologetically marketed toward male users the odds are in your favor , the landing page proclaims while boasting its baby to daddy ratio , and his business model is built on a prescriptive life philosophy in which women only need to be plied with gifts and money in order to expand their horizons when it comes to which men they re willing to date . as you trend toward the more transactional approach to dating , it does become less acceptable . in , he launched whatsyourprice , a more cut and dry version of seekingarrangement , predicated on the idea that everyone has a dollar amount at which they d be willing to give someone a chance on a first date . it s the most clear existing competitor to ohlala , in that its daters deal in cash , not the ambiguous promise of gifts . a first date is the beginning and end of its immediate goals . but nearly a decade later , its membership remains about one fifth the size of seekingarrangement s , wade says . primarily because it can be argued that a sugar daddy is just a wealthy and successful boyfriend who s willing to be generous towards you . an ongoing arrangement provides enough ambiguity that both parties can choose to unsee the monetary exchange at the center of it . the clearly labeled price tags on the users of whatsyourprice , and now ohlala , are harder to ignore . as you trend toward the more transactional approach to dating , it does become less acceptable , says wade . in a way , this means that its users really have to want to do what they re there to do . one of ohlala s selling points is its strict policy regarding no shows that s one way it preserves its instant and on demand selling points . but if a female user suddenly gets a bad vibe from her date , must she still show up at the risk of getting kicked off the service ? and if she does show up , how does she guarantee payment if her date deems the evening unsatisfactory ? in the end , what s on demand , and who s demanding ? ohlala may put more power in the hands of women when it comes to vetting dates , but the only people who are finding dates on demand are the men . women are first and foremost finding work . it s tough to be a female entrepreneur . perhaps that s why the people who are most upset by pia s escortgate stunt were those who felt their work was most invalidated by it her female peers . being a founder myself it was obvious to me that they were not founders , nor investors but girls that were invited for entertainment purposes , read one woman s account of the noah party . back at ohlala hq , this is what poppenreiter still can t get over what she calls a double moral within the tech industry , especially in berlin . people say , oh my god , those girls , they wore skirts and high heels they re hookers . she says , okay , so , if you re wearing a skirt , and if you re wearing makeup , then you re a hooker ? she turns back to her feed , and laughs bitterly when she reads a quote from a female entrepreneur who attended the party . crazy women saying i m glad i wore a business outfit so no one would mistake me for an escort . as it happens , many female entrepreneurs were mistaken for escorts by their male peers , when poppenreiter reads this she laughs again , this time with a little more schadenfreude oh man , now i wish i would have been there , she says . poppenreiter comes from a different school of thought than many of her fellow female founderssuffice to say , poppenreiter comes from a different school of thought than many of her fellow female founders . i always say , i m a woman , and i m a woman in tech . and i don t want to dress like she stops short . i was wearing a black dress on the first day i attended noah , because i want to be a woman in a male dominated environment . i don t want to dress like a guy . and yet , she rejects much of the female tech community their meetups and initiatives and representation quotas , which she considers reverse discrimination . i think women in the startup community are so aggressive about their points , and i don t think that s the way to create the greatest amount of change in the shortest period of time , she says . what i want to do is be an excellent ceo , and accomplish that myself , and then be a role model because i accomplished that myself . that ohlala s founder is a woman and that she s hired a staff that s over percent female an anomaly in tech certainly helps with public perception . but it s also a double edged sword , and poppenreiter is continually fighting to be taken seriously as both a ceo and a disruptor of the still largely feminine encoded dating industry , especially at events like noah . not that she d ever let on as much . pia experiences this every day i don t , because i sit here when pia goes to events , st ber says . and she does not talk about this , because pia is busy proving that she s really good at what she s doing . so it doesn t come up . a few days later , poppenreiter posts a follow up statement , this time on her facebook page . we could spend time discussing how unfair the world is and how we disagree with the tendencies of a formerly heavily male influenced industry , she writes with barely concealed disdain . you choose . and i will roll up my sleeves and go back to work now . the work pays off just a few days after escortgate , marketing director lindsay buescher says she estimates signups have increased by percent . during my conversation with tara , a homeless man approaches , looking distraught enough that neither of us can ignore him . he s lost his wallet and his id , he says , and he s just looking for money for food and to travel back home . we each hand him a dollar he thanks us and moves on . as soon as the man s out of earshot , tara tells me about a video she watched that weekend , about a homeless man who seduced women for shelter . he d go to walgreens and duane reade , and just freshen up using hair gel . he would go bar hopping , and he would sleep with girls , and he was like , depending on how good i fucked them , i could stay a three day weekend . if i can get paid to just go on a date and just be my loud , crazy , fun self , why not ? the hustle is real , and tara has few illusions about it , which is why she had few qualms about signing up for ohlala . people will let you exploit them to a certain extent , and they re okay with it , she says . i thought , if i can get paid to just go on a date and just be my loud , crazy , fun self , why not ? and yet , almost despite herself , she thinks she may have found someone she really likes . stuart ? from amsterdam ? after getting over the initial miscommunication hump , they ended up going out anyway , with the understanding that sex was not on the table . she still got her , too he paypal d her , and , like a true gentleman , waited to make sure she received the transaction before saying goodnight . he was like , just know this is for your time . he s actually really cool , she says . he s someone that i d right swipe on tinder anyway , so it was totally okay . their date turned into a few hours of bar hopping , and ended with a little bit of making out . sometimes it s nice , tara says . i m single now . it s nice sometimes , to be in the company of a guy that i m attracted to and see where it goes . i m percent certain i ll fuck him , she says , with an ear to ear grin . i like him . but throughout our conversation , she vacillates wildly on whether or not the feeling is mutual . they still text , but stuart has a wife and kids even on their first relatively chaste date , he expressed doubts about straying from his marriage . the money only clouds the issue further . perhaps , she says , she would have been open to sleeping with him after the night went so well if they had met any other way . but she couldn t trust herself in that transactional space . i d feel like well , did i only do it because you gave me money ? i don t know . for this , and the reasons she s already expressed , she s probably deleting her ohlala account . in the meantime , if she wants to set up another date with stuart , she has his number . he s supposed to be in town later that month , and they ve even discussed plans for a second date smorgasburg ! . and because she likes him so much , she s lowered her fee just this time . names have been changed to protect identities . design by james barehamedited by michael zelenko lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gt	 it s a strange coincidence , hearing two different cast members of mr . robot describe sam esmail in these near identically enigmatic terms . as the show s creator , showrunner , and as of season two , debuting next week director of its every episode , he exercises a degree of control over the series that s almost wholly unprecedented in television . that degree of engagement calls for a superhuman level of commitment . and it s also a vote of confidence from usa network , which utilized the show s massive critical buzz to cut itself loose from its light blue skies reputation and enter the prestige drama big leagues . ampltcommand control ampgthow mr . robot s creator took the reins of season two by sean t . collins i feel like he s , like , not a human being . carly chaikin i m not quite sure if he s real . portia doubledayit s a strange coincidence , hearing two different cast members of mr . robot describe sam esmail in these near identically enigmatic terms . as the show s creator , showrunner , and as of season two , debuting in two weeks director of its every episode , he exercises a degree of control over the series that s almost wholly unprecedented in television . that degree of engagement calls for a superhuman level of commitment . and it s also a vote of confidence from usa network , which utilized the show s massive critical buzz to cut itself loose from its light blue skies reputation and enter the prestige drama big leagues . mr . robot s content only makes it riskier . a twist filled tale of conflict between corporate cybersecurity and a hacker underground led by a mentally ill morphine addict , the show uses bold , almost alienating shot compositions and edge of sanity performances to plumb the depths of depression , isolation , and rage generated by omnipresent technology and late capitalist inequality . it s not afraid to name names , either , whether taking shots at beloved geek culture properties like the hunger games and the marvel cinematic universe , or calling out secular saint steve jobs for sweatshop labor in its very first episode . i think there s a couple of things we ve gotten in trouble for , doubleday says of the jobs swipe . he knows everything . that s why when actors chaikin and doubleday describe esmail , they sound like members of the show s underground hacker army fsociety talking about their charismatic leader , mr . robot himself . they openly marvel at his complete command of both the series large scale logistics and the story s intimate emotional details it just doesn t compute with me how he s able to navigate directing , knowing what shots he wants , and then he goes into the editing room i mean , he s never not working , says doubleday . he knows what s going to be right . he knows everything . like his fictional counterpart , esmail is in charge of a vast operation designed to challenge the dominant system of how capital and creativity interact . that mr . robot is a superhuman figment of the main character elliot alderson s imagination the aggressive , anarchic side of himself he uses to rally the troops and strike a blow against corporate hegemony doesn t really matter . the results are real enough . and both onscreen and off , the sense of dislocation and frustration that fuel both masterminds respective quests are real as well . on the overcast may morning when i meet esmail at a bed stuy basketball court where mr . robot is shooting , he seems very real indeed . at , esmail stands a head higher than star rami malek or cinematographer tod campbell . until the basketball playing extras show up , he s the tallest person in the playground his black rimmed glasses and air of stubbly , slightly artsy dishevelment make him look like an overgrown film student . he wears a canada goose coat far bulkier than anything else being sported on the temperate late spring morning , which adds to his imposing figure as he buzzes around the location . he s a presence , says a network rep watching him work in the same awestruck tone i d heard from the cast . when he speaks loudly , his voice turns into a booming baritone . let s do that one more time , he bellows from the director s chair halfway across the playground , as malek , christian slater , and newcomer craig robinson plus a canine co star who s proving somewhat difficult to wrangle run their lines . great ! esmail says after the take is completed , before he grins and adds i m talking to the dog . he ll definitely yell at us all the time , doubleday tells me . you ll hear a resounding carly ! or portia ! or no , rami ! but the actor insists he s neither a dictator nor a disciplinarian . he just knows us so well , says doubleday . he s said so many times , you guys know these characters better than i do . i don t know if you ll have a better idea than me , so bring it to the table and we ll see if it works . if he likes it , it sticks . if he doesn t , then i trust that it wasn t right for the moment , because he s seeing the entire world . as cast and crew prep for another run , esmail s voice rings off the court don t do that . i like to get yelled at , malek jokes in response , his famously large eyes lighting up with the smile that returns whenever he breaks character . he likes to yell , chimes in co executive producer joe iberti , watching behind the monitors and smiling along with malek . if his tongue were any further in his cheek , iberti wouldn t be able to finish his craft service breakfast . for all his volume on set , esmail is extraordinarily mild mannered , slater tells me over the phone later . i felt safe with him from day one . again , the cast speaks with one voice about this he always has a smile on his face , always available where you need him to be , always ready to talk if you need to , chaikin says . if i was in his position , i d probably be pulling out my hair and sobbing every second . when i asked esmail about the challenge of directing all twelve episodes of a season himself , he s quick to demur . steven soderbergh directed , in an amazing way , two seasons of the knick . obviously cary fukunaga did it , and was brilliant , with the first season of true detective . when i point out that neither director served as showrunner or writer on those shows the aspect that make his role this season so unique it s as if he forgot he d even done so himself . i always thought the writing process for movies and tv shows was just a blueprint . the making of it was the thing . it s exhausting , but in the best way possible . even though there s a lot of hours spent being very hyper focused on details . considering the difficulties inherent in directing what is essentially a hour movie , this hyperfocus serves esmail well . on that brooklyn basketball court alone , he shot scenes from episodes one , two , three , four , seven , and nine before the week was even half over a process called block shooting , in which material is shot out of order to consolidate the time spent at any given location and minimize the cost and hassle of bouncing back and forth from one set to another . it s an efficient technique , but far from flawless , making it difficult to accommodate last minute changes . it can also wreak havoc with the performers ability to keep track of where they are in the story . half the time i m like , wait , what episode are we doing ? what just happened ? where did i come from ? chaikin says . there are times that you ll film a scene from episode seven , then you go and do one from episode three , and one scene is born from the other so you wish you d done it earlier . luckily , sam knows everything so well , and tells us exactly what s going on . as busy as he is , you can call him the night before and be like , i don t understand this ! esmail s savant like familiarity with the material comes up again and again . the fact that he s there percent of the time and has the full overview of everything we re doing , where we just came from , where we re going , has been extraordinarily helpful , slater says . doubleday adds as busy as he is , you can call him the night before and be like , i don t understand this ! why is this happening ? and have him break it down rapidly . having that access is incredible . i feel like i can take more risks , because i trust him implicitly . the director is both happy and nervous to hear how his actors praise his ability to see the whole picture . i sure hope i do i don t know who else would ! he says , laughing . i m kind of the guy that s always been there , from the beginning . every idea that we came up with for the season , for the story , for the show , for the characters i ve always been around . part of the decision to direct every episode this season was to streamline that process and help the whole project become a lot more cohesive . the more compact we get , the less people have to get involved in order to get those ideas across , the better . and since esmail handed in scripts for the entire season before the cameras started rolling , those ideas were downloaded by cast and crew in a massive artistic data dump . we had a five hour table read for the first episodes and an eight hour table read for the last , chaikin says . having esmail there for all of it eased much of season s logistical nightmare , she says . those were cold reads , none of us had ever read them before , so we got to binge watch or binge read the show together . in between episodes , we d be like , oh my god , what happens next ? what happens next that is , after fsociety successfully manages to bring down ecorp in the first season s finale is , frankly , pretty bleak . the initial episodes of season finds the core cast of malek , chaikin , doubleday , and slater pushing their characters to their darkerst places yet the somber mood is palpable on set , too , in the way malek and robinson rarely raise their voices above a murmur , while slater communicates only in clipped , jittery declarations of anger and impatience . a character lights tiny fires in the background they burn briefly and sputter out listlessly . even the dog seems sick . when combined with campbell and esmail s trademark off center cinematography in which individual characters are literally cornered in the frame , with vast swathes of empty screen weighing down on them the effect is as heavy as anything on tv . in any case , fans of the show will be reassured that it hasn t let up its apocalyptic tone . the first season s preternatural prescience about cybersecurity breaches was half its appeal , with the sony and ashley madison hacks happening so close to its airdate that they felt like network tie in stunts . i ve heard him discuss the wal mart hacks , the target hacks , the arab spring , slater says of esmail s fascination with internet enhanced breakdowns . he was paying attention more closely to things that had been percolating , growing . the world has actually started to catch up . a lot of the characters are lonely . watching a group of young people rebel against the one percent these are not new ideas , says doubleday . they re things that as a society we re all thinking but don t know how to tackle . he s just relating to what so many of us are wondering , but don t say , and don t have a platform to . it s true that esmail himself has some experience as a hacker as a college student at nyu he got in trouble for pranking his girlfriend s college s email server . but to hear him tell it , that s informed the show primarily as an aesthetic matter . we were never going to do cheesy graphics flying at you in the screen , he says . that , for me , is the biggest no brainer . we were actually going to use the real screens that hackers would use to execute a certain hack . anything that didn t feel real , anything that felt tv or movie , we would collectively cringe . getting the tech right is one thing , but recently esmail has come to suspect that his show is about something both more personal and more universal . it struck me when i was editing episodes two and three that there s one thing very different about our show compared to other television shows we don t have a lot of relationship drama , he says . there s not a lot of falling in love and breaking up and meeting and relating to one another . a lot of the characters are lonely . they have no spouse or significant other they re just on their own . the only relationships we have are bad ones . a lot of the drama is people in their rooms by themselves , either staring at a screen or communicating with someone through a screen . maybe it is that we re reflecting today s anxieties , but i would go even deeper and say we re exploring what loneliness looks like today . you can see that loneliness in more than just the narrative . the show s signature framing , short sighting characters against the edge of the screen , reflects how we ourselves look with our faces glued to our iphones or staring through the ether to someone on the opposite side of a google chat . the whole reason why i feel that composition works it s purely instinctual is because the movies and tv shows i d watch that do that would give me this unsettling feeling , like these people are disconnected . i wanted to show this disconnect . the widespread disconnect between people obviously , that s one of our biggest themes . but it s hard to find a less lonely , more interconnected place than a tv set , which thrives on long term working relationships and trust that spans years . as the center of an enterprise as complex as mr . robot season two , esmail seems an unlikely authority on isolation . his actors praise his kindness , friendliness , and accessibility for their every inquiry . his network has entrusted him with nearly every task involved with the show s construction , from the writer s room to the editing room . tv giants like matthew weiner have praised his achievements . he s engaged to shameless star emmy rossum . what loneliness looks like today ? with all due respect , how would he know ? i ve lived a very isolated life . i have tremendous social anxiety . i ll be honest with you , he says , his analytic tone momentarily shifting inward . i ve lived a very isolated life . i have tremendous social anxiety . i did not love going out to parties or even get togethers , really i went to the movies , which if you think about it is an isolating experience anyway and this was because i had anxiety about interacting with people . but what i ve realized is even when i would talk to friends , they were a little bit the same way . it became easier just to text , because it s less anxious . you re not as nervous . you re more removed . this is a direct result of technology , and because i m such a tech nerd , i remember sensing it not just in myself but in everybody i d interact with in my personal life . it s unprecedented . and what drove me he pauses . i wouldn t say it drove me mad , but what i found curious is when i would watch tv shows or movies , they would do that thing where the guy goes to the girl s house . no ! traces of that on set boom creep into his voice . they wouldn t even call that person anymore ! or go to the person s job ? no one does that ! no one just goes to someone s office ! and because drama always lives on the one on one interaction , writers and filmmakers just ignored that . filming mr . robot , i took the opportunity to say , wait a minute , what would actually happen ? in the context of today , how would people actually interact , without having them face each other ? my personal life , my frustration with what i was watching , feeling like it wasn t authentically representing how i was interacting with people , was what motivated me . as the scene between malek , robinson , and slater winds down , esmail unfolds himself from the director s chair and takes to the basketball court , huddling with the camera crew about the next set up . security for the next scene is tight on this secrecy obsessed show , it always is and nonessential personnel are ushered off the location . as i leave , i watch esmail cheerfully interact with dozens of people , in person , in real time something neither he , during the worst of his social anxiety , nor elliot , his fictional alter ego , would be capable of doing . but once it s time to run the scene , he goes back to the camera , or plants himself in front of the monitors , watching his world through a screen . design by james barehamedited by emily yoshida lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gt	 satya nadella bounded into the conference room , eager to talk about intelligence . i was at microsoft s headquarters in redmond , wa , and the company s ceo was touting the company s progress in building more intelligent apps and services . each morning , he told me , he puts on a hololens , which enables him to look at a virtual , interactive calendar projected on a wall of his house . nadella appeared giddy as he described it . the system was intelligent , productive , and futuristic everything he hopes microsoft will be under his leadership . no matter where we work in the future , nadella says , microsoft will have a place in it . the company s conversation as a platform offering , which it unveiled in march , represents a bet that chat based interfaces will overtake apps as our primary way of using the internet for finding information , for shopping , and for accessing a range of services . and apps will become smarter thanks to cognitive apis , made available by microsoft , that let them understand faces , emotions , and other information contained in photos and videos . microsoft argues that it has the best brain , built on nearly two decades of advancements in machine learning and natural language processing , for delivering a future powered by artificial intelligence . it has a head start in building bots that resonate with users emotionally , thanks to an early experiment in china . and among the giants , microsoft was first to release a true platform for text based chat interfaces a point of pride at a company that was mostly sidelined during the rise of smartphones . after losing on mobile , can microsoft win the next battle ? in january , the verge described the tech industry s search for the killer bot . in the months that followed , companies big and small have accelerated their development efforts . facebook opened up a bot development platform of its own , running on its popular messenger chat app . google announced a new intelligent assistant running inside allo , a forthcoming messenger app , and home , its amazon echo competitor . meanwhile the echo , whose voice based inputs have captivated developers , is reportedly in million homes , and has added , skills through its api . microsoft is proud of its work on ai , and eager to convey the sense that this time around , it s poised to win . in june , it invited me to its campus to interview some of nadella s top lieutenants , who are building ai into every corner of the company s business . over the next two days , microsoft showed me a wide range of applications for its advancements in natural language processing and machine learning . the company , as ever , talks a big game . microsoft s historical instincts about where technology is going have been spot on . but the company has a record of dropping the ball when it comes to acting on that instinct . it saw the promise in smartphones and tablets , for example , long before its peers . but apple and google beat microsoft anyway . the question looming over the company s efforts around ai is simple why should it it be different this time ? microsoft has already had more success building bots than perhaps any other us company . but you probably aren t aware of it , because its success started in china . in january , one of microsoft s artificial intelligence creations appeared on the chinese morning news show dragon tv when the newscaster cut away to its weather forecaster , xiaoice . pronounced shao ice , it s a bot whose name is chinese for little bing . that s bing as in microsoft s perennial also ran search engine . but this version of bing is way more talkative . the camera cut to an animated circle hovering in front of a virtual podium . the face transformed into an image of a microphone , and in a soft female voice , xiaoice shared her forecast , even answering a question from the anchor . we ve found a bot that works in a new way that fulfills many of the promises of conversation . if you want to know why microsoft has become so bullish on bots , xiaoice is a big part of the answer . i m not going to go so far as to say we ve found the killer bot but we ve found a bot that works in a new way that fulfills many of the promises of conversation , says derrick connell , head of search engineering at bing . xiaoice , which microsoft introduced on the chinese messaging app wechat in , can answer simple questions , just like microsoft s virtual assistant cortana . where xiaoice excels , though , is in conversation . the bot is programmed to be sensitive to emotions , and to remember your previous chats . going through a breakup ? xiaoice may check in to ask you how you re doing . after it was available for three days , xiaoice had been added to . million conversations on the chinese mega messenger app wechat . it was later made available on the chinese micro blogging service weibo , where it became one of the most popular celebrity accounts to follow . today the bot has been used by more than million people , and the average conversation takes an impressive turns between speaker and bot . for connell , xiaoice points the way toward the next generation of search . web queries traditionally returned a page with blue hyperlinked results the perfect conversational bot will simply return the correct answer . of course , success in china may not translate to the united states . microsoft s first english language bot experiment , tay , was a fiasco . two years after xiaoice s debut , there s still no english language equivalent , and none is imminent . but microsoft executives say the infrastructure behind xiaoice represents a significant opportunity for the company . we want it to be an ecosystem . it s the modern era you don t have to be an expert in speech and language understanding , connell says . just use our tools . go build your branded bot with our tools and put it on whatever canvas it might be slack , it might be facebook messenger . we hope it might be skype or windows . but you choose . and with fears mounting among developers that a war could emerge over bot standards , microsoft has been uncharacteristically diplomatic . it organized a conference in san francisco in june to promote cooperation among bot makers . we re really interested in it being interoperable we want it to be an ecosystem , says lili cheng , a senior engineer at microsoft who helped organize the two day event . it was called botness . it s more like , what are the problems and challenges that we are finding that we can work on together ? but by taking the lead with events like botness , microsoft hopes to position itself at the center of the shift to bots . if the company succeeds , it will have a fresh start in the mobile era . bots powered by the company s technology could show up inside each of the world s most popular messaging apps , giving microsoft a lucrative foothold in the new world . the strategyof course , microsoft isn t alone in trying to build the defining platform for the next generation of computing if conversation even turns out to be that platform . every major tech company and a host of startups are building ai divisions , often with impressive results . but here it s worth saying that comparing ai across companies is difficult to the point of being impossible . much of what companies like google , facebook , and amazon are working on remains unreleased . and executives are often opaque when asked what distinguishes their ai google ceo sundar pichai , for example , has taken to simply saying that the company has been working on it for a very long time . benedict evans , the resident futurist at venture capital firm andreessen horowitz , said in a recent blog post that the future of ai remains opaque . this field is moving so fast that it s not easy to say where the strongest leads necessarily are , nor to work out which things will be commodities and which will be strong points of difference , he wrote . though most of the primary computer science around these techniques is being published and open sourced , the implementation is not trivial these techniques are not necessarily commodities , yet . every major tech company is getting ready for this fight qi lu is happy to make the case for microsoft s competitive advantage . lu is one of the dozen people on nadella s senior leadership team , overseeing the company s applications and service groups . he s also a computer science phd with patents to his name , and is revered among the colleagues of his i speak to . after a few minutes , i start to understand why he s ferociously intelligent , tapping his feet impatiently as he talks , as if frustrated he can t speak as quickly as he thinks . when we meet he is wearing socks with sandals , cargo shorts , and a t shirt emblazoned with three words make epic shit . lu begins by running down the disadvantages presented by the first wave of the mobile internet . the percentage of web traffic from mobile devices has never exceeded desktop traffic he says , reflecting users frustration with the experience . we know web doesn t really work on the phone , lu says . and outside a handful of major categories , users are resistant to downloading apps . seattle residents might be asked to download an app just to check the fare of a ferry they take a couple times a year surely there s a better model . our industry hasn t found an experience platform that can unleash the entire value of mobile and the cloud , lu says . apps , fundamentally , are not the right model . apps arose as an interface in lieu of the html based web because they were the best we could do at the time . you couldn t just yell what you wanted from the internet into your phone , so developers built sophisticated hidden plumbing and let you interact with it via big graphical buttons . and buttons remain the most efficient path for getting lots of things done . but thanks to advancements in natural language processing , now you actually can just yell what you want from the internet into your phone . lu says the next generation experience platform is going to start there , with conversation . it fits more naturally with how humans behave anyway . and if you get it right , you can always start layering those big shiny buttons back on later . we see a full spectrum of using language as the baseline , but using graphical interactions in a thoughtful , meaningful way , to elevate the experience , he says . piece it all together and you can see why microsoft is feeling so optimistic but to win , lu says , a company needs five key assets . the first is a conversation canvas a place where people are doing lots of talking and texting . microsoft has office , outlook , skype , and cortana . the second is that ai brain a sophisticated mental model of the world . microsoft says its own ai efforts date back nearly years . the third is access to a social graph people s activity on the internet often involves their friends and coworkers . not coincidentally , a few days after i met lu , microsoft announced it would spend . billion to acquire linkedin , and its million registered users . the fourth piece is a platform for the artificial intelligence to operate on . microsoft has windows and a family of devices , notably the xbox . the final piece is a network of developers eager to build on your platform , and to pay you for the privilege . stoking that interest had been the primary goal of the microsoft build developer conference in march . individually , microsoft s assets have strong rivals . facebook arguably has a stronger conversational canvas with its family of messaging apps , for example certainly it has the largest social graph . google s brain might be smarter , and it has broad access to hundreds of millions of android devices . but piece it all together and you can see why microsoft is feeling so optimistic . adding all those assets , lu says , i believe we have what it takes to lead the future . the brainmicrosoft s total embrace of ai became apparent two years ago at the inaugural code conference . the conference was acquired the next year by vox media , which owns the verge . nadella , who had become ceo just three months before , appeared on stage to discuss microsoft s future . at the end of his talk , he demonstrated a new feature inside skype . two microsoft employees spoke on stage one in english , the other in german and skype translated their speech in real time , allowing them to communicate despite the language barrier . it was an impressive demo and nadella announced that by the end of the year it would be a working product . to the skype team back in redmond , nadella s timeline landed like a bombshell . it was a complete surprise to me , says peter lee , a corporate vice president at microsoft research . satya really put us in jail with this skype translator thing . initially , the team had two major concerns . one was that microsoft research historically has not been tasked with bringing products to market , and researchers worried they would suddenly have less freedom to pursue scientific breakthroughs . satya really put us in jail with this skype translator thing . the other concern was that at the time of the demo , skype translator wasn t very good . the company s language models had been built using a large body of formal speeches testimony from the united nations , for example . but two way communication of the sort that skype needs to translate is much different . there are more disfluencies moments when the speaker trips over a word , or backs up to start a sentence over again . there s code mixing when speakers use multiple languages in a single sentence , which is very common outside of english . then there was the singing apparently people are constantly singing to each other , and it turns out that computers have a very difficult time parsing it . basically , nothing worked , lee says . what we had to do is re train all our models . but lee s team rallied , cheered on by nadella , and released a preview that december . the product became widely and freely available the next year . lee , who approvingly calls nadella an activist , says the project was exhilarating eventually . imagine the dips in morale and fear when you realize none of this stuff is gonna work you have to somehow get people past that , lee says . and when you do , you see amazing new things appearing . this doesn t feel like hyperbole . microsoft can now translate conversations between eight different languages different combinations . and the underlying technology has implications that go beyond translation . you want to hear about a bot that s incredibly , even magically useful ? microsoft is beta testing software that records business meetings and produces transcripts in real time . the same software can also , say , take an audio recording of an interview between two people and produce a transcript that distinguishes between the speakers perhaps the single most desired piece of technology for any journalist who ever lived . i can t tell you how dismaying it was when we found out stuff wasn t working well for skype translator when we first embarked on that , lee says . but now that we re climbing that mountain , we re in possession of these speech and translation models , especially the speech models they re shockingly good . clippy s revengein the meantime , microsoft is pouring ai resources into some of its biggest franchises windows and office . one of the promises of ai is that it can anticipate your needs it s the foundational idea of google now , which presents you with traffic , weather , and sports scores the moment you unlock your phone . microsoft is working to build this kind of ai into the desktop . marcus ash , who oversees the development of cortana , showed me a mocked up version of windows that draws heavily on cloud based inferences about what i might want to know . when ash accesses the start menu , cortana appears with a series of suggested actions names that are meaningful to you , documents you ve used recently , and suggested translations for common french words . the user here has an upcoming trip . with your permission , cortana incorporates data about your contacts , web search history , and app usage into its recommendations . it isn t as sexy as a general ai that anticipates your every need but it s here today and it changes based on the time of day app developers can signal that they re useful in the morning , or around dinner time , for example . this idea of using conversation , using contextual information about you , with your permission , to make you speedier and make you feel like you re in control , that s the stuff we get really excited about , ash says . a lot of our user experience work is around simplification , removing friction , and really showing the power of intelligence . one of ash s favorite examples is called commitments . with your permission , outlook can take note of the fact that your boss asked you to send her something by the end of the week and automatically remind you if you fail to respond . my life is pretty complicated , and i tend to forget things especially in emails , ash says . recently he forgot to respond to a request from his own boss , he says , but cortana notified in time for him to address it . i see more of this kind of thing when i meet with kirk koenigsbauer , corporate vice president of marketing for office . he shows me a range of ways where intelligence is making office easier to use . in september microsoft introduced delve , a kind of fitbit for productivity that is included with office . the app analyzes how much time you spend in email and in meetings , and highlights times on your calendar where you have extended periods of time to do more complicated , meaningful work . it tells you what percentage of people you sent an email to actually read it , and how quickly . it will suggest reaching out to colleagues that you haven t emailed in a while . it even shows you response times for your colleagues , and for yourself . if your organization lives in google apps , as do many big silicon valley companies , browsing delve felt like a revelation . you don t have to be a numbers nerd to find this kind of information useful . if you re a manager , delve can tell you at a glance how much time you ve spent with each of your employees over the past week . this kind of intelligence isn t as sexy as a general ai that anticipates your every need but it s here today , it works , and it makes google apps look like a neglected backwater by comparison . after six months of searching for a killer bot , i m still bullish on the concept generally . the interactions they enable are vastly richer than the numbers and forgotten small business websites they will eventually replace . but i ve been disappointed by much of what we ve seen on platforms like facebook messenger and telegram at times they have felt like the slowest way to use the internet . most seem barely more functional than smarterchild era bots on aol instant messenger , and all the typing they require sends me screaming back to button based graphical interfaces . for now the discussion around bots and ai remains driven by the industry s desire for a profitable new platform , rather than consumer demand for the services they provide . when bots do their work in the background , they can feel a little bit like magiccompanies response to that problem so far has been , essentially , that they re working on it . like many of these advanced technologies , people assume it s all here today , said mike schroepfer , chief technology officer at facebook , when i asked him about it in may . and there s a lot more technology and work to be developed . i think this will improve month over month , year over year . and yet visiting microsoft made me wonder if i hadn t been thinking about the subject in the wrong way . chat based interfaces are generally tedious . but the machine learning that powers them , applied to tools you re already using , is really quite powerful . if microsoft can infuse delve like intelligence into a wider range of services , it can reasonably say that it offers the most powerful productivity suite in the world . there will be tremendous value in that even if its vision of a massive platform for powering chatbots never materializes . and it may not at this early stage , bots in the foreground too often feel frustratingly dumb . but when they do their work in the background , they can feel a little bit like magic . illustrations by pete ryan . edited by dieter bohn . ceo satya nadella s vision for microsoft	 my partner and i step through a portal and into a bright , vaguely mayan temple . i pick up a torch to light the way , and we set off on our adventure over the course of less than ten minutes , we find a hidden passage , escape from a huge serpent in an underground lake , climb hundreds of feet to a beautiful vista , and , after getting through a cramped hall full of spiders , fulfill a mystical prophecy about a fractured star . dream parkfrom giant robots to haptic spiders , the real future of virtual worlds by adi robertson ampamp ben poppermy partner and i step through a portal and into a bright , vaguely mayan temple . i pick up a torch to light the way , and we set off on our adventure over the course of less than ten minutes , we find a hidden passage , escape from a huge serpent in an underground lake , climb hundreds of feet to a beautiful vista , and , after getting through a cramped hall full of spiders , fulfill a mystical prophecy about a fractured star . then we take off our headsets , and it all disappears . i m standing on stage playing a game called the curse of the serpent s eye in the void , an experience created by the utah based company of the same name that is one part virtual reality , one part video game , one part interactive theater , and one part haunted house . its creators call it hyper reality a virtual experience overlaid onto physical space , creating impossible places that visitors can touch as well as see . instead of a torch , i m carrying a wooden dowel studded with small , shiny balls . instead of the hissing snake , i see what look like powerful fans . and instead of the straight golden walls , there s a round and nearly featureless gray labyrinth , turning us in circles forever . on july st , after months of running limited beta testing , the void is opening its first public attraction a ghostbusters themed experience in new york city s times square , located inside the madame tussauds wax museum . for , visitors can strap on a vr headset and a backpack computer fashioned into a ghostbusters proton pack , pick up a matching gun shaped plastic prop , and act out a cinematic fantasy in real life . after opening a door into a small new york city apartment , they re accosted by tiny pink poltergeists , then make their way into an elevator and out a th story window . a flock of living stone gargoyles and one angry victorian spirit later , everything seems fine until a familiar marshmallow shaped face appears in the window . ghostbusters dimension is short and linear , although there are supposedly hidden easter eggs for visitors to find it s a walk through three person experience , not a vast virtual world . but as technological achievements go , it s a stunningly intricate one . players can see full body avatars of their companions thanks to tracking markers on the headset and gun , and they walk freely through a tremendous amount of space by vr standards . haptic feedback simulates the feeling of getting hit by a thrown object or friendly proton pack fire , and mist accompanies the whooshing of a ghost . we tried it , and it may blow your mind if you ever get a chance to try it too . over the last four years , virtual reality has emerged as one of tech s most exciting new sectors facebook , google , samsung , and sony are all in the process of producing and marketing virtual reality hardware . most of those devices are are being sold directly to consumers the experiences they offer games , short films , and the like are meant to be played at home , sitting in a chair or else tethered to a nearby pc and power supply . but there s an entirely separate category of virtual reality that won t be possible at home . you ll be able to walk freely , without tripping over wires . you ll actually feel the heat of a fire on your face , and the weightlessness in your stomach during a fall off a skyscraper . these are the virtual reality experiences currently being built into arcades , attractions , and theme parks . shot on location at quassy amusement parkin february of this year , china s shanda group announced it would invest million in virtual reality and build a vr theme park built in collaboration with the void . imax , the widescreen theater chain , is working with the swedish game studio starbreeze to bring premium location based virtual reality to multiplexes , malls and other commercial destinations . and established amusement parks are layering virtual reality onto their existing rides six flags is currently upgrading nine roller coasters into vr experiences this summer . in one way , there s something contradictory about driving all the way to a theme park to get into a virtual world . in another , virtual reality seems like an arbitrary term to throw around , when theme parks already offer simulator rides and d theaters does adding a headset fundamentally change the experience ? but if these attractions catch on , they could give people a new way to live out the fantasies that disney , warner brothers , and other companies have used to build multi billion dollar empires . and to companies like the void , vr isn t just a new technology . it s the key to building another world . as futuristic as something like the void feels , we ve been on this ride before before . in the early s , companies large and small started mixing vr experiences with real world attractions , putting a new spin on arcades and theme parks . and the idea started growing long before then . in the late s , two teenage students at the merchant marine academy in new york jordan weisman and ross babcock saw their first training simulator . the sim was a crude and extraordinarily expensive re creation of a ship s bridge , designed to help pilots learn to steer . but in it , they could see the future of entertainment a world where instead of going to see a science fiction movie , someone could buy a ticket and step onto a starship , joining a crew of like minded participants . inspired , babcock and weisman dropped out of the program , wired together a series of apple ii computers and attempted to imitate the multi million dollar military system . it s a good way to fry motherboards , weisman recalls . but we saw a glimpse of what we could get . investors didn t agree , so the two put the dream aside and founded a company called the fasa corporation , which produced some of the s most beloved board and tabletop games titles like mechwarrior , shadowrun , and crimson skies . eventually , fasa s games had earned the pair enough money to revisit their original idea . with babcock and his father morton , jordan weisman founded virtual world entertainment , its name evoking a freshly coined term for a science fictional idea virtual reality . virtual world built a series of cockpit like pods with complicated physical controls and put them in what the company called a battletech center , the first of which launched in chicago in . while spectators watched on televisions outside , players could pay to and pilot a three story robot through a minute firefight . enclosed in the pod , they would look through a video screen and see an endless alien desert , inhabited only by their teammates and opponents mechs . despite its name , virtual world consciously avoided the head mounted displays that define vr today . when you strap this big stupid thing to your head and back in those days , it was an even bigger , stupider thing you look like a fool to everybody else , says weisman now . one of the things you don t want to do when you re going out for an evening of entertainment is look stupid . on their own , battletech pods were more like arcade cabinets than rides a few outposts found their way into the restaurant and arcade chain dave ampamp busters . but with funding from tim disney walt s grand nephew , vwe imagined building larger centers with a range of games that would appeal to everyone , somewhere between a high tech arcade and an indoor amusement park . in , the company opened a pasadena based virtual world center adorned with proto steampunk decor from a fictional virtual geographic society , complete with a bar and restaurant . the mid s saw a lot of vr related entertainment centers , few of which survivedby the mid s , vwe was just one example of companies building vr related entertainment centers , from sega s gameworks arcade to the more theme park like iwerks cinetropolis . uk based inventor jonathan waldern was selling his virtuality headsets as stand alone vr arcade machines . and disney the big one had taken notice . around , the walt disney company assigned its imagineering r ampampd group a secret mission to as team member bill redmann now puts it demonstrate , at any cost , a disney quality vr . its first attempt was one of the coolest sounding theme park rides to never see the light of day . imagineering looked at disney s upcoming movie slate and chose the rocketeer , a retro futuristic superhero movie that , fortuitously , put its hero in a giant helmet . players would sit on a stool and suit up with realistic looking haptic jetpack and a fingerless leather glove with a throttle , and an attendant would offer them a replica of the movie s golden helmet . at the last minute , they d switch it out for a bug eyed simulator helmet mounted from the ceiling , and players would go flying off in virtual reality . but the project , with its expensive military grade tech , was deemed too hard to put in a park . it would take a few more years for the public to see virtual reality , disney style . in , the epcot center opened an aladdin magic carpet ride , putting visitors in a custom headset that resembled an alligator s snout . then , in , the company launched a full indoor theme park devoted to interactive rides disneyquest , located at disney world in orlando , florida . the first location , which housed attractions based on properties like the film hercules and disney s pirates of the caribbean ride , was soon followed by another one in chicago . the orlando disneyquest drew steady crowds , but its successor in chicago quickly stalled , until disney shut it down and scrapped plans for a third center in philadelphia . meanwhile , virtual world had overestimated how quickly it could grow the big virtual world centers hadn t done appreciably better than their smaller progenitors , while leaving the company with higher upkeep costs . after microsoft bought fasa s computer gaming operation in , the centers gradually shut down . in fact , it was a bad time for almost any location based entertainment , whether or not it was strictly vr . iwerks opened just two of its proposed cinetropolis locations before losing so much money it dropped the idea . a much hyped sony entertainment center in san francisco slowly morphed into an ordinary mall . the dave ampamp busters chain kept some battletech pods running for a while , but even that damned the idea in its own way . vr wasn t a new medium it was just another attraction in the back of a restaurant . decades later , both battletech and disneyquest have had a long if limited half life . the orlando disneyquest remains open after nearly years , and battletech s pods retain a cult following and resale market , years after the original centers demise . but until the oculus rift jump started virtual reality development in , it was an idea that belonged firmly in the past . if you were to pick a place for one of the world s hottest virtual reality attractions , there are more likely cities than lindon , utah , the void s home base . around miles south of salt lake city , lindon is nestled in the flatland between utah lake and the southern end of the wasatch mountains . much of its architecture is so aggressively nondescript that the void s offices could be housing anything from a dentist s office to a top secret government facility . once we re inside , though , there s no doubt it s the right place . the void prints its logo on absolutely everything the walls , the floors , the packing crates , the giant inverted black pyramid hanging from the rafters . when ceo ken bretschneider greets us , it s in the same void t shirt we see on almost everyone in the office , a baseball cap pulled over his slightly shaggy blond hair . the void evolved out of plans for a steampunk theme park called evermore , conceived by bretschneider and his partner curtis hickman . while laying the groundwork , they hired a visual effects director named james jensen for help . jensen pitched a longtime dream an experience that would map a virtual world over real space . by , the three had abandoned the traditional park idea and announced the void , where they now share executive duties . the void is one of a few companies trying to sell visitors on big , walkable vr worlds . its main competitor is australian company zero latency , which plans to open a location in tokyo next month , and the lower profile american company vyocor is considering a similar project . landmark entertainment group expects to open a live center full of vr attractions in china next year . in a broader sense , it s also competing against location based entertainment like laser tag , haunted houses , and escape the room games . the void s creators , though , say they re offering something that s never been done . the experience of the void starts with a custom rapture vr headset and backpack computer , built in partnership with several outside engineering companies . rapture is a souped up version of consumer virtual reality gear , wired to a haptic vest that simulates everything from an exploding wall to the tickle of spiders . the hardware specifics vary by experience ghostbusters headset is a modified oculus rift dk , with the promise of the void s more advanced design down the line , and the team created a prop proton pack gun that players hold throughout the experience . in utah , the headsets are full custom hardware , embedded with working leap motion hand tracking sensors . for now , everything else is tracked by cameras located above the stage , but the team is working on a more accurate radio frequency based system called spire . the company s biggest achievement , though , is simultaneously more sophisticated and lower tech . every void experience takes place on a custom built stage , undergirding the virtual experience with real heft . press a button , and you ll feel it under your fingers sit in a chair , and it will hold your weight . the farther you go , the more fantastical things become . the underground lake in curse of the serpent s eye exudes real mist that cools your face when the serpent jumps at you , a platform lifts you out of its reach , convincingly rumbling under your feet . but when you take off the headset , your mayan temple turns into a monochrome shadow world . in the game , i held a torch to a stone door , which blew up in my face to open a passage . but the stage i was on has no doors instead , there s a permanent gap in the corner of the room , one i never noticed while running my hands along the walls . what , i ask hickman , was i actually doing ? he doesn t exactly answer me , but he gives a general explanation i was being distracted . the idea is just to direct people away from the method from the thing you don t want them to see . hickman is a veteran magician who performs as the amazing curtis and virtual worlds are his ultimate illusion . one of the void s most remarkable tricks is something called redirected walking players walk down what they see as straight corridors , but the stage s walls are subtly curved , nudging them in circles to make short paths feel endless . by combining virtual and physical experiences , the void s creators promise a hyper reality far more transportive than normal virtual reality . visitors seem to agree . the company s youtube channel includes testimonials from the likes of aaron paul , who calls it easily the greatest experience , truly , i ve ever had which , coming from a man who starred in breaking bad , is saying something . but when i try it , the void in both ghostbusters and curse of the serpent s eye is grasping at something it hasn t yet reached . the haptic vest and headset are too big for me , so i m constantly reminded of their presence . in the temple , my virtual hand keeps accidentally warping away from its proper location to stick to the torch , even when my partner s holding it . the redirected walking is interesting , but i don t remember traveling radically farther than i actually have it s actually far less surreal than a non vr art installation i ve experienced elsewhere . more importantly , everything i can do just reminds me of what i can t . i can feel the rough stone of the walls , but i can t trace the elaborate carvings on them . heat emanates from a brazier where i light a torch , but not the torch itself . at one point , i m convinced that i should jump off a ledge , but there s no fall someone just pulls me back . none of these stop the experience from being fun , clever , and a little uncanny and some of the issues only appear when you re given time to take a breath and explore the world , which the fast paced ghostbusters experience doesn t allow . i think you don t have to have it percent , says bretschneider . when the void s beta testers feel something approximating a wall , he says , they re satisfied especially when special effects like mist and heat come into play . it kind of reinforces to the brain that it s real enough . and as the technology improves , they ll have to start deciding how real they want things to get . the void is fun , clever , and a little uncanny but will it inspire repeat business ? right now , none of the void s special effects can produce much more than psychological discomfort . but hickman says that if they used the haptic vests full force , the team could make things like a shooting game where you re genuinely worried about getting hit not because it would cause permanent harm , but because it would be distinctly unpleasant , like a paintball shot . someday i kind of hope we get there , in a place where we can have real , almost punishing feedback for decisions and things that you do , without us being sued into the ground . but that s a long way off , because right now , nobody knows what the void will become . its first appearance will be in the form of small , linear attraction stages , like curse of the serpent s eye and ghostbusters . bretschneider says they ve established a solid way to get enough paying customers through put groups of two or three players in at once , wait for them to clear a segment of the experience , then send in the next group right behind them . the experiences would change over time , and players could earn points that would apply across different attractions , creating a single avatar that could be adapted to each setting . this , however , is just the first step . the void s final goal is a series of large , theme park like regional centers filled with what the team calls dimension stages open ended experiences in a space four times as big as the x foot ghostbusters stage , capable of holding between and people at a time . the dimension stages sound a bit like a complex live action role playing session , or maybe non traditional theater like sleep no more , both of which hickman says he looks to for inspiration . they could be anything from a spaceship simulation to a high fantasy world . virtual reality is a safer bet now than it was years agothe closest i got to a dimension stage was a plastic model of a maze , resting on a coffee table in the company s utah warehouse . the team has never built one , nor have they started building any of the centers that would hold them . and while it s not hard to see how a movie themed experience could flourish in an already popular location , it s harder to draw a path from there to a full fledged theme park . the void centers aren t necessarily doomed to the same rise and fall as the battletech centers or other s projects , and vr in general is a safer bet now than it was years ago . but the company s founders admit they re taking a big risk even if they re confident it s a worthwhile one . with how much the world is turning to their computers and being social through their computers , and being stuck with these screens , i find it a comfort to know that we re going to provide them a social outlet that will give them an opportunity to get out of their house , still be embedded and involved with technology , yet socially connected to the people around them , says hickman . to me , that s something that the world wants , and i m going to give it to them . it s a slightly paradoxical idea that people will drive to an entertainment center to escape being social through their computers , only to put the computers right back on once they arrive . it banks on the void s stages to add something unique enough that people will keep coming once the novelty wears off , as it did with virtual world . today , though , they re looking toward virtual reality to make everything old seem new again . virtual reality may be an even better bet at locations that already attract crowds of thrill seekers . no matter where you are at the six flags in maryland , you can see the superman ride of steel roller coaster . built in , the coaster climbs to feet on its first ascent , a red steel ridge that rises above everything else in the park . in reality , that first descent takes you down at a degree angle , reaching a top speed of miles an hour . it s a steep drop , sure , but my experience was a little more intense . i had a samsung gear vr headset strapped on , blocking out my view of the real world , immersing me in a virtual scene synced to the ride . as the train car was climbing , lex luthor lifted me above a skyscraper while superman battled laser wielding robots . and then , when the train car took its first fall , the degree drop was transformed into a sheer degree plunge , amplifying the terror to new heights . the graphics you see inside this virtual experience aren t great . they reminded me of pc games from at least five years ago . after all , the system is powered by a stock samsung smartphone , an s no different than the one you or i might carry in our pockets . there is no high end gaming pc with a top notch graphics card tucked underneath your seat . but relatively simplistic graphics become utterly convincing once the ride really gets going , and the physical forces of the coaster the weightlessness during free fall , the four and a half gs around the turn perfectly match the visual storyline . lt ! function var l function new pym . parent theverge superman graphic , https apps . voxmedia . com at theverge superman if typeof pym undefined var h document . getelementsbytagname head , s document . createelement script s . type text javascript s . src https cdnjs . cloudflare . com ajax libs pym . . pym . js s . onload l h . appendchild s else l gtvirtual reality companies pride themselves on the ability to create a sense of presence , a physical belief that you are actually in another world . the cliche example is to present a user with a virtual cliff . if they know it s not real , but still can t bring themselves to walk off , then the system has done its job , tricking the lizard part of their brain , instilling their body with belief in the simulation . adding physical effects to virtual reality makes it much easier to achieve presence , or heighten the actual experience , what the void has branded hyper reality . for theme parks , virtual reality offers a tantalizing opportunity convert old rides into new experiences without having to spend millions on materials and construction . take the revolution , a forty year old coaster at six flag s magic mountain location in california . once upon a time it was the world s tallest coaster , and the first with a complete loop , an innovative and award winning design . but it only took a few years before competitors built taller coasters and bigger loops . compared to the coasters designed today , the revolution looks quaint . with vr , we can take a coaster like that , and make it feel truly revolutionary again , says sam rhodes , six flags corporate head of ride design . since we ve added the virtual reality element to the revolution , ridership has tripled . theme parks have been moving in the direction of virtual reality for years , driven by the media portfolios of their corporate parents . six flags has a long history with time warner , and it competes with parks from walt disney and nbcuniversal . vr has the potential to really change the business , said tyler batory , an industry analyst specializing in theme parks . the fact that you can change the theme of the coaster to match the season or the movie is way better than building a brand new coaster . you take a ride that s old , visitors don t really like it that much anymore , something like vr can breathe a lot of new life into it . i asked rhodes what he thought of experiences like the void . he had tried it himself , and acknowledged that it was worked well as an immersive experience , but was skeptical of the business model . it would be hard , he said , to turn a profit charging people for just that experience , especially if people only went through in small groups , with each session lasting five minutes or more . at madame tussauds in new york , the void costs on top of a ticket for the wax museum , for a minute experience that can fit only three people at a time . ours is part of the ticket price , and it s every seat on every train , so that s a lot of people . at the event organized by six flags , i met a group of hardcore riders who were also invited along to try the superman ride . they were from the american coaster enthusiasts , a non profit group whose mission is simply to ride and enjoy as many roller coasters as they can . initially , the members seemed skeptical of vr s place in a theme park . honestly , i thought it was gonna be a cheap gimmick , said matthew ferrell . but after riding the superman vr experience times in one morning , he came away a believer . i really came in thinking it would be nice , but not expecting to love it , and it turned me in a positive way i didn t see coming . you get completely pulled out of your world and pushed into this other world where everything looks and feels real . it felt like a movie , but i wasn t a passive participant , i was there , being saved . the experiences currently being built for theme parks , malls , movie theaters , and arcades will act as an catalyst for the still nascent virtual reality industry . i would be willing to guess six flags will put more people through vr for the first time over the next few years than anyone , says rhodes . we estimate million people will ride vr coasters with us this year alone . that compares with around one million monthly active users of samsung s gear vr , the last metric the company shared . given the high bar for owning a htc vive or oculus rift , it s a safe bet that far more people will try room scale vr for the first time outside their own home , likely by visiting an experience like the void or zero latency . companies like the void will also give consumers a taste of the near future , a first glimpse of the kind of technology that will trickle down to the home after a few years . vr headsets sold directly to consumers are limited by a price most people can afford . the void , by contrast , plans to spend as much as , on a single headset so that it can deliver a high end experience worth the price of admission . i feel like we re in the early days of video games here . theme parks and the like won t just be testbeds for consumers to experience the bleeding edge of vr . they will also likely be the first to introduce consumers to vr s more complex cousin , augmented reality . right now most ar experiences involve bulky headsets with a limited field of view . but as the technology continues to get cheaper , smaller , and more powerful , new experiences will be possible . you ll see the normal coaster , as it is , but you ll have a monster attacking the rails , says thomas wagner , ceo of vr coaster , which built the technology six flags is using at its parks . there is tradeoff with these two mediums between immersion and isolation , between losing yourself in a fantasy and the alienating experience in a headset . i sat next to our cameraman on the superman coaster , but in vr , the seat next to mine was empty . one of the big promises from companies like the void is that you can share the experience with friends . during the ghostbusters experience , it worked really well . i could see my teammates and work in tandem with them , crossing the streams on our proton packs when it was time to take out the stay puft marshmallow man . zero latency offers a souped up version of laser tag , letting you battle hordes of zombies with friends you can see in virtual space . it s all strange , heady stuff . but in a best case scenario , we ll be looking back in years from some new plateau of immersiveness , trying to remember why touching a gritty wall in a headset seemed like a transcendent experience . i look forward to that , actually , says the void s curtis hickman . i feel like we re in the early days of video games here , where we ve got these sprite sheets jumping around on a screen and people are like , this is mind blowing , you know . but beneath it all are the fundamental rules of magic and magic , he says , never changes . the gimmick of it , the idea ooh i m in vr and i m moving around , that ll get old , that ll become normal . but this effect of genuinely feeling like you re somewhere else , because the illusion design has made you feel that way i don t know if that will ever go away . it s hard to know if companies like the void will thrive as businesses . even if visitors find the experiences extraordinary , the combination of steep prices , short experiences , and relatively small numbers may not pan out . but it seems almost certain that whatever virtual reality s place in mass culture , it will find a place outside the home . the novelty of the newest tech will always wear off when the next generation of hardware eclipses it . but you can t quite simulate the drop in your stomach when you plunge off a real cliff , or the experience of real heat on your skin and wind in your hair . until people start building coasters in their backyards or converting their living rooms into fun houses full of props , there will be a certain magic that is only available when you actually get off the couch . produced by frank bilead image ampamp design by james barehamphotography by tom connors and miriam nielsenedited by michael zelenko	 gadget shopping ? chances are that as soon as you plunk down cash for a new smartphone or . inch tablet or k d led flatscreen television , a tiny part of your brain is already plotting its disposal . thanks to rapid changes in technology , a shifting media landscape , and falling prices , discarded electronics have become the fastest growing waste stream in the world . in the us , we threw away billion pounds of circuit boards , transistors , and hard drives , also known as e waste , in alone about pounds each for every man , woman , and child . ampnbsp e waste empirenew york city discards millions of pounds of dead electronics each year . we follow its path from shelf to shredder by andrew j . hawkins photography by amelia holowaty krales gadget shopping ? chances are that as soon as you plunk down cash for a new smartphone or . inch tablet or k d led flatscreen television , a tiny part of your brain is already plotting its disposal . thanks to rapid changes in technology , a shifting media landscape , and falling prices , discarded electronics have become the fastest growing waste stream in the world . in the us , we threw away billion pounds of circuit boards , transistors , and hard drives , also known as e waste , in alone about pounds each for every man , woman , and child . in response to all this digital detritus has risen a cottage industry of recyclers , from multi million dollar corporations to local nonprofits to fly by night , back of the van scammers . it s no small task , too . recycling electronic waste requires the ability to collect , sort , dismantle , and extract recyclable materials and precious metals from a whole range of devices , while also separating out non recyclable and hazardous waste . to be a large scale e waste recycler you need to have a fleet of vehicles , an army of workers , ample warehouse space , government contracts , and loads of insurance . the profits are slim , the overhead is huge , and regulatory landscape is endlessly confusing . it s a constant challenge , says john shegerian , ceo of the fresno , california based electronics recyclers international . with seven facilities around the country , eri is one of the biggest e waste recyclers in the us . since getting into the business over a decade ago , the company s margins have exploded . in april of , it recycled , pounds of e waste this last april , that number spiked to million pounds . eri recycles most of new york city s residential e waste , which translated to over million pounds in alone . it s a huge enterprise to recycle electronics in a responsible way we re recycling a couple hundred million pounds a year , over a billion pounds in our lifetime as a company , and we ve still only scratched the surface . the us has no federal law requiring e waste be recycled . currently , only states in the us have laws establishing a funding system for the collection and recycling of electronic products , as well as bans against sending electronics to landfills . in the other states , tossing toxic e waste into the trash is perfectly legal . and then there s the disastrous effect that e waste has had on third world countries . the us is the only developed nation that hasn t ratified an international treaty to stop first world countries from dumping their e waste in developing nations . so , mountains of hazardous us based waste are growing at an exponential rate in countries like india , china , and south africa . exported e waste has turned rivers in china black and towns in ghana into some of the world s largest dumps . the un environment programme predicts that between and , the amount of e waste exported to india will have jumped by percent , and by to percent in south africa and china . most americans toss their old gadgets in the trash with last night s dinnermeanwhile , all of our electronics are getting smaller , more streamlined , and exceedingly more difficult to recycle . the larger companies , like apple , hp , huawei , amazon , and microsoft have detailed protocols for recycling their products , but that only applies to those that are actually returned by consumers . most americans toss their old gadgets in the trash with last night s dinner . the rest is left to recyclers like eri to try to bring some sanity to the process . over several weeks in early , the verge tracked just one of the countless e waste recycling paths around the country , from a garbage room in an apartment building in manhattan , to a drop off site in staten island , to a sorting facility in new jersey , to a bustling recycling warehouse in massachusetts . the goal was simple to get a broader sense of where all our old televisions , phones , and computers go when we don t want them anymore . at am on a windy tuesday in february , a nondescript white truck pulls up outside the manhattan plaza , a story residential tower in new york city s hell s kitchen neighborhood which is home to some , tenants , many of them artists . two men wearing fluorescent yellow vests bearing the eri logo pile out and , with the help of the building manager , roll a grey cart brimming with old electronics from the garbage room to the truck . the cart is teeming with televisions , desktop computers , stereo equipment , laptops , modems , and even a handful of smartphones and tablets . using a flimsy liftgate , the men load the cart into the back of the truck . a inch dlp projection tv is too large for the cart and has to be brought onboard with a hand truck . one of the drivers takes a picture of the dusty relic with his phone . someday , that phone will get thrown away . will it be recycled ? the drivers will make more pickups that day . eri has a total of four trucks in new york city making similar routes each day , with building managers arranging pickups in advance . the company has contracts with , residential buildings across the city , and each borough has its own e waste idiosyncrasies manhattan , for example , throws away a smaller percentage of big televisions than the more suburban neighborhoods of staten island and queens . of course , many people in the big apple don t live in buildings with dedicated e waste pickups . for those people , places like the lower east side ecology center s drop off center in brooklyn are essential . next to the fetid gowanus canal , the warehouse is the only free , permanent e waste drop off facility in the city . the center handled over million pounds of e waste in . in addition to recycling e waste on site , the center also refurbishes old electronics to be sold in its prop library to film producers or set designers who may need an old cathode ray tube television for their next shoot . the next stop for the inch dlp projection television and its dilapidated companions is tucked away in an industrial section of new jersey s bergen county this is a sorting facility , where all of new york city s electronic waste goes to be separated and packaged before being sent out to various recycling facilities . computers are stacked with other computers , keyboards with keyboards , flat screen tvs with flat screen tvs , and so on . the grey bins that reside in the refuse rooms of the city s apartment buildings are emptied out , and then reloaded onto the trucks , to be returned to their respective garbage rooms back in the city . only five people work at the lyndhurst warehouse , loading and reloading , pounds of pounds of e waste every day . inside , a sea of electronics , some shrinkwrapped , some not , spreads out like a vast electronic graveyard magnavox tvs with built in vcrs , tvs built into ornate wooden cabinets , a crumbling pile of computer monitors . this facility is not long for the world . eri says it is looking for larger space , where it can maybe start recycling e waste closer to the city . freight and labor are the company s two biggest costs . it s incredibly expensive to send the city s e waste to its other recycling facilities in massachusetts , indiana , and north carolina , both in terms of fuel costs and manpower . holliston , massachusetts is a small town about an hour outside boston , famous for the balancing rock , a legendary and precariously perched stone that not even george washington himself could push over . it s also where eri s , square foot recycling facility churns at a furious pace . visitors entering the warehouse are greeted by the sight of a scrap metal waterfall raining down from an elevated conveyor belt . forklifts crisscross the factory floor bearing pallets of shrink wrapped electronics . each day , , pounds of televisions and , pounds of computers , laptops , phones , and a grab bag of printers , cable boxes , video game consoles , network adapters , and even a few smartphones , smartwatches , tablets , phablets , fitness trackers , and drones come through here . some are practically brand new . you never know what s going to be in the back of one of those trailers , says gary keith , the plant manager . and he s right perched atop one bin sits a weathered looking apple iic , a proto laptop released in , complete with its original packaging . around the warehouse , old electronics are endlessly brutalized . teams of workers snap laptops in half , smash screens , disembowel computers , and cripple keyboards . one employee wearing a ghostbusters t shirt rips apart printers and bulky toshiba laptops as if they were made of matchsticks . giant piles of circuit boards and shredded plastic gather at his feet . a roller coaster of conveyor belts soars overhead . it s the perfect place for a luddite with anger issues . in the back of the facility lurks the green , hulking , three story tall shredder . occupying over , square feet of space , the shredder is comprised of a series of conveyor belts , shakers , and sorters . metal and plastic is hammered , ground , and pushed through a steel screen until it is pulverized into a fine dust . dozens of plastic bags with their weights marked on the side , pounds , pounds , pounds are stacked in the corner , waiting to be shipped off to the smelter . but the unloading , smashing , and shredding of e waste is only half the operation here . to get to the facility s data security wing , you have to go through a metal detector and get past an eagle eyed security guard . here , neat stacks of laptops sit on top of wooden pallets , while a team of middle aged men wielding power tools quietly disassemble each one , wipe the hard drives , and send them to the mini shredder that sits in a cage in the corner . this is where corporate america financial service firms , medical groups , insurance companies , basically anyone with industrial secrets they want to protect sends its leftover electronics to be scrubbed of data , refurbished , resold , or completely recycled . thirty plus security cameras cover the area , known at eri as the asset management wing . no one without special clearance is allowed in . all the electronics going in have to match the weight of material that comes out , down to the milligram . sounds like overkill , says scott townsend , director of recycling solutions . but we re not willing to take that chance . the memory wiping process is hardly instantaneous one terabyte , or , gbs , takes hours . eri has a zero tolerance policy if the company fails to wipe the drive , the item takes a permanent detour to the shredder . a facility like eri can harvest , pounds of copper and pounds of gold , silver , and palladium a month . where do those precious commodities go ? simply put , they re sent to burn . the smelting industry in the us is in decline , with plants shuttering across the country . fifteen years ago , there were active aluminum smelters in the us . today there are only six . alcoa , which most recently closed its evansville , indiana facility in january , has just one us smelter still in operation in massena , new york , and that s only because of a million aid package from the state . it s not hard to envision a future in which all smelting is outsourced to countries like china and russia , where safety standards are lax in comparison . eri says it recycles percent of the electronics it collects the only components not recycled are the wood from old console tvs and speakers and other equipment with wood . the company then sells its precious metal materials to two main smelters ls nikko , which is based in south korea and alcoa . once material is processed at the smelters they create a more pure commodity to be sold on the commodities market . prices have fluctuated wildly since the market crashed in . at a certain point , recyclers of e waste can spend more money recycling electronics than they make selling the post recyclable material back to the manufacturers . meanwhile , more and more electronics are getting tossed in the trash . globally , people threw away million tons of e waste in , or over billion pounds . that number is expected to grow this year to over billion pounds . by , the global volume of e waste will weigh the equivalent of eight of the great egyptian pyramids , according to the un . or to put it another way , an amount equal to empire state buildings . that s a veritable skyline of e waste , and it s rising taller every day . correction this article previously stated that the global e waste estimate for was . trillion pounds . in fact , it is billion pounds . product by frank bilead image and design by james barehamedited by michael zelenko lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gt	 it was a rare sunny day in seattle and phil spencer seemed very pleased . sitting across from me in a meeting room at microsoft s sprawling redmond campus , the head of xbox smiled as he talked , mixing serious discussion about the future of his business with jokes about how his employees dress . he s not a fan of cargo shorts in the office . xbox start to continuean exclusive look inside microsoft s plan to turn your xbox into a pc by andrew webster photography by vjeran pavic it was a rare sunny day in seattle and phil spencer seemed very pleased . sitting across from me in a meeting room at microsoft s sprawling redmond campus , the head of xbox smiled as he talked , mixing serious discussion about the future of his business with jokes about how his employees dress . he s not a fan of cargo shorts in the office . it was pm , almost exactly a week before today s e keynote in los angeles . i d spent the day speaking with everyone from key members of the xbox leadership team to the creative leads behind games like gears of war and forza , about what they d present on stage in la . i also checked out new pieces of hardware , including the much rumored and much smaller xbox one s , and drove a few laps in the just announced forza horizon . xbox s presentation at e today points to a future in which the console in your living room behaves a lot like the pc in your office . microsoft s approach starts with hardware , where devices like the xbox one s and project scorpio will fundamentally disrupt the tried and true console cycle by pushing continuous , periodic updates that take advantage of new technology like k and virtual reality . then there are initiatives like xbox play anywhere , which brings the xbox one and windows closer together by letting customers buy a game once and play it seamlessly across both platforms . the vision also includes improvements to xbox live that add the kind of functionality pc gamers expect , like persistent chat , on consoles as well as on windows . spencer says all these moves stem from a single goal to merge the often disparate worlds of pc and console gaming , and use that to keep xbox at the cutting edge . i think there are things for us to learn and take from the pc and xbox ecosystems to make gaming better . it s our job as the platform holder to make the console experience feel like the console experience , to make the pc experience feel like the pc experience , and to bring the best from both when we can . all of this sounds good on paper and it also sounds very familiar . last fall , microsoft invited the verge to redmond for an exclusive look at the company s xbox strategy . a few years prior , microsoft suffered a disastrous xbox one debut . to the consternation of millions of fans , microsoft had put games aside , instead positioning the xbox one as the center of your living room entertainment experience . in , spencer and a new leadership came aboard to refocus microsoft s efforts in the console space , and put the emphasis back on the games themselves . at the time , spencer laid out an ambitious roadmap that involved putting serious effort and significant resources behind bringing hit games to the xbox . the plan also included bringing some of those iconic xbox franchises to the pc . as we embrace windows users as an active part of the xbox community , he noted at the time , it opens up opportunities for our first party games . . . . i don t want to dilute what the xbox console customer feels , spencer said . i want to expand what we re able to do for more customers . that sentiment could easily be used to describe the brand new xbox play anywhere initiative . in effect , today s e keynote indicates that the company is putting into action many of the ideas the company revealed to the verge last fall , and expanding on them . at its keynote , the company unveiled two new iterations of the xbox one , both slated to launch over the next two years . the first machine isn t exactly surprising . the xbox one s , which will debut in august , is a smaller version of the xbox one , with a white color scheme and a slick , streamlined design . it s typical of the slim refreshes of devices like the nintendo ds lite or ps one , though it does add some new functionality , most notably the addition of k ultra hd video support and hdr capabilities . when microsoft showed me the one s last week , hardware lead matt lapsen hid the device under the shell of an original xbox one then lifted it up to dramatically reveal just how small the new version was spencer called it the cheesiest thing ever later in the day . next fall it will be joined by yet another xbox one , codenamed project scorpio . more powerful than the one s , scorpio will operate at six teraflops , powerful enough to play both k native games and virtual reality experiences with the addition of an as of yet unknown vr headset . according to spencer , the improvement between scorpio and the current xbox one will be immediately noticeable . i actually think the upgrade to scorpio in terms of visual fidelity will feel as dramatic of a change as we re used to seeing in new generations , he said . but one of the most significant initiatives doesn t revolve around a single console , spencer said it touches all of them . for decades console gamers have been faced with a persistent problem when you finally upgrade to a new device , you re essentially starting over from scratch , building up a new library of games . i can still play my dusty old copy of the first diablo on my new pc , but apart from a few platforms that offer backwards compatibility , console games live in one console generation . microsoft has slowly been adding xbox game support to the xbox one , but now it plans to radically expand that initiative . moving forward , microsoft wants to bring the pc approach to consoles , treating all xbox one games the same they ll all work no matter which iteration of the hardware you own . the next halo will look better if you have project scorpio and a new k television to take advantage of all its capabilities , but it will still work on your current machine . the idea is that wherever we are from the generation on , spencer says of the ability to carry over your library to new devices , we re investing in xbox live and content so that as you upgrade the experience moves with you . the xbox play anywhere initiative goes one step further , making some of the company s biggest games available across both xbox one and windows . starting later this year , if you buy a game digitally on xbox one you ll also own it on windows and vice versa . the game will simply appear in your library and all of your saved game data and achievements will transfer across both platforms . imagine launching a halo campaign on your console , and finishing it up on your laptop while travelling . not every xbox game will be capable of cross platform syncing for some time , but the majority of upcoming first party games titles either developed or published by microsoft will support it . that includes flagship titles like recore , forza horizon , and halo wars . xbox one a history of promises lt ! function var l function new pym . parent theverge xbox one revisited graphic , https apps . voxmedia . com at theverge xbox one revisited if typeof pym undefined var h document . getelementsbytagname head , s document . createelement script s . type text javascript s . src https cdnjs . cloudflare . com ajax libs pym . . pym . js s . onload l h . appendchild s else l gt people are going to play the games that they want to play on the devices that they want to play them on , spencer said when i asked him what the future of gaming looks like . certain people will want to play gears on a vr device , other people are going to want to play on a laptop , some people are going to want to play on their television . i think our longer term goal is to enable creators to reach the largest audience possible , and for gamers to buy the games that they want to play and to play them wherever they want to play , just like any other digital media you can watch netflix or read kindle books on almost any device . speaking to the verge in december , spencer admitted that the idea of merging windows and xbox was still in its infancy . i feel good about the early steps there , he said . over the next few months , the company made small moves toward realizing that vision last year s remaster of the original gears of war was released on both windows and xbox one when you bought quantum break on xbox one , you received a code to download it on windows , as well . ampnbspforza made its pc debut with the free to play spinoff forza motorsport apex on windows . you could see the the hand drawn outline of an idea in these moves now we can see the emergence of a fully formed plan . the biggest reason we actually started making apex was because we knew pc was going to be our future , dan greenawalt , creative director at forza studio turn , told me during my redmond visit . he s the kind of person whose eyes light up when he gets into the nerdy details of things , whether it s a virtual car or porting a game to a new platform . we wanted to bring forza to pc because we believe in pc as a gaming platform . apex marked the series debut on pc , something that will continue with the cross platform release of forza horizon on september th . working on apex allowed the studio to get its feet wet in the world of pc development , before crafting the more fully fledged experience of a new horizon game . horizon comes in standing on the shoulders of apex , greenwalt says . last year s gears of war ultimate edition was a similar prospect , allowing new studio the coalition to experiment with cross platform development on a remastered game before creating a brand new experience in the form of gears of war . of course , there s more to the modern gaming experience than just the games the social element is arguably just as important , and xbox live has been a big part of that . in october , xbox live is getting a new feature called clubs , that lets you create predefined groups that you can use to play with or simply just hang out with other players . you can make a group for people who like to play destiny in the evenings , or one for your closest friends who you ve known since high school , and these groups will continue to exist outside their respective games . in a very pc like addition , the groups will feature a persistent chat that you can access whether you re on console , pc , or even the xbox live mobile app . persistent chat feels like a throwback ampnbspa modern take on chatting in irc while you play starcraft . but microsoft hopes that the combination of cross platform functionality and big xbox games coming to windows will make it appealing to pc gamers who are already invested in entrenched platforms like steam , and are used to having games follow them from pc to pc . the pc ification of the xbox ecosystem has clear benefits for microsoft . it allows the company to sell games to customers across a variety of platforms , and potentially move more consoles by regularly updating them with new features the xbox one continues to significantly lag behind the playstation in sales . similarly , the new strategy has the potential to benefit game developers and publishers , who no longer have to worry about the bumpy shifts between console generations , and whether to support an aging platform with a big user base or switch to a more powerful device with a limited audience . but is the strategy is good for consumers ? if microsoft succeeds , the game console will be yet another device like your phone , in need of an upgrade every two years or so . spencer says he expects new games will continue to work on older consoles for a long time . and while i may technically be able to run the latest xbox one games on my original hardware , that doesn t mean i won t be looking at the splendid k visuals on project scorpio with envy . but spencer believes that choice is the key factor to this paradigm shift . what we re saying is that we re going to ship xbox one games , and those games will run on xbox one , run on xbox one s , and run on scorpio , he explained . am i going to run games in k on the xbox one that i bought ? no , you re not . i ll say the same things that i say to my customers today you love what you have on the , keep buying and playing games on your . yes , i agree that there will be some people at the front end that will say , hey , i always want the latest and greatest , and for those people the upgrade cycle could feel shorter . but i m not going to force that on you . i m going to let you know that you get to make the choice . the other question is how long the strategy will last . microsoft has been talking about many of these features for quite some time , and only now are they being implemented in a serious way . in less than three years , xbox one has already gone through multiple identity crises from an entertainment system , back to gaming , and now toward a pc . microsoft s gaming efforts appear to be heading in the right direction , but if project scorpio fails to ignite xbox one sales , who knows what the sales pitch will be two years from now . back in redmond , i pointed out the company s pivots to spencer . the xbox chief seemed undeterred by the company s last three years . he believes that fighting against the traditional console cycle is important to keep consoles relevant in a world where technology advances at a rapid clip . what was the likelihood , i asked him , that in a few months microsoft would be pivoting again ? ampnbspspencer became more contemplative . i m coming up on three decades now at microsoft , i started as a programmer here , and betting on technology innovation seems to me has always paid off , he said . as opposed to betting on static technology , that something is going to be built and not change for a decade , especially with today s pace of innovation and consumer appetite for new , innovative experiences . i m pretty convinced that this is the right approach . xbox fans are hoping he s right . contributed reporting by chris plantedesign by james barehamedited by michael zelenko lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gt	 one of the first things you notice about duncan jones is that he loves to laugh . sometimes it s a self deprecating chuckle , others a full throated guffaw . while i m waiting to sit down with the year old director at a studio space in burbank , california , i can hear his roar from rooms away . it turns out he s watching candace payne giggling about her new chewbacca mask , and when it comes up that i m getting married soon , he s got an idea you ve got to do your vows in that ! for the hordeduncan jones went through personal hell while making warcraft and survived by bryan bishop photography by james bareham one of the first things you notice about duncan jones is that he loves to laugh . sometimes it s a self deprecating chuckle , others a full throated guffaw . while i m waiting to sit down with the year old director at a studio space in burbank , california , i can hear his roar from rooms away . it turns out he s watching candace payne giggling about her new chewbacca mask , and when it comes up that i m getting married soon , he s got an idea you ve got to do your vows in that ! you can understand why he d want to grab a few minutes to cackle alongside the rest of the internet . jones is in the midst of the weeks long promotional push for his third feature , warcraft ampnbspa few days ago he was in moscow for hours , next up is new york , then it s off to london and beijing ampnbspand at this point he s essentially a marketing marathon runner . but for somebody who first burst onto the filmmaking scene in with the low budget sci fi drama moon , a time when he was known more for being david bowie s son than for his own work , there s a sense of welcome relief , too . warcraft , his first franchise film and biggest by an order of several degrees , is almost out the door . he ll soon be returning to the indie world with his next film , mute , which recently locked down paul rudd and alexander skarsgard in the leading roles . and later this month , jones and his wife are expecting their first child . it s as if duncan jones can hardly believe he sees the finish line . maybe it s because he s coming off the most harrowing four years of his life . duncan , like all great writers , draws on personal experience , his producing partner stuart fenegan tells me over the phone . if anyone should know , it s fenegan the two first met in in the uk commercials scene , bonding over a shared desire to make feature films , and have worked together ever since . one of their early successes was a tongue in cheek nod to kung fu movies for the fashion brand french connection , and looking back , the spot contains much of the dna of the filmmaker jones has evolved into it s quirky , with a playful sense of humor , and a movie geek s love of genre . what wasn t apparent yet was the sense of emotional intimacy that weaves through his feature work , no matter the genre or budget one that seems inextricably linked to how he discovered the medium in the first place . my dad , bless him , tried to get me to learn musical instruments , and i always kept it at arm s distance , jones says , relaxed in a t shirt and glasses . strip away the director s beard and brawny shoulders , and , yes , the family resemblance is undeniable . but film i loved . one of the father and son bonding things i remember is him showing me how to make a zoetrope . interest in that primitive , flickering marvel led to home experimentation with stop motion animation and an mm camera , and along the way jones hung out with his father on the sets of movies like labyrinth and tony scott s moody vampire flick the hunger . but early exposure didn t translate to an obvious career path , and it was only after jones was three years into a phd program at vanderbilt that filmmaking called again . jones , left , with nicolas roeg and david bowie on the set of the man who fell to earth . my dad was working up in montreal with tony scott on this tv version of the hunger , and asked me if i wanted to take a little break and come up and join them . once jones was on set , scott put a mm bolex camera in his hands and tasked him with shooting pick up footage for the show . i had the best time . and i was like , this is it . i need to go to film school . when jones took his feature debut moon to sundance nearly a decade later , the film was praised as a refreshing return to thoughtful , intimate sci fi at a time when the genre was often eclipsed by sound and fury . the story of sam bell sam rockwell , a corporate maintenance worker nearing the end of a three year solo shift on a lunar station , it used the genre to tackle feelings of alienation and identity in ways that were shockingly accessible ampnbspand , it turns out , personal . when he was writing moon , he had a long distance relationship with a woman from korea , and that feeling of loneliness and isolation was certainly a part of it , fenegan says of jones creative process . he had spent a lot of time doing his graduate studies in the midwest , completely separate from his family and friends . again , firsthand experiences of that isolation and loneliness . jones isn t feigning interest in movies and fan culture he embodies it the response from those who saw it was amazing , and it really made me feel like , yeah , i actually have found something i m good at , that i really enjoy doing , jones says now . moon earned him a bafta for outstanding debut by a filmmaker , and he parlayed the momentum into the jake gyllenhaal action film source code . its million budget was a significant jump in scale , and with the movie s high concept premise ampnbspgyllenhaal plays a soldier who relives the last eight minutes of a bombing victim s life in order to find the perpetrator ampnbspit s easy to imagine a rote , action heavy take on the material . but jones found both critical and box office success by teasing out some familiar themes . as he tells it , his characters tend to be someone who s being abused by the system that they are there to work for , and not being given all the information . feeling alienated by their job , and the circumstances that they re in . they re common dystopian concepts that seem particularly resonant for jones , even while they re hard to square with him as an individual . in person , there s no sense of the alienation that simmers in the background of his movies . he s charming and engaging , enthusiastically joking with the same verve he exhibits on his lively twitter account . jones isn t feigning an interest in movies , gaming , and fan culture he embodies it , from the custom warcraft and moon t shirts he wears at interviews , to the late night visits to fans he and his wife made last year at comic con . there is a line to be sketched between that aspect of jones work and his father s own explorations of being a misfit and outsider . but it s abundantly clear that jones has been able to use his own astute sense of emotional empathy to elevate genre material ampnbspand that ability is what got him the warcraft gig in the first place . sam raimi had been attached to direct the film in , but creative differences between the director and blizzard stalled the project . when raimi dropped out , the project started anew with screenwriter charles leavitt blood diamond , focusing on human forces fighting an orc invasion . enter duncan , says warcraft producer charles roven . he comes in , reads the draft . he tells us that he really likes the story , but there s one huge problem that he would change he would tell the story from both the point of view of the orcs and the humans . the idea of showing a conflict from both sides that s what really appealed to me , jones says . trying to allow the audience to empathize with characters who , from their point of view , are doing the right thing . i just find that interesting . it was a fundamental shift on a tentpole film whose million budget would far eclipse anything he d ever attempted before ampnbspwith technical and visual effects challenges to match . but even while he was pitching for the job , jones was already dealing with a much more personal challenge in a very public way . in november of , jones fianc e , photographer rodene ronquillo , was diagnosed with stage ii breast cancer . the couple responded that same day by heading to a courthouse and getting married . by the end of the week , rodene ronquillo jones was in surgery and prepping for the long road of chemotherapy and treatment ahead . one month later , the couple took an unusual step they shared what they d been going through on twitter . it was scary , and the only thing that kept us going was just sharing stories , and being able to vibe with other people who d gone through it , ronquillo jones says now , looking back at the ordeal . it s such an unknown , uncurable thing , and it s such a life changer . community was the only way to get through the whole process . jones and ronquillo in . when doctors recommended she shave her head ahead of treatment , her husband did the same in solidarity rodene gave him a bright pink mohawk , and they detailed all of it online . keeping things private like that , to me , makes them more scary , the director says . i think opening up and letting people who are going through it say , yeah , we re going through that , too , or , we ve just been through that , and you can get through it i find that much more comforting than trying to keep everything private and feeling like you re surrounded by shadows . that following january , the professional and personal intersected as jones teased he was waiting to hear back on some big news , and it finally came he would be directing warcraft . but step by step , treatment after treatment , the jones continued to put their struggle in the public eye to raise awareness ampnbspoften accompanied with the hashtag touchupyourlovedones , because , well , that s how they d discovered the lump in the first place . i was , and i ve met other girls in the community who are . that s really young to get hardcore cancer , ronquillo says . it was just more beneficial to be able to share something like that , and let people know this is a huge problem , and will continue to be a problem if people hide it , and act like it s some sort of mysterious disease . because it s not . you also have to respect those people who choose to keep private about it , jones admits , and it s hard to not think he s speaking from very recent personal experience . everyone s got their own way of dealing with things . for duncan and rodene jones , dealing meant moving full steam ahead with the rest of their lives . within days of rodene finishing her treatment , the couple had moved to vancouver to begin pre production on warcraft , where she served as the on set archival photographer . it was a great distraction , because we went from hardcore cancer stuff , to hardcore film stuff , she says . for duncan , the task turned toward realizing his vision , and much of it came down to turning the game s creatures into beings an audience could actually care about . true to his original take , jones warcraft spends equal time between its human characters and its seven foot tall , green skinned orcs . so while massive sets were built for the film ampnbspfrom the cobblestone streets of stormwind to the orc encampments ampnbspthe orc performances were all recorded via motion capture , only fully realized when the cg creations were brought to life . you shoot your film , and you go back to edit it , and you ve just got some characters and some sets , explains visual effects supervisor jeff white . you don t really have a movie until the orcs go in there . we went from hardcore cancer stuff , to hardcore film stuff . it s easy for filmmakers to be overwhelmed by , effects shots in a film , white says . but duncan understands the technology . he s not afraid to keep pushing . i think what was so great is that we could do animation reviews with him , and he really zeroed in on what the character needed , communicated what was happening in that scene , and why certain things were important . the emotional intent is clear right from the beginning of the film . warcraft opens with an orc chief and his wife toby kebbell and anna galvin , respectively worrying about the future of their unborn child , with jones fearlessly holding on a two shot of the all cg couple . it s a gutsy way to open ampnbspif the visual effects don t deliver , you ve basically tanked your film in the first five minutes ampnbspand it s to warcraft s credit that the orcs are often the easiest characters to identify with . but they re a far cry from sam rockwell s lonely clone . we re in a moment when promising directors with distinctive voices are regularly snatched up and , for better or worse , tossed into the hollywood franchise machine ryan coogler with black panther , or rian johnson with star wars episode viii . there s a legitimate fear that a franchise can drown out the voice of the filmmaker , and with the expectations of gaming fans , a major studio , and game creator blizzard all bearing down , there s no film that would seem more likely to drown under that pressure than warcraft . but jones personal themes of interest undeniably emerge . jones and travis fimmell on the set of warcraft universal pictures . take paula patton s character , garona . in the film , her half human , half orc character is ostracized from the orc community for being different , only to be captured later by the human forces ampnbspwho also rebuke her . she s trying to work out where she can belong . so i think in the same way that sam bell in moon knows himself to be different because of the fact that he s a clone , and the way that colter stevens in source code realizes that he is not who he thought he was and doesn t fit in , garona follows that pattern . there s a skin thickening process that you have to get used to when you do studio films . that concept of the individual fighting for a sense of identity against a monolithic machine is echoed throughout warcraft , and in jones own experience working on a film with so many corporate masters . in addition to blizzard , charles roven s production company , and the team at legendary pictures , the film also faced a midstream change in major studio partners , with legendary moving its distribution deal from warner bros . to universal after the film was already moving forward . making things even more interesting , the chinese conglomerate wanda group bought legendary five months ago . there s a skin thickening process that you have to get used to when you do studio films , jones says . it s not the struggling artist fighting the world . there s a certain amount of bureaucracy and diplomacy that you have to be able to deal with , and you need to be able to have your ideas really challenged , possibly multiple times by different people . there s a lot of competing priorities as to what warcraft needs to be , he admits . after that experience , it will be very satisfying to go back to an indie where it s me and my producer , and whatever me and the actors decide we want to do . that indie is mute , the first of two semi sequels to his debut that will make up a loose trilogy he describes as the moon iverse . a sci fi noir set in a futuristic berlin , it follows a mute bartender alexander skarsgard hunting for his missing girlfriend ampnbspwhat sounds like another classic jones outsider . it s a bit of a palate cleanser after doing a big studio film like this . it s my mustard after a big bowl of ice cream , he says , before launching back into that big laugh . every so often jones gives off the faintest hint of weariness when talking about warcraft , and it s not hard to understand why . while he began making the film against a backdrop of personal struggle , that s how he ended it , too ampnbspwith his father passing away on january th . like many others , i looked to jones twitter account when the bowie rumors first started swirling ampnbspand he confirmed the news with a photo of his infant self on his father s shoulders . after taking two weeks off from the internet , jones came back cracking jokes , posting about video games , and talking up his directors as babies photoshop series . a month after his father died , jones shared the christmas card that he and rodene had given bowie the year before . it announced to the world that the jones were expecting their first child ampnbspthe same month , it turned out , that warcraft would be hitting theaters . when asked why he decided to share such an intimate moment with the public , jones is uncharacteristically at a loss for words . it s a tricky one , that . i don t know . i don t have much more of an answer , other than it felt right . i don t even know what to make of people that i know over the internet , he confesses . it s been such a part of my life now , for such an extended period of time , that i m not willing to think of them as strangers . especially the ones that i actually have known only in that capacity for years . it s a relationship , he admits , that is strangely in tune with his films like sam bell trading messages with the loved ones he s really only ever seen on a video screen . what s very clear is that sharing and connecting ampnbspthrough twitter , through the internet , through his films ampnbspis vital for duncan jones , and helped in just as much as it did in . it s the same community of online fans and friends he s turned to as warcraft s largely negative reviews have filtered online over the past few weeks , trying to ensure that his movie is addressing the wants and needs of the fans that were so clearly on his mind while making it . and now that this tumultuous chapter is over , it s time to move on to the experiences that lay ahead . starting with what we went through with cancer , and ending with the birth of the baby , it really does feel like just this incredibly intense period , jones acknowledges . all the life experiences that you want , and you don t want , all compressed into this years . i almost feel , like , okay , well , we ve done all the hard stuff in life . i guess now we just cruise . design by james barehamedited by emily yoshida lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gt	 the next time you shoot video with your phone , nick woodman wants you to edit it with gopro software . then he wants you to do that again and again and again . it will be so good and fast and easy that you ll get a rush , like a surfer riding the barrel of a wave , or a skateboarder stomping the perfect trick . and then that rush will keep you coming back for more . woodman thinks this could turn you into a habitual storyteller , and maybe then , if you don t already own a gopro , you might want to buy one . gopro ceo nick woodmangopro needs a herocan a shift to software save the action camera giant ? by sean o kane photography by vjeran pavic ampamp sean o kane the next time you shoot video with your phone , nick woodman wants you to edit it with gopro software . then he wants you to do that again and again and again . it will be so good and fast and easy that you ll get a rush , like a surfer riding the barrel of a wave , or a skateboarder stomping the perfect trick . and then that rush will keep you coming back for more . woodman thinks this could turn you into a habitual storyteller , and maybe then , if you don t already own a gopro , you might want to buy one . the ceo and founder of gopro is sitting at his desk on the third floor of the company s headquarters , located in a severely nondescript business park in san mateo , california . we re talking about the next phase of his company and woodman , typically buoyant in interviews , is having a moment . one really exciting aspect of our brand is how many people like it , whether they re a customer or not , he says . it s one of the things i m most proud of , i m all ampnbsp it makes me a little bit teary eyed , he says , actually dabbing the corner of his eye . was not a great year for gopro was , by all accounts , not a great year for gopro . the company , famous for wearable cameras targeted toward surfers , mountain climbers , and anyone else living on the edge , shipped more cameras than ever , but its revenue dropped percent between the fourth quarters of and . by the end of last year , gopro s stock value dropped to less than half of its original posting price . our growth rate has slowed , and some analysts have attributed this to competitive threats and our ability to address a market beyond our core customer , woodman said during that first investor call of , though he disputed that analysis . in february , gopro laid off percent of its staff and scaled back projections . in his first investor call of , woodman sounded jubilant . during the first one of , he sounded as if he were in mourning . but when we meet in san mateo , woodman and basically everybody else i speak with at gopro ampnbspseems preternaturally positive . over the last three years , gopro has been building a software team from scratch , cobbling together acquisitions and a few key hires into what is now a plus employee division that makes up about one tenth of the company . woodman acknowledges that the trend of middling sales figures will likely hold until gopro releases a set of new devices at the end of this year , including the hero , gopro s first drone , and a spherical camera made for general consumers . meanwhile the new software team , and what it s building , will herald in a new era at the company , inspire investors , and eventually attract new customers . woodman believes gopro is on the verge of a major evolutionin the last four months , gopro bought , rebranded , and relaunched two powerful mobile editing apps called replay and splice ampnbsp ampnbspopening up gopro to users who don t own any of its cameras . and in the second half of , gopro will release a desktop editing experience that will rival imovie and a cloud backend that will tie everything devices , files , and the overall gopro experience together into a single ecosystem . no one knows what kind of revenue this new branch of the company will generate , and meanwhile , gopro s longstanding competitive hardware advantage is shrinking for years , gopro was the only one offering up rugged , go anywhere cameras that could fit in your pocket and still capture amazing footage . but just over the last three years , sony s action cam line , garmin s virb , tomtom s bandit , and a number of startups have entered the market . sponsorship deals gopro s other bread and butter are starting to go to the competition . but woodman is unfazed . he believes gopro is on the verge of a major evolution . previously the company staked its success on hardware now , woodman says , he s betting on software . the future of gopro , he says , depends on it . gopro was born , appropriately enough , on a surfing trip . in the summer of , woodman was a visual arts grad from the university of california , san diego who had failed to get a digital marketing startup off the ground . so , he spent five months trolling through australia and indonesia , pounding dirt roads in search of prime beaches and surfing spots . surfers , woodman noticed , liked to document their runs and professionals hired photographers or paid for waterproofing equipment . but for those on a limited budget , there were few options the best solution woodman s friends could come up with was to rubberband disposable cameras to their wrists and hope they stuck . woodman saw an opportunity , and , using shell covered belts bought at a bali market , set out to make the first gopro product a camera strap . using shell covered belts , woodman set out to make the first gopro product a camera strapafter returning stateside , woodman and his girlfriend now wife spent months driving along the california coast , selling the straps out of what they dubbed the biscuit , a s volkswagen van . proceeds from his sales went toward founding gopro and , in , woodman sourced a cheap but durable mm camera to sell along with the strap . he dubbed the whole package the gopro hero . the first digital hero , released in , caught on fast in the extreme sports community which had little in the way of a light , affordable camera with which they could capture their stunts . it was an era in which our hunger for personal documentation and social media sharing was exploding for the first time , and gopro quickly became a phenomenon . each subsequent version of the hero afforded better quality and functionality the hd hero shot p footage , the hd hero added slow motion , and the hero and brought wi fi connectivity and k . by , woodman was no longer selling products out of his van , though he was still very much the face of the company . if you look back at gopro s youtube channel you can see a younger , chubby faced woodman showing off the camera s video quality by kayaking around california s half moon bay or piloting a formula car around sonoma raceway . gopro s san diego officemeanwhile , the company was growing at an impressive clip , from dozens of employees to a few hundred . in and , it became the fastest growing camera company in the world , capturing percent of the wearable camera market and selling an estimated , cameras for a revenue of million . the hero cameras married exceptional video quality with a small form factor in a way that no one had ever seen before cnet praised the hd hero for its phenomenal wide angle video and ridiculously durable build , and engadget raved about the original hd hero , calling it a piece of genius design tiny enough to take all over the world , and cheap enough for you to be more bothered about losing the footage than the camera . gopro used that momentum to scale up on the hardware side , establishing supply partners in china and even receiving a million investment from taiwanese manufacturer foxconn . the marketing shifted from focusing on just extreme sports to include videos of babies , dogs , and musicians . gopro cameras didn t just go anywhere , they were everywhere . today gopro employs over , people with offices scattered between california , france , texas , and germany . woodman is a billionaire , with whitened teeth and carefully coiffed hair . in person he is relaxed but measured , always careful to stay on message , and always willing to pause mid sentence to make sure he hasn t erred . but it s obvious he s still the same prototypical californian just under the surface he can spend hours talking about the best surf spots , peppering his speech with dude s and gnarley s . woodman is clear eyed on the fact that the hardware first chapter of gopro is coming to an end . cameras will still be important , because woodman believes that vertical integration gives gopro an advantage over software focused competitors . but when all is said and done , he thinks people will flock to the gopro experience because it won t just be the easiest way to shoot a video , but the best way to tell their stories . gopro has the opportunity to become the content creation solution for everyone that s interested in visual storytelling , he says . regardless of what camera they re using . a few days before last june s gopro mountain games , a three day festival full of live music and athletic competition , gopro invited a handful of journalists and company sponsored athletes to vail , colorado . the company used the occasion to show off its newest camera , the hero session , a full month ahead of its july announcement . in front of a small crowd of athletes , employees , and journalists at the mountain standard restaurant , woodman was fired up , acting like a hype man for his own product . can i get a hell yeah ? he yelled as he pulled the tiny cubed camera out of his pocket . he yelled the question again for good measure before he passed the session around . pretty sick , huh ? but later , as he tore through a leg of lamb at a table full of tech journalists , woodman stopped cheerleading . he was proud of his cameras , but admitted that market saturation was creating a new problem . it s turning into content guilt , he said . most people don t even watch their gopro footage . woodman didn t blame the users for that ampnbsprather , he said it was a problem that gopro created . we ve sold a great promise to people but we haven t followed through on it . we solved the capture side of it , but then we sort of left them hanging with the whole hassle of the post production . most people don t even watch their gopro footage , says woodmanuntil , gopro essentially had no one in the company working on software . in fact , gopro had been using contract manufacturers to handle what was a pretty light load , paying them to develop things like the firmware for the hero cameras . the first time gopro developed its own firmware was on hero black , which woodman admits was not the most stable camera in the world . the decision to build an entire software division came in , but its foundation was laid in with gopro s acquisition of a company called cineform . at the time , cineform was popular in the filmmaking industry for one particular reason in the early days of digital cinematography it was hard to get the video files to play nicely with different editing programs . cineform created a piece of software that could quickly and easily convert digital video files between formats . we saw ourselves as this little startup that was fixing the mistakes of camera vendors , says david newman , a cineform co founder . thanks to high profile projects like slumdog millionaire , cineform s reputation grew quickly ampnbspand the company turned its attention to another problem the headache of dealing with d footage . companies struggled to find software that could handle the careful synchronization , optimization , and compression required to process the video , newman says , and gopro was one of those companies . cineform was working on a tool that could handle gopro s d footage when the company s popularity caught up to it , and the founders started receiving acquisition offers . sensing an opportunity , gopro swooped in , finalizing the deal in a matter of weeks . because of gopro s relatively small size at the time , newman says they hadn t even thought to approach the camera maker . in fact , gopro was small enough that a handful of people approached the cineform team at a trade show at the time and asked if they had bought gopro instead of the other way around . gopro s san diego officenow a part of gopro , cineform took its d footage tool and turned it into a full blown editing program that eventually became gopro studio , the company s first desktop application . in , gopro released its first mobile app , built by contractor jeff youel , ampnbspa designer who had done a lot of work with cineform . its utility was limited ampnbspusers could see a live view from the camera and change some settings , but that was it . youel was eventually brought on full time and woodman tasked him with building a dedicated mobile team . over the next few years , the app slowly gained basic editing and social sharing capabilities . but it wasn t enough . by and , dozens of startups were offering better mobile editing experiences . with revenues booming , gopro decided to swallow up some of that competition . woodman and his executives scoured app stores on both ios and android looking for the best . earlier this year , they settled on two replay and splice . hunter powell , the ceo of splice an app that promises desktop level editing tools on your iphone says gopro wasn t even on his company s radar when nick woodman came calling . i was in the middle of fund raising , honestly when gopro reached out to me , he says . it was like out of a storybook i literally got an email one day saying they d been using our product . stupeflix , the company behind replay editing software that was rebranded under gopro as quik wasn t such an easy target . replay offered a feature gopro customers were hungry for ampnbsp ampnbspit let users easily and automatically edit videos to the beat of a track with just a few taps . but stupeflix had a higher profile founder jeff boudier even demoed the replay software onstage during apple s ipad air announcement event . it just totally clicked . . . . gopro is starting with capture and we re starting with editing . replay was very successful , it was profitable , we were really on a great trajectory . it took some convincing , says boudier . woodman and gopro s senior vice president of software cj prober flew to paris , where stupeflix is headquartered , to pitch them on the partnership . it just totally clicked , boudier says now . our vision is to enable anyone to easily create beautiful videos . this is what gopro is trying to do , we re just tackling it from different ends of the consumer journey right ? gopro is starting with capture and we re starting with editing . prober doesn t mince words when you ask him what he s been up to since he was hired in . what i ve been doing over the past months is building from scratch a world class software organization , he explains . he helped gopro pry the head of engineering of the software side of amazon s fire tv , hire the former cto of mobitv which builds apps for services like at ampampt s u verse and t mobile tv , and product development employees from companies like netflix and yahoo . over the last five years , the company has had five other acquisitions , including kolor , a french company that had spent years making software for capturing and displaying virtual reality . since its acquisition at the beginning of , the kolor team has grown from to more than , and earlier this year helped gopro launch a virtual reality social media platform available in app form and on the web . we ve been so successful only focusing on this one thing , woodman says of the company s hardware . imagine how successful we can be for our customers and then as a business if we focus on this other thing and complete the solution for people . in may , i traveled to carlsbad , california to see how all this change was playing out . from the outside , gopro s southern california office is just as unassuming as the san mateo headquarters . but inside the , square foot shared complex where gopro is located , the scene is exactly what you d expect when i walked in , an employee was popping wheelies on a mountain bike just behind the front desk . the office has ev charging spaces in the parking lot , plenty of open air space to work and eat , and outdoor surf showers . you can see the waves of the pacific ocean whitecapping from the roof deck . i d come to see the new software in action and participate in the company s mandatory weekly team building event , live it , eat it , love it a name that sounds less like a corporate initiative and more like the title of a new age self help book . think of live it , eat it , love it as google s percent time , with a hint of x games live it , eat it , love it is our commitment to helping our employees live the brand that they re building , and also respecting their need for personal time to pursue passions and things that keep them motivated and keep their chi boosted , woodman says . every thursday from pm , employees are free to do , essentially , whatever . just make sure you capture it with a gopro , and then come back and use our software tools to create and share content , woodman says . think of it as google s famed percent time , with a hint of x games employees use the weekly gathering to rip through wooded trails on mountain bikes , tackle white water rapids , or of course go surfing . the week i m there , the activity is indoor go karting . a dozen gopro employees in total travel to k speed , a go kart track located a few miles further inland . the scene is one part team building exercise , one part school field trip on our arrival we re handed boxed lunches and gatorade . we talk about weekend activities newman is big car enthusiast , and has driven a number of times in the hours of lemons . eventually , we throw on helmets and take about a dozen practice laps . gopro cameras are stuck on just about every surface we can find . gopro s san diego officebetween races , everyone digs furiously around in backpacks and boxes looking for mounts that will let them mix up their camera angles . two members from gopro s vaunted media team show up with the camera odyssey vr rig and plunk it down in the middle of the race track . newman pulls out the company s new camera omni vr rig and follows suit . once the races are run and the trophies are handed out , jeff youel , who now runs gopro s mobile and desktop application operations , shows me a feature of the new app that the whole software team is the most proud of . everyone i talk to at gopro tells me the company plans to replace its first generation editing software , studio , with the aptly named gopro app for desktop released this past march . the app will eventually feature a new editing experience that the software team , for now , calls storyteller . in many ways it feels a lot like quik , the automatic editor app that gopro just launched on ios and android . in others , it looks a lot like imovie . top image cineform co founder dave newman third image down gopro employeesas soon as youel plugs in his cameras , the app pulls the footage immediately and displays it in the neatly designed media management page . he highlights his favorites and clicks a tab , which moves him into storyteller . there , he hovers his mouse over each clip , and much like imovie ampnbsp ampnbspa cursor appears and lets you quickly scrub through footage . every time youel finds a moment he likes , he clicks on it . then you move on . find another cool moment ? click , and move on . there s no tedious trimming , or setting in and out points like there is in gopro studio . in fact , you won t even have to learn what in and out points are anymore . the selected moments drop into a timeline at the bottom of the app and when you re ready , you pick a song , and the app matches the edits between each clip to the music . right now the plan is to launch storyteller with free tracks , with the option to pay for more . every time you click on a moment , you re giving the program a sort of starting point . this way , when the automatic editing takes over it knows what s most important , but it can also use the surrounding footage as a buffer if it needs more time to match an edit to the beat . storyteller takes the simple experience offered by quik and scales it up without making it intimidating . and it speaks to gopro s effort to push its software across all the platforms it touches . you can use the gopro app to post a video right from your gopro , you can hop into quik and create something more stylish with just a few taps , and soon you ll be able to do the same on your computer . gopro plans to support all this with a cloud based ecosystem , one that all these apps and therefore , all your devices will plug into so that you re never separated from your footage . the company won t disclose how much access will cost when it s released at the end of this year , but gopro promises it will save you the headache of downloading and organizing all the files that you ve shot . as woodman puts it , you ll never have to touch an sd card or a usb again . the question that the software team says they get the most at trade shows , in stores , or out in the world is , how can i get my footage to look like the gopro commercials ? people buy these camera on the promise that they can deliver videos like that , says tim bucklin , who was the first developer to work on gopro studio and came over in the cineform acquisition . and the hardware is absolutely capable of doing that . but there s always that gap . we re not going to include film school with your camera . storyteller offers the next best thing an easy shortcut to make it look like you know what you re doing , even if you don t . it s a work in progress though , so as youel is showing this to me , there are a few bugs . he s having trouble reordering clips on the timeline , and thumbnails for videos sometimes don t show up . he also can t do the nifty cursor scrub trick on the timeline . the idea behind live it , eat it , love it is exactly this using the hardware like customers would , and identifying flaws in the software . storyteller is still months out from rollout , but youel says that when it sees the light of day that it s going to be a genius feature . we can be the switzerland of content creation , woodman says back in san mateo . it s an incredible opportunity for the brand , and it s a natural opportunity for the brand , because i think most people associate gopro with great content why can t gopro be the content creation solution for everyone , and we just open up our doors to say this brand is now relevant to you no matter who you are or what device you re using ? gopro is entering crowded fields when it comes to content creation tools and platformsgopro has spent more than a decade building up its brand as a hardware company , and it will be hard to translate its relevance to a new group of consumers , no matter how good its editing programs are . the company doesn t have a clear way of monetizing a lot of the forthcoming software , at least none that woodman or president tony bates would share . and whereas gopro essentially created a market with its line of wearable action cameras , it s entering crowded fields when it comes to building content creation tools and platforms . but gopro is firmly set on this path , and woodman believes that the company will be better off even if something like storyteller doesn t become the next big hit . the pivot to software will help the company gather feedback and improve their hardware as well . for instance , six months ago gopro began collecting raw user data for the first time in order to get a sense of how customers use their hardware more people are using gopro cameras to take photos than the company had previously thought , for example , and they re also shooting video at higher resolutions than just the p standard . meanwhile , newman s team is working on an open standard for video metadata , a way to save information inside the . mp files so that like how exif data works with photos ampnbspit will be retrievable at any point and others are working on things like the ability to overlay sensor data on your footage , or making third party devices pair and play nicely with gopro cameras a result of the company s recent developer program launch . what gopro is now asking of its customers and investors is patience . building a software team has required the most time of any new venture that we ve taken on at the company , because it meant building an entirely new group , a new business within the business , and it is different , woodman says . but the good news is that because it s not easy to do , the spoils go to those that figure it out . and those spoils could be massive the amount of video being consumed is steeply rising ampnbspmore than percent of smartphone users stream video , according to a recent report from npd . gopro already has strong footholds in the two biggest video platforms , facebook and youtube . but young consumers are increasingly choosing smartphone cameras over traditional ones , meaning they re probably less likely to ever buy a gopro . piper jaffray analyst erinn murphy recently wrote that while gopro has gained share in a declining category , we note overall camcorder ownership declined to percent among teens versus percent last spring . to put this into perspective , camcorder ownership was north of percent in . all of which makes it critical for gopro to unmarry its brand from its hardware as soon as possible . the company woodman worked so hard to establish as a camera company now has to become something altogether different . it will take some time and some investment for people to realize oh , gopro has something for me even if i don t own one of their cameras , woodman says . but that s something we re really good at that s just marketing , communication , and building strong relationship with consumers , which is something that gets back to the strength of the brand , he adds . for now , gopro is still a healthy company , with a projected revenue of . billion in and a slate of exciting new hardware and software releases . but where will woodman s software pivot leave the camera maker in years ? there are only a few companies in the world who are building out platform experiences like this , he says . he grins and throws his right thumb over his shoulder . they re based here in silicon valley , and they re a heck of a lot bigger than we are . design and still life photography by james barehamedited by michael zelenko lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gt	 facebook s instant articles promised to transform journalism but now big publishers are fleeing inside facebook s menlo park headquarters , the arrival of instant articles in the spring of was presented as a cause for celebration . talking with reporters , executives described the fast loading , natively hosted articles as a promising new creative format . a suite of publishing tools incubated in facebook s now defunct newsreading app paper would find their way to instant articles , executives said , evolving the news posts shared on facebook into immersive multimedia experiences . for publishers and journalism the stakes were high . readers who once regularly visited their desktop websites now got their news from facebook , twitter , snapchat , and other apps outside of publishers control . for many large publishers , survival would depend on whether they could build loyal audiences inside third party mobile apps . publishers were wary . some feared facebook would absorb so much content behind its walled garden that the web itself could be at risk . platforms are eating our business , and we re letting it happen , wrote mat yurow , then director of audience development at the new york times . do you have any proof that publishers using another company s proprietary platform have ever created a lasting and sustainable business ? asked john battelle , a media industry veteran . the answer appeared to be no . platforms are eating our business , and we re letting it happen . there was optimism , too . facebook s daily aggregation of eyeballs is the largest in human history , and publishers were eager for the chance to capture more of them . it seemed possible that a superior reading experience could benefit readers , publishers , and facebook at the same time . in the long run , wrote will oremus at slate , some might find they re better off outsourcing their distribution and ad sales to well funded tech giants and refocusing on what they do best reporting the news . but two years after it launched , a platform that aspired to build a more stable path forward for journalism appears to be declining in relevance . at the same time that instant articles were being designed , facebook was beginning work on the projects that would ultimately undermine it . starting in , the company s algorithms began favoring video over other content types , diminishing the reach of instant articles in the feed . the following year , facebook s news feed deprioritized article links in favor of posts from friends and family . the arrival this month of ephemeral stories on top of the news feed further de emphasized the links on which many publishers have come to depend . in discussions with facebook executives , former employees , publishers , and industry observers , a portrait emerges of a product that never lived up to the expectations of the social media giant , or media companies . after scrambling to rebuild their workflows around instant articles , large publishers were left with a system that failed to grow audiences or revenues . facebook says the adoption of instant articles is growing quickly , and that upcoming changes to the platform will lure back some of the major media companies that have abandoned it . but given facebook s other priorities , the future of instant articles is less certain than ever . instant articles went live on may th , , with tools that included d maps , audio captions for images , and photos that moved based on the position of the phone in your hand . publishers abandoned those tools almost immediately , instead focusing on the format s ability to solve an increasingly pressing problem attracting and retaining readers . the early signs were hopeful readers liked instant articles faster loading times , and they rewarded them with more of their clicks . instant articles was built from the raw materials of paper , a newsreading app facebook released on ios in early . a bold reimagining of the company s flagship app , paper offered users customizable sections including politics , technology , and food . the news feed was there , too and without any ads . paper was a hit with critics but not with facebook s core user base , and it was ultimately shuttered last year . mike matas , whose design firm push pop press was acquired by facebook in , had been responsible for its unique look and feel , and he was tasked with designing instant articles . though the format would have important financial consequences for the companies who used it , generating revenue for publishers was not a primary goal in its development . the team is legitimately motivated by making great articles , matas told me in . one former employee familiar with the matter said media companies business models had initially been all but an afterthought . the idea that these products could meaningfully impact the revenue of the news industry just didn t really come up , the former employee said . i don t know that anyone at facebook took that piece all that seriously . fidji simo , a vice president of product at facebook who oversees news , video , and ads in the news feed , disputed the idea that the company didn t take revenue seriously . about percent of publishers initial requests to the company involved direct ad sales , she said in an interview last week . facebook agreed to the proposal publishers could keep percent of the revenue of any ads they sold themselves , or percent of the revenue if they wanted facebook to sell the ads for them . at publishers request , facebook also included analytics tools so they could understand and track their audiences , and customization tools so they could make their articles look distinct from one another s . publishers were drawn to the sheer enormity of facebook s audience but it was never clear , even then , how much of that audience instant articles would attractbut the build first , monetize later approach that facebook takes in building so many of its own products made for an awkward fit at media companies , many of which were still reeling from the transition from print to the web , and were now losing their hard won digital audiences to facebook s news feed . publishers were drawn to the sheer enormity of facebook s audience but it was never clear , even then , how much of that audience instant articles would attract . still , the optimism was real . this is a very exciting experiment , declan moore , chief media officer for national geographic , told me in may . national geographic was one of nine publishers , including buzzfeed and the new york times , invited to be launch partners . facebook was careful not to guarantee that publishers would see expanded reach from instant articles . but it seemed likely that facebook would favor the instant links , given that the articles loaded up to times faster and kept users glued to the company s flagship app . in the beginning , having access to instant will provide a huge advantage over publications that don t , wrote john herrman , whose content wars series in the awl had warned publishers that facebook would ultimately change the terms of any deal to benefit itself . eventually , publishers numbers will even out as competition increases . but it s unclear if any huge advantage ever materialized . facebook decided from the start that publishing a story using the instant articles format would not automatically improve its ranking in the news feed . in practice , instant articles typically do reach more people , because people are more likely to read and share them . but as the format spread , competition increased , and any advantage to using instant articles was blunted within months . given that instant articles were designed to carry less advertising than mobile web articles , broad reach was essential to ensure publishers would profit from the format . the reach just never arrived . facebook did meet regularly with publishing partners , and gradually implemented their suggestions . we deeply believe that the only way to have publishers use instant articles is if this works for them , will cathcart , who oversaw instant articles at the time , told me on its first anniversary . as part of that effort , facebook added more revenue generating tools to the format . first it permitted more display ads then it implemented video ads then it introduced sponsored posts shared on the publishers own feeds . but across a wide swath of major publishers , results have been uniformly weak . the revenue in no way backed up the amount of time that was being spent on it , says jason kint , ceo of digital content next . dcn is a trade group that represents many large publishers , including nbc , the new york times , conde nast , espn , slate , business insider , and vox media . vox media owns the verge . at the end of last year , dcn surveyed its members on the financial performance of content published to third party platforms including facebook , twitter , snapchat , and google s amp project . it found that not one publisher reported earning more money through instant articles than they did through their own properties . we make less money on instant articles than we do on mobile web , which is probably everyone s experience , said bill carey , director of audience development at slate . and while facebook reported that publishers using instant articles saw readers consuming percent more content , most dcn members had seen no such increase . in a presentation at the social media week conference in february , the verge s audience engagement editor , helen havlak , presented a slide comparing views of traditional verge links posted to facebook to verge instant articles as a percentage of overall facebook traffic . it showed that article views from facebook were essentially flat in , with instant articles representing a larger share of that traffic over time . viewed in this light , instant articles had simply replaced one kind of view with another , less profitable one . facebook says that the stagnant traffic is a product of a growing marketplace , and attributes it to increasing competition there are more posts than ever to read , while readers time remains finite . simo told me the company is building a tool that will show publishers how their articles would have performed if posted as traditional links rather than instant articles . spoiler badly . were it not for instant articles , the company says , publisher traffic would likely have declined even more . this appears to have been by design . even as it courted publishers for the instant articles program , other teams at facebook were building the features that would gradually push it out of the limelight . last june , adweek reported that publishers posts were reaching percent fewer people than they were previously . a few weeks later , facebook confirmed that it had altered the news feed algorithm , prioritizing posts from friends and family members over links shared by publishers . facebook is building a tool that will show publishers how their articles would have performed if posted as traditional links rather than instant articles another new priority soon emerged in the form of video . in september , just four months after instant articles launched , facebook s ad product lead said that a year or two from now , we think facebook will be mostly video . a massive investment in live video followed , and a video tab was added to facebook s flagship app . i wouldn t be surprised if you fast forward five years and most of the content that people see on facebook and are sharing on a day to day basis is video , ceo mark zuckerberg told buzzfeed in april . this month s arrival of facebook stories , a rolling series of photo and video posts that disappear hours after they re posted , pushed instant articles further down in the news feed . and publishers can t use the stories format even if they want to they are currently enabled only for individual users . the camera is going to be the priority , not news and entertainment content , one former employee told me . that s just going to keep getting shoved down in the feed . the company has all but confirmed this the camera is the new keyboard is a popular refrain on campus these days . simo says that the news feed is becoming more of a multimedia experience over time , and that instant articles which support video is part of that . we live in a world that s multimedia , where you tell stories using a variety of formats . what we ve tried to do is bring these things together so publishers can tell stories that combine all of these things . and so for publishers that do their journalism primarily by linking to text , the news feed appears increasingly forbidding . i d suggest that links in general have felt weird on facebook for a long time , herrman , now writing for the new york times , told me in an email . it s the most obviously dated part of an otherwise constantly modernized platform it s a big messy border with the web that produces a bunch of difficult and institutionally unusual problems . while big publishers have been largely disappointed with instant articles , the format is propagating quickly throughout facebook . since last year , when facebook began letting anyone publish to the format , the number of publishers using instant articles grew times , to , publishers , simo said . that figure has grown percent this year alone . and a quarter of all clicks to articles on facebook are now to instant articles , simo said a number that has grown percent in . it s easy to see why readers like instant articles they re fast and uncluttered . and it s easy to see why facebook likes instant articles they keep people on facebook . but for big media companies , the format has looked like a bad bet . and after two years of experimenting with instant articles , many outlets appear to have had enough . the new york times , which had been a launch partner for instant articles , abandoned the platform last fall . vice news , forbes , the los angeles times , the chicago tribune , and hearst publications are among the large publishers who have joined it in leaving . since last year the number of publishers using instant articles grew times , to , publishers others are publishing a small handful of articles to the platform while pushing the majority of their readers to their own websites , including cnn , the new york daily news , and the wall street journal , according to an analysis published last month by the tow center for digital journalism . conde nast decided not to roll the format out company wide after all but one of its test titles lost money on it , a company source told the verge . now publishers are turning their attention elsewhere . google s accelerated mobile pages project borrows elements from instant articles while giving publishers more control . publishers that use paywalls , such as the times , can implement them in amp but not instant articles . articles published through amp remain part of the open web , which publishers generally prefer to facebook s closed ecosystem , and google has flooded amp with traffic from search . most importantly , it makes more money than instant articles . by february , it was serving percent of all traffic to major us publishers . publishers are also paying increasing attention to apple news , which added push notifications as part of a redesign last year and now delivers significant traffic thanks to the fact that it comes pre installed on hundreds of millions of devices . the team that built instant articles has moved on , too . matas quit in february . michael reckhow , the product manager who led development of the initial version , left for uber a few months later . reckhow has been replaced by mona chaudhuri , a well regarded former vice president of product at chartbeat , who joined facebook last august . chaudhuri led a listening tour of publishing executives in new york last fall , and facebook says it is responding to their concerns . all of these publishers are very open to coming back to the table once we implement a lot of their feedback . the biggest request subscriptions . publishers who rely on a membership model are pushing facebook to effectively build a paywall inside instant articles . subscribers could read instant articles just like any others , but others would be offered a chance to subscribe . a lot of the frustrations you hear are business model frustrations , rather than the performance of their content on facebook or otherwise , simo said . facebook wouldn t comment on whether it is building such a system , but based on my discussions with publishers , it seems likely . we re listening to the feedback and we re continuing to iterate , simo said . all of these publishers are very open to coming back to the table once we implement a lot of their feedback . she added i want them to find value . if instant articles can t build traffic or revenue , perhaps it can at least inspire loyalty in publishers existing audiences . this month , facebook added a module to instant articles allowing publishers to solicit newsletter signups or likes to their pages . in the future , facebook says the module could be used to invite readers to install publishers mobile apps or begin a trial subscription . slate s carey said the company has seen early success in attracting newsletters subscribers this way . the company is shifting away from a page view driven business model to one that emphasizes reader loyalty . loyal readers are more likely to sign up for slate plus , its premium subscription product . for us right now , the big question is whether we can bring more people back into the slate audience , and make them slate readers , he said . the newsletter signup module has been a good start . we re hopeful that tools they have coming down the pike will be similarly helpful . neha gandhi , senior vice president of content and strategy at refinery , told me instant articles neither helps nor harms the company s efforts to build audiences through facebook . the publisher remains part of the program so it can beta test new features , such as the newsletter modules . these are products that are testing building daily habit , increasing stories per session , and building loyalty all of which are core priorities for refinery , she said . meanwhile , the news feed is as unpredictable as ever . the ones who can afford to adapt to every new format facebook introduces , hoping that , in aggregate , engaging with the platform s ecosystem will lead to profits . it s the constellation of things that we have on facebook , said mark silverstein , who leads business development at the huffington post . the huffington post was the top publisher on facebook in , according to newswhip , embracing instant articles , live video , and video on demand . consumers are going to go where consumers go , silverstein said . it s our job to meet them there . two years later , it s increasingly clear that instant articles won t resolve publishers s anxieties about building sustainable businesses . but neither has it led to a cataclysm . despite instant article s middling results , facebook s power over publishers seems stronger than ever . where facebook leads , publishers follow from articles , to instant articles , to video , to live video , to ephemeral stories and beyond . facebook changed , and so did publishers , herrman said . the underlying dynamic didn t , at least not that much . 	 human feces floated in saline solution in a mortar , on a marbled countertop , in a dimly lit kitchen in burlingame , california . a bottle of ethyl alcohol , an electronic scale , test tubes , and a stack of well worn pots and pans lay nearby . the stove light illuminated the area as josiah zayner crushed the shit with a pestle , creating a brownish yellow sludge . i think i can feel something hard in there , he said , laughing . it s probably vegetables the body doesn t break them down all the way . a bitter pilljosiah zayner s gut was making his life hell so he embarked on an extreme diy fecal transplantby arielle duhaime ross photography by vjeran pavic human feces floated in saline solution in a mortar , on a marbled countertop , in a dimly lit kitchen in burlingame , california . a bottle of ethyl alcohol , an electronic scale , test tubes , and a stack of well worn pots and pans lay nearby . the stove light illuminated the area as josiah zayner crushed the shit with a pestle , creating a brownish yellow sludge . i think i can feel something hard in there , he said , laughing . it was probably vegetables the body doesn t break them down all the way . this heralded the beginning of zayner s bacterial makeover . he was clad in a wu tang clan t shirt , jeans , and white socks and sandals . at his feet , james baxter , zayner s one eyed orange cat , rubbed its flank against its owner s legs . the kitchen smelled like an outhouse in a busy campground . over the course of the next four days , zayner would attempt to eradicate the trillions of microbes that lived on and inside his body organisms that helped him digest food , produce vitamins and enzymes , and protected his body from other , more dangerous bacteria . ruthlessly and methodically , he would try to render himself into a biological blank slate . then , he would inoculate himself with a friend s microbes ampnbspa procedure he refers to as a microbiome transplant . zayner imagines the collection of organisms that live on him his microbiome as a suit . as such , it can be worn , mended , and replaced . the suit he was living with , he said , was faulty , leaving him with severe gastrointestinal pain . a new suit could solve all that . you kind of are who you are , to a certain extent , he said . but with your bacteria , you can change that . a full bacterial overhaul like this had never been documented before in fact , it may have been the first time it had ever been attempted . there was no evidence to suggest it would work , though there was a real risk it could make zayner life threateningly sick . that didn t bother him . zayner unwrapped a brand new syringe and filled its barrel with the brownish liquid . he grabbed one half of a gelatin capsule , pushed the syringe s plunger , and filled the capsule with the fecal slurry in inconsistent spurts . undigested portions of the meal are clogging it , he said . frustrated , he removed the needle and pushed the plunger again , letting clumpy muck accumulate in the half capsule . but by the time he joined both ends of the pill , the gelatin casing had begun deteriorating in his gloved hands . i think the liquid is dissolving these fucking capsules , he said . for a brief moment , zayner considered throwing his head back and swallowing the feces straight up , like a shooter from hell . but the thought disgusted him , and instead he opened a kitchen drawer and grabbed an inoculating loop , an instrument used by microbiologists to sample microorganisms . he dipped it into the large , poop filled ziploc bag on the counter . we re going to try this new technique the stuff and jam , he said . the unadulterated shit had a frosting like texture and didn t eat through the gelatin the pill held up . exhausted from his most recent dose of antibiotics , zayner took a break . tomorrow , in a hotel room near the san francisco international airport , he planned to start his transformation . zayner is a punk his ears are adorned with a row of piercings each , his body is covered in tattoos , and his dark mohawk is topped with a shock of bleached blonde hair . the haircut , the piercings , and most of the tattoos he did himself . he doesn t trust others with these tasks , he says . this is a running theme in zayner s life . as a child , zayner rarely saw doctors his family , he says , was too poor to pay for visits . then in college , he got health insurance and finally started going gastrointestinal pain was making it hard for him to lead a normal life . he was pooping more than four times a day , and severe attacks forced him to isolate himself for hours . the doctors visits were expensive and ineffective , he says , and over time , zayner grew suspicious of physicians . i ll take their advice if there s something i can t fix myself , but otherwise , if what they say goes against what i know , i m not going to necessarily believe them or trust them , right ? he says . that s not to say zayner is dubious of science in fact , he s a scientist himself . in , he earned a phd in biophysics from the university of chicago and subsequently served as a postdoc researcher at nasa s ames research center for two years . but the space agency didn t suit him . nasa was not what i imagined it to be , he says . it was supposed to be a bastion of innovation , but the experiments he saw performed at nasa were underwhelming . there s very little work getting done , because people either don t work , don t care to work , or because the last time they did any science was years ago , he says . so in january , zayner left ames and turned his attention to two of his own projects an indiegogo campaign aimed at providing people with crispr kits to alter bacterial dna , and the odin , a business he started in grad school that sells scientific kits and instruments to people who d like to do experiments at home . today , the odin has four employees who work out of zayner s garage . sustained by orders from schools and hobbyists , the odin is doing well , zayner says he expects the company s revenue to reach somewhere between , and , this year . on weekends he sometimes teaches free classes on genetic engineering in public lab spaces around san francisco . in our conversations , zayner stressed to me the importance of breaking science out of labs and classrooms and making it available to the wider public . i don t like titles , zayner told me . but i generally refer to myself as a biohacker . i don t like titles , zayner told me . but i generally refer to myself as a biohacker . leaving the world of conventional science made zayner happy and working from home was easier on his gut . zayner generally has to defecate two to three times before starting his workday , and also after every meal . he claims to have ulcers and irritable bowel syndrome , but he s a bit hazy on the details of his diagnoses . when pressed , he admits that he doesn t remember what his physician told him in college he could have ibs or inflammatory bowel disease . and a search through his medical records is inconclusive . i don t think i made it up or am remembering wrong , but who knows ? he wrote me in a text . but his physical distress and his frustration with the medical treatment he received was very real . so at , zayner decided to dive into one of science s most foolhardy traditions self experimentation . some of his predecessors have achieved great things . in , nobel winner barry james marshall ingested a species of bacteria to demonstrate their role in causing ulcers . he was , to his discomfort , proven correct . other ventures have been less successful . in , an american physician by the name of jesse lazear intentionally submitted himself to bites from yellow fever infected mosquitoes in an effort to learn about the virus transmission . he died . three decades later , russian physician alexander bogdanov performed multiple blood transfusions on himself to deduce whether the procedure would keep him eternally young . it didn t the experiment killed him . across cultures , human feces are reviled . shit stinks , yes , but that s not actually why it s gross thanks to its bacterial load , it s a disease vector that causes outbreaks of cholera , typhoid fever , and e . coli . but humans didn t truly figure that out until the th century . so , for a long time , shit was actually used by some as medicine . the ebers papyrus , a document from ancient egypt dating back to bc , contains more than prescriptions for medicines in which shit is the active ingredient . in the th century , a well known traditional chinese doctor described using a suspension of human feces to help patients with food poisoning or severe diarrhea . and in the th century , an italian anatomist named fabricius ab aquapendente was using shit to treat gastrointestinal diseases in veterinary medicine . the first modern fecal matter transplant didn t take place until the mid th century . in , an american surgeon named ben eiseman performed enemas on four pseudomembranous colitis patients . eiseman suspected that a treatment of antibiotics had killed off natural gut bacteria , leading to severe cases of diarrhea . so , instead of flushing their colons with water alone , he used shit from healthy patients . perhaps , he figured , reintroducing normal intestinal bacteria into the guts of patients whose digestive system had been wiped out would heal them . it seemed to work , eiseman told author mary roach in a interview . it made a small splash . sometimes patients can improve in a couple of hours . the fecal enema didn t exactly come into fashion over the next three decades , only a handful of trials were done . but by the late s , fecal matter transplants were increasingly recognized as a treatment for infections caused by the bacterium clostridium difficile ampnbspinfections that can cause colitis . and antibiotics , used more and more often in american health care , were triggering more and more cases of c . diff . by , c . diff infections were killing , americans a year . fecal matter transplants , or fmts the procedure that egyptian and chinese doctors used long before eiseman ampnbspsuddenly made a comeback . though enemas and nasal operations are still performed , the most publicized fmt procedure involves taking pills filled with the feces of another healthier individual . because shit is considered a medicine when it s administered by a doctor , the procedure is strictly regulated by the us government , and is only available to patients with recurrent c . diff . and in truth , the restriction has a lot do with the fact that scientists don t yet understand why the treatment works , or how it affects patients in the long term . but evidence suggests the benefits can be great the mayo clinic s campus in phoenix reports that percent of c . diff patients who receive fmts are cured of the infection . and the transplants can work fast . sometimes patients can improve in a couple of hours , says majdi osman , a physician and the clinical program director at openbiome , a nonprofit that facilitates fecal transplants by screening donors and collecting their feces . zayner doesn t recall the first time he heard about fmts and he s never been diagnosed with c . diff . but given his condition , replacing his gut bacteria sounded like a possible solution . the operation zayner envisioned , however , would involve more than a simple fecal matter transplant instead he would also alter the bacterial composition of his nose , mouth , arms , and skin his entire exterior . he d been thinking about full body microbiome transfers for a while in august he made a video in which he imagines a future where police use scanners to identify people by their microbiome a future where those who engineer themselves are persecuted and imprisoned , he told me . last november , i called zayner to discuss his indiegogo crispr kits and that s when he mentioned the transplant , which he described as kind of an art science project . in the weeks that followed , i reached out to more than a dozen researchers who might be familiar with such an experiment . eventually , a skin microbiome expert told me that the closest thing scientists had done in adults was to transfer bacteria from one site of the body to another . in that instance , a bacterial transplant from the study participants tongues to their forearms held up well eight hours later , but a transfer of tongue bacteria to participants foreheads didn t . the researchers obtained similar results when they attempted the same , small transfers between different volunteers . other research has been done on inoculating children born through c section with their mothers vaginal bacteria . but i found no mention of an adult ever trying to kill all the bacteria on their skin in order to permanently replace them with that of another human being . every single professional stressed that zayner s experiment could make him very sickthe lack of precedent meant that few experts were willing to discuss the bacterial skin transfer zayner was suggesting . one biologist did agree to talk and she wasn t impressed . i think that s sort of pie in the sky , said elizabeth hohmann , a fecal transplant expert at harvard university . changing the skin s microbiome is not as simple as coating yourself in some antibiotics and then putting a bacterial swab on ampnbsp ampnbspthat s just ridiculous . researchers were even less enthusiastic about the fecal transplant . of the nine biology and medical professionals i spoke with , every single one stressed that zayner s experiment could make him very sick . zayner vowed not to analyze his donor s feces it contradicted , he said , the diy ethos of the experiment and could make the project seem less accessible to laypeople . as a result , he was putting himself at risk for hepatitis , rotavirus , and a whole slew of other pathogens and parasites . and his decision to take antibiotics to kill his own bacteria before the transplant was risky , said openbiome s osman . some people carry c . diff without any symptoms if zayner was one those people , disrupting the balance in his gut could enable c . diff to flourish and the consequences of that could be life threatening . we actually advise patients to stop antibiotics before they have a fecal matter transplant , if possible , said osman . there was another thing that all the experts agreed on the chances that zayner would experience any benefit from the transplant were essentially zero . we don t have any evidence whatsoever that fecal microbiota transplantation helps cure other diseases , says sahil khanna , a gastroenterologist at the mayo clinic . hohmann added that zayner s experiment was ultimately na ve and poorly advised on several levels . for months , zayner mulled over the experiment . then , at the end of january , he booked three nights at a hotel just south of the san francisco airport . the crowne plaza sits along highway , the artery that shuttles tech workers back and forth between san francisco and silicon valley . the hotel is a dated and dreary place , decorated in a depressing blend of beiges and browns . a hotel room is not a sterile environment for the sort of operation zayner envisioned , but it was better than his home , where traces of his microbiome could be found in his sheets , his bathroom , his kitchen , his front doorknob . zayner s next challenge was finding a donor . everyone he d spoken to had either turned him down or backed out citing the risks involved . if i end up in the hospital , it s okay if i end up sick , it s okay . a few days before the scheduled procedure , he finally convinced someone to participate michael not his real name , a friend from college who zayner hadn t seen in years . michael knew people with gastrointestinal tract problems , and he thought zayner s experiment could help him . so michael agreed to poop in a ziploc bag , and have the skin on his arms , legs , the inside of nose , and his mouth swabbed twice . if the experiment worked , zayner and michael would share a unique and very personal biological bond . fecal matter donors typically undergo a rigorous screening process , says mark smith , director of openbiome . less than percent of all of the donors that we screen end up qualifying as donors . when i reminded zayner of the dangers involved , he insisted the experiment was worth it . that s the risk i need to be able to take to inspire people to take their health in their own hands , he said . comments like these took me aback they demonstrated the intricate ethical acrobatics zayner was continuously performing . he was convinced that carrying out a risky and unproven procedure using himself as a human guinea pig and then publicizing it , could help others . to a skeptic like myself , zayner s good intentions came across as misguided . would he feel responsible if someone repeated his experiment and fell ill ? no , not at all , he said without hesitation . he had calculated the risks and benefits of his experiment if i end up in the hospital , it s okay if i end up sick , it s okay and anyone following in his footsteps was responsible for doing the same . i m not your parent or government to regulate you do what you want with your body . at pm on a thursday in mid february day one of his procedure josiah zayner stood in the middle of his hotel room , stripping down to his boxer briefs . he donned a yellow , disposable isolation gown and blue shoe covers . he handed me a set as well , which i immediately put on . zayner s first task was to turn the hotel room into a sterile containment field . thousands of travelers have passed through here pilots and flight attendants from all over the world , snotty children , flu ridden businessmen not to mention countless employees . at one point or another , their microbiomes had colonized this space . zayner stripped the beds , replacing the sheets with ones he bought from amazon specifically for this purpose . then , he grabbed a container of clorox wipes and silently disinfected every surface of the room he was likely to touch . his experimental protocol was self designed . there were five main steps , two of which he d already started taking samples of his skin microbiome and feces for a later analysis and ingesting a two day regimen of antibiotics he d purchased on alibaba and ebay and verified for effectiveness . then zayner would try to rid himself of the bacteria on his body by cleaning his skin with powdered tetracycline , an antibiotic he would also dissolve and use to clean his nostrils and mouth . rubbing your skin with tetracycline powder is not going to sterilize it , elisabeth bik , a microbiologist at stanford university , told me . there is no way to sterilize your skin . any attempt at complete sterilization of a person s skin will most likely kill a person first before they are sterile . once clean , zayner would proceed to the actual transplant swallowing poop pills , and applying a saline solution filled with michael s skin bacteria to his nose , mouth , arms , and legs . later , he would sample his skin and fecal matter again . so far , so good . zayner had been on a digestive rollercoaster since he began the antibiotic regimen , but that was expected . he was tired and in pain . the drugs gave him cramps , in addition to explosive poops , he said . with the room disinfected to his liking , zayner jumped into the shower to begin scrubbing off his microbiome . as he applied the antibiotic with a kitchen sponge , his pale white skin turned an angry red he was scrubbing hard . after , he filled a neti pot with the same antibiotic liquid and flushed out his nasal passages over the sink ampnbspa process that involved hacking up prodigious amounts of yellowish saliva . i couldn t help but notice zayner cutting corners . after drying off , he put on a brand new hanes white t shirt to prevent his old microbiome from recolonizing his body , but an old though freshly laundered pair of jeans . he sampled his arms , nose , and mouth , but he didn t bother to take microbial samples from his genitalia , and didn t plan on applying michael s skin bacteria to his penis or testicles . he told me that there just isn t much scientific value in gathering that information . over the course of his experiment , zayner would only take a third of the poop pills that someone undergoing a standard fmt procedure would , stretched over a longer period of time . when i confronted zayner about my observations , he was either dismissive , or unaware of a standard fmt protocol . scrubbed raw , at around pm , zayner began the transplant . he put on blue gloves , grabbed a glass of water and took a plastic bag filled with poop pills out of the fridge . he was nervous . you start thinking about like wow , why do animals eat their own poop or eat other animals poop ? and like , what really are we so scared about with feces ? he d told me the day before , rationalizing the experiment . zayner looked like he was enjoying himself . the thrill of the experiment ampnbspand the idea that he may soon be rid of his digestive issues ampnbsppropelled him forward . sitting on the bed , facing the hotel window , he took a few deeps breaths and raised the pill in the air . yolo , he said , tossing it into his mouth . it disappeared down his throat , followed by a gulp of water . over the next three days , he d repeat this process , ingesting a total of eight poop pills . at one point he inadvertently tasted some of michael s shit , which had gotten on the outside of certain capsules . he describes it tasting a little bitter . next , zayner applied the donor skin bacteria . he removed his t shirt and unscrewed a test tube filled with saline solution and the cotton inoculating swab that zayner rubbed on michael s arms . he applied the liquid ampnbspwhich should have been teeming with skin bacteria , zayner told me ampnbspliberally on his arms , chest , and legs . then , he grabbed the swab that had been in michael s mouth , and applied it to the inside of his cheeks and onto his gums . he repeated this process with his nose . at pm , one hour after he began the procedure , zayner was in theory covered in michael s microbiome . then came the wait . the main risk right now is mostly with the pill that i took . if there s any toxic bacteria that grew on it or anything like that , it could put me in the hospital , zayner said , settling into his makeshift quarantine . for the next hours , zayner hid out in the hotel room , leaving only to buy snacks in the hotel commissary or eat in the hotel restaurant . he didn t shower , and spent most of his time on his computer or phone . he watched daytime tv and movies back to the future , furious , anything really . his girlfriend melissa visited him daily , but avoided touching him , and didn t spend the night . every few hours , zayner repeated his protocol take another pill , reapply michael s bacteria , and take samples of his own skin . on day two , zayner told me he was feeling great . i m so excited and happy , he said , sitting on the hotel bed . i really feel like i shed something . he admitted it may have been a placebo effect , but his bowel movements had become less frequent , he said , and he felt rejuvenated . by the morning of day three , zayner was relaxed . taking time off from running the odin had done him some good , he said , and his stomach was cooperating he went almost hours without having to use the bathroom . yesterday was a really awesome day so i was like oh , my gosh . it feels really good , but then today feels even better than yesterday , he said . but when he came home the next day , zayner s resolve to follow through with the transfer weakened . he had originally intended to keep taking the pills at home for a few more days . but after three days , he was too disgusted . he felt sick just thinking about them . three days after the transfer , he reached out to argonne national laboratory , a nonprofit lab run by the university of chicago , to get his samples sequenced . he sent them a total of samples , which included michael s donated poop zayner s poop before , during , and after the transplant as well as samples taken from michael and zayner s nose , mouth , and skin . he even sent in a skin swab from melissa and myself , as well as skin and fur samples from his two cats james baxter and trypsin to see if we had inadvertently contaminated the experiment . the sequencing cost about , . the process , zayner was told , would take six to eight weeks . there s essentially no research on the long term effects of fecal transplants , but some scientists are starting to look at the short term effects . in late april , scientists announced that when patients receive fmts , the new bacterial strains can survive for at least three months after the procedure . that means one day it might be possible to introduce customized bacteria to fully replace one s natural gut microbiome . but that hasn t changed the fact that fecal transplants are reserved to patients with c . diff ampnbspand no one else . fecal transplants are reserved to patients with c . diff and no one elsezayner is unique , but as far as his pain goes , he isn t alone . gastrointestinal diseases affect between and million americans each year , according to the national institutes of health . this number includes people with cancer and liver disease , but also individuals with chronic constipation and irritable bowel syndrome ampnbspconditions that aren t deadly , but aren t necessarily easy to treat , either . so for people , like zayner , who haven t found symptom relief through conventional means , turning to feces the drug that everyone has access to for free isn t all that surprising . home remedies are nothing new , but in the internet age , information on cures that others have tried have become increasingly available . finding someone who s willing to walk you through a home enema preparation is as easy as doing a youtube search . and there s no shortage of reddit threads and internet comment sections where people can discuss their use of fmts to cure a spectrum of ailments . in that respect , zayner s just the latest addition to a movement of individuals who for better or worse ampnbsphave taken their digestive health into their own hands . i hear from a shocking number of people who are doing things like this , says catherine duff , founder of the fecal transplant foundation , a nonprofit that aims to help fmt patients and raise awareness of the procedure . mostly for gastrointestinal things , but also for almost anything you can think of . duff doesn t advocate for diy transplants , but people still contact her to inquire about them . my concern is that there are so many desperate people who haven t found an answer with big pharma , and so they search for a magic bullet , she says . but generally people don t seem to have a grasp on what the long term effects of this could be because nobody knows . a few weeks after his transplant , zayner traveled to new orleans to participate in the bayer agvocacy forum . the last time he attended , four or five years ago , his digestive system didn t fare well . this time it was different . in an email he sent entitled new stomach is a powerhouse , he described a gluttonous diet chicken fried steak , beignets , and a po boy with a crawfish reduction . the conference also involved lots of drinking over the course of three days , zayner had beer , shots of jameson , a frozen hurricane , gin and tonics , and vodka red bulls . his stomach powered through like i was , he wrote , ecstatic . he was defecating only once a day . it s weird , but so cool , he added . no matter how much i have changed my diet over the years from mostly vegetarian to mostly meatatarian , it never changed my poop schedule it gives me hope . that is pretty insane , he said in a shaky voice . the experiment actually worked . then , two weeks ago , i received a text message from him . argonne national laboratory had completed the sequencing . with the results in hand , zayner performed a statistical analysis to find out if the bacterial composition of his skin , nose , mouth , and feces had changed over time and whether the transplant had caused it to resemble michael s . days later , zayner revealed the results of the analysis to me and to himself ampnbspover skype . the connection was poor , but i could tell from zayner s pixelated face that he was becoming emotional . the bacterial composition of zayner s post transplant feces were consistently more closely related to michael s feces than his own poop prior to the experiment . that is pretty insane , he said in a shaky voice . the experiment actually worked . the skin microbiome transfer results were less impressive . during zayner s stay at the hotel , the bacterial composition of the skin on his arms morphed to resemble michael s . but that didn t last long once he was back home , the arm samples began to resemble samples taken from his girlfriend and his cat . the results for his mouth and nose were all over the place , making it hard to reach any conclusions . the experiment was both a hit and a miss , but for zayner it was a success . it s exciting to think that we have a chance to affect the outcome of our own lives in these medical instances . to get reliable results , scientific researchers typically follow rigorous protocols multiple participants , control groups , perfectly controlled conditions . zayner did none of that . jason koval , a microbiologist who does independent sequencing work in argonne s labs , replicated zayner s analysis , and his results were almost identical to zayner s . but because of zayner s lack of rigor , he was more skeptical of the experiment s conclusion . the small number of samples zayner collected means that it would be almost impossible to tell if the differences he found between various samples are statistically significant . as a result , his experiment is more of an anecdote than science , koval said . it s a fascinating pilot study , but you can t firmly say yes , this happened . i skyped with zayner in early may . he looked sweaty and tired . running the odin was stressful , he said . but more than two months after the transplant , he was still feeling a lot better ampnbspand defecating a lot less . probably percent to percent of the time , it s only once in the morning , he told me . we also talked about his new living arrangements ampnbsphe s moved to a larger home in the east bay with his brother , his girlfriend , and one of his odin employees ampnbspand about his recent weight loss . he said he s lost about pounds which was both good news and a bit concerning . before the call ended , we discussed one more piece of anecdotal evidence that the transplant had worked zayner s newfound taste for sweets . gut bacteria has been shown to influence what a person eats and michael , zayner s friend turned stool donor , has a serious sweet tooth he can consume an entire a box of oreos in one sitting . before the transplant , zayner was never one for cookies . now i crave them , he said . the previous evening , he ate three oreos before bed . it wasn t scientific proof , really , but for zayner it was meaningful . edited by michael zelenko 	 julie mora blanco remembers the day , in the summer of , when the reality of her new job sunk in . a recent grad of california state university , chico , mora blanco had majored in art , minored in women s studies , and spent much of her free time making sculptures from found objects and blown glass . struggling to make rent and working a post production job at current tv , she d jumped at the chance to work at an internet startup called youtube . maybe , she figured , she could pull in enough money to pursue her lifelong dream to become a hair stylist . the secret rules of the internet the murky history of moderation , and how it s shaping the future of free speech by catherine buni ampamp soraya chemaly illustrations by eric petersen julie mora blanco remembers the day , in the summer of , when the reality of her new job sunk in . a recent grad of california state university , chico , mora blanco had majored in art , minored in women s studies , and spent much of her free time making sculptures from found objects and blown glass . struggling to make rent and working a post production job at current tv , she d jumped at the chance to work at an internet startup called youtube . maybe , she figured , she could pull in enough money to pursue her lifelong dream to become a hair stylist . this article was reported in partnership with the investigative fund at the nation institute it was a warm , sunny morning , and she was sitting at her desk in the company s office , located above a pizza shop in san mateo , an idyllic and affluent suburb of san francisco . mora blanco was one of odd twenty somethings who d come to work at the still unprofitable website . mora blanco s team people in total was dubbed the squad safety , quality , and user advocacy department . they worked in teams of four to six , some doing day shifts and some night , reviewing videos around the clock . their job ? to protect youtube s fledgling brand by scrubbing the site of offensive or malicious content that had been flagged by users , or , as mora blanco puts it , to keep us from becoming a shock site . the founders wanted youtube to be something new , something better a place for everyone and not another ebaum s world , which had already become a repository for explicit pornography and gratuitous violence . mora blanco sat next to misty ewing davis , who , having been on the job a few months , counted as an old hand . on the table before them was a single piece of paper , folded in half to show a bullet point list of instructions remove videos of animal abuse . remove videos showing blood . remove visible nudity . remove pornography . mora blanco recalls her teammates were a mish mash of men and women gay and straight slightly tipped toward white , but also indian , african american , and filipino . most of them were friends , friends of friends , or family . they talked and made jokes , trying to make sense of the rules . you have to find humor , she remembers . otherwise it s just painful . videos arrived on their screens in a never ending queue . after watching a couple seconds apiece , squad members clicked one of four buttons that appeared in the upper right hand corner of their screens approve let the video stand racy mark video as plus reject remove video without penalty strike remove video with a penalty to the account . click , click , click . but that day mora blanco came across something that stopped her in her tracks . oh , god , she said . that day mora blanco came across something that stopped her in her tracks mora blanco won t describe what she saw that morning . for everyone s sake , she says , she won t conjure the staggeringly violent images which , she recalls , involved a toddler and a dimly lit hotel room . ewing davis calmly walked mora blanco through her next steps hit strike , suspend the user , and forward the person s account details and the video to the squad team s supervisor . from there , the information would travel to the cybertipline , a reporting system launched by the national center for missing and exploited children ncmec in . footage of child exploitation was the only black and white zone of the job , with protocols outlined and explicitly enforced by law since the late s . the video disappeared from mora blanco s screen . the next one appeared . ewing davis said , let s go for a walk . okay . this is what you re doing , mora blanco remembers thinking as they paced up and down the street . you re going to be seeing bad stuff . almost a decade later , the video and the child in it still haunt her . in the back of my head , of all the images , i still see that one , she said when we spoke recently . i really didn t have a job description to review or a full understanding of what i d be doing . i was a young year old and just excited to be getting paid more money . i got to bring a computer home ! mora blanco s voice caught as she paused to collect herself . i haven t talked about this in a long time . mora blanco is one of more than a dozen current and former employees and contractors of major internet platforms from youtube to facebook who spoke to us candidly about the dawn of content moderation . many of these individuals are going public with their experiences for the first time . their stories reveal how the boundaries of free speech were drawn during a period of explosive growth for a high stakes public domain , one that did not exist for most of human history . as law professor jeffrey rosen first said many years ago of facebook , these platforms have more power in determining who can speak and who can be heard around the globe than any supreme court justice , any king or any president . launched in , youtube was the brainchild of chad hurley , steve chen , and jawed karim three men in their s who were frustrated because technically there was no easy way for them to share two particularly compelling videos clips of the tsunami that had devastated southeast asia , and janet jackson s superbowl wardrobe malfunction . in april of , they tested their first upload . by october , they had posted their first one million view hit brazilian soccer phenom ronaldinho trying out a pair of gold cleats . a year later , google paid an unprecedented . billion to buy the site . mora blanco got a title content policy strategist , or in her words , middle man . sitting between the front lines and content policy , she handled all escalations from the front line moderators , coordinating with youtube s policy analyst . by mid , youtube viewers were watching more than million videos a day . in its earliest days , youtube attracted a small group of people who mostly shared videos of family and friends . but as volume on the site exploded , so did the range of content clips of commercial films and music videos were being uploaded , as well as huge volumes of amateur and professional pornography . even today , the latter eclipses every other category of violating content . videos of child abuse , beatings , and animal cruelty followed . by late , youtube had codified its commitment to respecting copyright law through the creation of a content verification program . but screening malicious content would prove to be far more complex , and required intensive human labor . they followed a guiding light question can i share this video with my family ? sometimes exhausted , sometimes elated , and always under intense pressure , the squad reviewed all of youtube s flagged content , developing standards as they went . they followed a guiding light question can i share this video with my family ? for the most part , they worked independently , debating and arguing among themselves on particularly controversial issues , strategists like mora blanco conferred with youtube s founders . in the process , they drew up some of the earliest outlines for what was fast becoming a new field of work , an industry that had never before been systematized or scaled professional moderation . by fall , working with data and video illustrations from the squad , youtube s lawyer , head of policy , and head of support created the company s first booklet of rules for the team , which , mora blanco recalls , was only about six pages long . like the one pager that preceded it , copies of the booklet sat on the table and were constantly marked up , then updated with new bullet points every few weeks or so . no booklet could ever be complete , no policy definitive . this small team of improvisers had yet to grasp that they were helping to develop new global standards for free speech . in , the squad helped create youtube s first clearly articulated rules for users . they barred depictions of pornography , criminal acts , gratuitous violence , threats , spam , and hate speech . but significant gaps in the guidelines remained gaps that would challenge users as well as the moderators . the google press office , which now handles youtube communications , did not agree to an interview after multiple requests . as youtube grew up , so did the videos uploaded to it the platform became an increasingly important host for newsworthy video . for members of the squad , none of whom had significant journalism experience , this sparked a series of new decisions . in the summer of , iranian protesters poured into the streets , disputing the presidential victory of mahmoud ahmadinejad . dubbed the green movement , it was one of the most significant political events in the country s post revolutionary history . mora blanco , soon to become a senior content specialist , and her team now dubbed policy and more than two dozen strong monitored the many protest clips being uploaded to youtube . on june th , the team was confronted with a video depicting the death of a young woman named neda agha soltan . the year old had been struck by a single bullet to the chest during demonstrations against pro government forces and a shaky cell phone video captured her horrific last moments in it , blood pours from her eyes , pooling beneath her . within hours of the video s upload , it became a focal point for mora blanco and her team . as she recalls , the guidelines they d developed offered no clear directives regarding what constituted newsworthiness or what , in essence , constituted ethical journalism involving graphic content and the depiction of death . but she knew the video had political significance and was aware that their decision would contribute to its relevance . mora blanco and her colleagues ultimately agreed to keep the video up . it was fueling important conversations about free speech and human rights on a global scale and was quickly turning into a viral symbol of the movement . it had tremendous political power . they had tremendous political power . and the clip was already available elsewhere , driving massive traffic to competing platforms . the policy team worked quickly with the legal department to relax its gratuitous violence policy , on the fly creating a newsworthiness exemption . an engineer swiftly designed a button warning that the content contained graphic violence a content violation under normal circumstances and her team made the video available behind it , where it still sits today . hundreds of thousands of individuals , in iran and around the world , could witness the brutal death of a pro democracy protester at the hands of government . the maneuvers that allowed the content to stand took less than a day . today , youtube s billion plus users upload hours of video every minute . every hour , instagram users generate million likes and twitter users send million tweets . last august , mark zuckerberg posted on facebook that the site had passed an important milestone for the first time ever , one billion people used facebook in a single day . the moderators of these platforms perched uneasily at the intersection of corporate profits , social responsibility , and human rights have a powerful impact on free speech , government dissent , the shaping of social norms , user safety , and the meaning of privacy . what flagged content should be removed ? who decides what stays and why ? what constitutes newsworthiness ? threat ? harm ? when should law enforcement be involved ? while public debates rage about government censorship and free speech on college campuses , customer content management constitutes the quiet transnational transfer of free speech decisions to the private , corporately managed corners of the internet where people weigh competing values in hidden and proprietary ways . moderation , explains microsoft researcher kate crawford , is a profoundly human decision making process about what constitutes appropriate speech in the public domain . moderation is a profoundly human decision making process . during a panel at this year s south by southwest , monika bickert , facebook s head of global product policy , shared that facebook users flag more than one million items of content for review every day . the stakes of moderation can be immense . as of last summer , social media platforms predominantly facebook accounted for percent of all traffic to major news sites . nearly two thirds of facebook and twitter users access their news through their feeds . unchecked social media is routinely implicated in sectarian brutality , intimate partner violence , violent extremist recruitment , and episodes of mass bullying linked to suicides . content flagged as violent a beating or beheading may be newsworthy . content flagged as pornographic might be political in nature , or as innocent as breastfeeding or sunbathing . content posted as comedy might get flagged for overt racism , anti semitism , misogyny , homophobia , or transphobia . meanwhile content that may not explicitly violate rules is sometimes posted by users to perpetrate abuse or vendettas , terrorize political opponents , or out sex workers or trans people . trolls and criminals exploit anonymity to dox , swat , extort , exploit rape , and , on some occasions , broadcast murder . abusive men threaten spouses . parents blackmail children . in pakistan , the group bytes for all an organization that previously sued the pakistani government for censoring youtube videos released three case studies showing that social media and mobile tech cause real harm to women in the country by enabling rapists to blackmail victims who may face imprisonment after being raped , and stoke sectarian violence . a prevailing narrative , as one story in the atlantic put it , is that the current system of content moderation is broken . for users who ve been harmed by online content , it is difficult to argue that broken isn t exactly the right word . but something must be whole before it can fall apart . interviews with dozens of industry experts and insiders over months revealed that moderation practices with global ramifications have been marginalized within major firms , undercapitalized , or even ignored . to an alarming degree , the early seat of the pants approach to moderation policy persists today , hidden by an industry that largely refuses to participate in substantive public conversations or respond in detail to media inquiries . in an october wired story , adrian chen documented the work of front line moderators operating in modern day sweatshops . in manila , chen witnessed a secret army of workers employed to soak up the worst of humanity in order to protect the rest of us . media coverage and researchers have compared their work to garbage collection , but the work they perform is critical to preserving any sense of decency and safety online , and literally saves lives often those of children . for front line moderators , these jobs can be crippling . beth medina , who runs a program called shift supporting heroes in mental health foundational training , which has provided resilience training to internet crimes against children teams since , details the severe health costs of sustained exposure to toxic images isolation , relational difficulties , burnout , depression , substance abuse , and anxiety . there are inherent difficulties doing this kind of work , chen said , because the material is so traumatic . even basic facts about the content moderation industry remain a mystery but as hidden as that army is , the orders it follows are often even more opaque crafted by an amalgam of venture capitalists , ceos , policy , community , privacy and trust and safety managers , lawyers , and engineers working thousands of miles away . sarah t . roberts is an assistant professor of information and media studies at western university and author of the forthcoming behind the screen digitally laboring in social media s shadow world . she says commercial content moderation a term she coined to denote the kind of professional , organized moderation featured in this article is not a cohesive system , but a wild range of evolving practices spun up as needed , subject to different laws in different countries , and often woefully inadequate for the task at hand . these practices routinely collapse under the weight and complexity of new challenges as the decisions moderators make engage ever more profound matters of legal and human rights , with outcomes that affect users , workers , and our digital public commons . as seen with black lives matter or the arab spring , whether online content stays or goes has the power to shape movements and revolutions , as well as the sweeping policy reforms and cultural shifts they spawn . yet , even basic facts about the industry remain a mystery . last month , in a piece titled moderating facebook the dark side of social networking , who is hosting this ? suggested that one third of facebook s entire workforce is comprised of moderators , a number facebook refutes as an overestimate . content moderation is fragmented into in house departments , boutique firms , call centers , and micro labor sites , all complemented by untold numbers of algorithmic and automated products . hemanshu nigam , founder of ssp blue , which advises companies in online safety , security , and privacy , estimates that the number of people working in moderation is well over , . others speculate that the number is many times that . at industry leaders such as facebook , pinterest , and youtube , the moderation process is improving drastically at other platforms it might as well be . there , systems are tied to the hands off approach of an earlier era , and continue to reflect distinct user and founder sensibilities . at chan , for example , users are instructed against violating us law but are also free to post virtually any type of content , as long as they do so on clearly defined boards . according to the site s owner hiroyuki nishimura , chan still relies heavily on a volunteer system of user nominated janitors . these janitors , nishimura said in a recent email exchange , play a critical role , tasked with keeping the imageboards free of rule breaking content . as a janitor application page on the website lays out , janitors are able to view the reports queue , delete posts , and submit ban and warn requests for their assigned board . chan janitors , nishimura said , use chat channels , to discuss content questions with supervising moderators , some paid , some unpaid . if they can t decide , he wrote , they ask me , so that i m the last one in chan . and , in case i couldn t judge . i asked with lawyers . even after more than a decade , chan remains a site frequently populated by harassment and threats . content has included everything from widespread distribution of nonconsensual porn , to niggerwalk memes , to racist mobs evoking hitler and threatening individual users . people who try to do bad things use youtube , facebook , twitter , and chan also , nishimura told us . as long as such people live in the world , it happens . right now , i don t know how to stop them and i really want to know . if there is a way to stop it , we definitely follow the way . the details of moderation practices are routinely treated as trade secrets the details of moderation practices are routinely hidden from public view , siloed within companies and treated as trade secrets when it comes to users and the public . despite persistent calls from civil society advocates for transparency , social media companies do not publish details of their internal content moderation guidelines no major platform has made such guidelines public . very little is known about how platforms set their policies current and former employees like mora blanco and others we spoke to are constrained by nondisclosure agreements . facebook officials monika bickert and ellen silver , head of facebook s community support team , responded to questions regarding their current moderation practices , and pinterest made safety manager charlotte willner available for an interview . however , facebook and pinterest , along with twitter , reddit , and google , all declined to provide copies of their past or current internal moderation policy guidelines . twitter , reddit , and google also declined multiple interview requests before deadline . when asked to discuss twitter s trust and safety teams operations , for example , a spokesperson wrote only our rules are designed to allow our users to create and share a wide variety of content in an environment that is safe and secure for our users . when content is reported to us that violates our rules , which include a ban on violent threats and targeted abuse , we suspend those accounts . we evaluate and refine our policies based on input from users , while working with outside safety organizations to ensure that we have industry best practices in place . several motives drive secrecy , according to crawford , willner , and others . on the one hand , executives want to guard proprietary tech property and gain cover from liability . on the other , they want the flexibility to respond to nuanced , fast moving situations , and they want to both protect employees who feel vulnerable to public scrutiny and protect the platform from users eager to game a policy made public . the obvious costs of keeping such a significant , quasi governmental function under wraps rarely rank as a corporate concern . how , asks roberts , the content moderation researcher , do you or i effect change on moderation practices if they re treated as industrial secrets ? dave willner was at facebook between and , most of that time as head of content policy , and is now in charge of community policy at airbnb . last spring , we met with him in san francisco . he wore a rumpled red henley and jeans , and he talked and walked fast as we made our way across the mission . members of the public , as much as the public exists , he said , hold one of three assumptions about moderation moderation is conducted entirely by robots moderation is mainly in the hands of law enforcement or , for those who are actually aware of content managers , they imagine content is assessed in a classroom type setting by engaged professionals thoughtfully discussing every post . all three assumptions , he said , were wrong . and they re wrong , in great part , because they all miss the vital role that users themselves play in these systems . the public holds one of three assumptions about moderation . all three assumptions are wrong by and large , users think of themselves as customers , or consumers . but platforms rely on users in three profound ways that alter that linear relationship one , users produce content our stories , photos , videos , comments , and interactions are core assets for the platforms we use two , user behaviors amassed , analyzed , packed , and repackaged are the source of advertising revenue and three , users play a critical role in moderation , since almost every content moderation system depends on users flagging content and filing complaints , shaping the norms that support a platform s brand . in other words , users are not so much customers as uncompensated digital laborers who play dynamic and indispensable functions despite being largely uninformed about the ways in which their labor is being used and capitalized . anne collier , the founder of icanhelpline , a social media tool for schools , suggests that users have not yet recognized their collective power to fix the harms users have themselves created in social media . they re called users for a reason , she said , and collectively still think and behave as passive consumers . by obfuscating their role , she argues , the industry delays users recognition of their agency and power . some of the larger companies notably facebook and google engage civil society through the creation of expert task forces and targeted subject matter working sessions dedicated to the problem of online harassment and crime . organizations such as the global network initiative , the anti cyberhate working group , facebook s safety advisory board , and twitter s new trust and safety council are all examples of such multidisciplinary gatherings that bring together subject matter experts . however , these debates unlike say , congressional hearings , are shielded from public view , as both corporate and civil society participants remain nearly silent about the deliberations . without greater transparency , users , consumers the public at large are ill equipped to understand exactly how platforms work and how their own speech is being regulated and why . this means that the most basic tools of accountability and governance public and legal pressure simply don t exist . in the earliest information wants to be free days of the internet , objectives were lofty . online access was supposed to unleash positive and creative human potential , not provide a venue for sadists , child molesters , rapists , or racial supremacists . yet this radically free internet quickly became a terrifying home to heinous content and the users who posted and consumed it . this early phase , from its earliest inceptions in the s until , is what j . g . ampnbsppalfrey , the former executive director of the berkman center for internet and society at harvard university , calls the open internet . it was in great part the result of s ampnbspcommunications decency act s section c , known as the good samaritan act , which absolved companies of liability for content shared on their services . section is widely cherished as the most important law on the internet , credited with making possible a trillion or so dollars of value according to david post , legal scholar and fellow at the center for democracy and technology . he calls section , ampnbspa rather remarkable provision . it reads no provider or user of an interactive computer service shall be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information provided by another information content provider . these words put free speech decisions into private hands , effectively immunizing platforms from legal liability for all content that does not violate federal law , such as child pornography . all the checks and balances that govern traditional media would not apply with no libel risk there were , in effect , no rules . on the internet , the checks and balances that govern traditional media would not apply moderation s initially haphazard , laissez faire culture has its roots here . before companies understood how a lack of moderation could impede growth and degrade brands and community , moderators were volunteers unpaid and virtually invisible . at aol , moderation was managed by a community leader program composed of users who had previously moderated chat rooms and reported offensive content . they were tasked with building communities in exchange for having their subscription fees waived . by , companies had begun to take a more proactive approach . compuserve , for instance , developed one of the earliest acceptable use policies barring racist speech , after a user with a holocaust revisionist stance started filling a popular forum with antisemitic commentary . in , ebay banned nazi and ku klux klan memorabilia , as well as other symbols of racial , religious , and ethnic hatred . democratized countries joined forces to take down child pornography . palfrey calls this phase access denied , characterized by a concerted effort across the industry and the government to ban unappetizing content . over the next decade , companies and governments honed these first generation moderation tools , refining policies and collapsing the myth that cyberspace existed on a separate plane from real life , free from the realities of regulation , law , and policy . this was the era in which mora blanco began her career at youtube . trying to bring order to a digital wild west one video at a time was grueling . to safeguard other employees from seeing the disturbing images in the reported content they were charged with reviewing , her team was sequestered in corner offices their rooms were kept dark and their computers were equipped with the largest screen protectors on the market . members of the team quickly showed signs of stress anxiety , drinking , trouble sleeping and eventually managers brought in a therapist . as moderators described the images they saw each day , the therapist fell silent . the therapist , mora blanco says , was quite literally scared . around , she recalls , youtube expanded moderation to offices in dublin , ireland and hyderabad , india . suicide and child abuse don t follow a schedule , and employing moderators across different time zones enabled the company to provide around the clock support . but it also exposed a fundamental challenge of moderating content across cultures . he quietly began removing blackface videos . at the time , youtube considered blackface non malicious soon after the expansion , mora blanco found herself debating a flagged video that appeared to show a group of students standing in a circle with two boys brawling in the middle . moderation guidelines prohibited content showing minors engaged in fighting for entertainment and are written to be as globally applicable and translatable as possible . but interpretation of those guidelines , she discovered , could be surprisingly fluid . moderators in india let the flagged video remain live because to them , the people in the video were not children , but adults . when the video was flagged again , it escalated to the silicon valley team , as most escalations reportedly still do . to mora blanco , the video clearly violated youtube s policy . i didn t know how to more plainly describe what i was seeing , she said . the video came down . cultural perspective is a constant and pervasive issue , despite attempts to make objective rules . one former screener from a major video sharing platform , who participated in roberts research and spoke with us on the condition of anonymity , recounted watching videos of what he characterized as extreme violence murder and beatings coming from mexico . the screener was instructed to take down videos depicting drug related violence in mexico , while those of political violence in syria and russia were to remain live . this distinction angered him . regardless of the country , people were being murdered in what were , in effect , all civil wars . b asically , he said , our policies are meant to protect certain groups . before he left , he quietly began removing blackface videos he encountered . at the time , youtube considered blackface non malicious . when dave willner arrived at facebook in , the team there was working on its own one pager of cursory , gut check guidelines . child abuse , animal abuse , hitler , willner recalls . we were told to take down anything that makes you feel bad , that makes you feel bad in your stomach . willner had just moved to silicon valley to join his girlfriend , then charlotte carnevale , now charlotte willner , who had become head of facebook s international support team . over the next six years , as facebook grew from less than million users to well over a billion , the two worked side by side , developing and implementing the company s first formal moderation guidelines . if facebook is here to make the world more open , why would you delete anything ? we were called the ninjas , he said , mapping the rabbit hole . like mora blanco , willner described how he , charlotte , and their colleagues sometimes laughed about their work , so that they wouldn t cry . to outsiders , that sounds demented , he said . just like at youtube , the subjectivity of facebook s moderation policy was glaring . yes , deleting hitler feels awesome , willner recalls thinking . but , why do we delete hitler ? if facebook is here to make the world more open , he asked himself , why would you delete anything ? the job , he says , was to figure out facebook s central why . for people like dave and charlotte willner , the questions are as complex now as they were a decade ago . how do we understand the context of a picture ? how do we assign language meaning ? breaking the code for context nailing down the ineffable question of why one piece of content is acceptable but a slight variation breaks policy remains the holy grail of moderation . in the absence of a perfectly automated system , willner said , there are two kinds of human moderation . one set of decisions relies on observable qualities that involve minimal interpretation . for example , a moderator can see if a picture contains imagery of a naked toddler in a dimly lit hotel room clearly a violation . in these cases , trained moderators can easily lean on detailed guidance manuals . the other method of decision , however , is more complex and interpretation is central . recognizing bullying , for example , depends on understanding relationships and context , and moderators are not privy to either . for instance , let s say that i wear a green dress to work one day and everyone makes fun of me for it , explained facebook s monika bickert when we talked . then when i get home , people have posted on my facebook profile pictures of green frogs or posts saying , i love your dress ! if i report those posts and photos to facebook , it won t necessarily be clear to the content reviewers exactly what is going on . we try to keep that in mind when we write our policies , and we also try to make sure our content reviewers consider all relevant content when making a decision . created in , facebook s first abuse standards draft ran , words and was , willner said , an attempt to be all encompassing . while willner is bound by an nda to not discuss the document , a leaked facebook cheat sheet used by freelance moderators made news in . willner says the sheet included some minor misinterpretations and errors . humor and cartoon humor is an exception for hate speech unless slur words are being used or humor is not evident , read one rule . users may not describe sexual activity in writing , except when an attempt at humor or insult , read another . moderators were given explicit examples regarding the types of messages and photos described and told to review only the reported content , not unreported adjacent content . as in us law , content referring to ordinary people was treated differently than public figures . poaching of animals should be confirmed . poaching of endangered animals should be escalated . things like urine , feces , vomit , semen , pus and earwax , were too graphic , but cartoon representations of feces and urine were allowed . internal organs ? no . excessive blood ? ok . blatant obvious depiction of camel toes and moose knuckles ? prohibited . internal organs ? no . excessive blood ? ok . the sex and nudity section perhaps best illustrates the regulations subjectivity and cultural biases . the cheat sheet barred naked children , women s nipples , and butt cracks . but such images are obviously not considered inappropriate in all settings and the rules remain subject to cultural contexts . in , for instance , when headlines were lauding social media for its role in catalyzing the arab spring , a syrian protester named dana bakdounes posted a picture of herself with a sign advocating for women s equal rights . in the image bakdounes is unveiled , wearing a tank top . a facebook moderator removed the photo and blocked the administrators of an organization she supported , uprising of women in the arab world . her picture had been reported by conservatives who believed that images of women , heads uncovered and shoulders bare , constituted obscenity . following public protest , facebook quickly issued an apology and worked to rectify the mistake . the issue of female nudity and culturally bound definitions of obscenity remains thorny . last spring , facebook blocked a photograph of an indigenous woman with her breasts exposed , a violation of the company s ever evolving rules about female toplessness . in response , the brazilian ministry of culture announced its intention to sue the company . several weeks later , protesters in the united states , part of the sayhername movement , confronted facebook and instagram over the removal of photographs in which they had used nudity to highlight the plight of black women victimized by the police . in early march , at packed panel at south by southwest called how far should we go to protect hate speech online ? jeffrey rosen , now president of the national constitution center , was joined by juniper downs , head of public policy at google youtube , and facebook s monika bickert , among others . at one point , midway through the panel , rosen turned to downs and bickert , describing them as the two most powerful women in the world when it comes to free speech . the two demurred . entire organizations , they suggested , make content decisions . not exactly . content management is rarely dealt with as a prioritized organizational concern centrally bringing together legal , customer service , security , privacy , safety , marketing , branding , and personnel to create a unified approach . rather , it is still usually shoehorned into structures never built for a task so complex . moderation remains a relatively low wage , low status sector , often managed and staffed by women the majority of industry insiders and experts we interviewed described moderation as siloed off from the rest of the organization . few senior level decision makers , they said whether pr staff , lawyers , privacy and security experts , or brand and product managers experience the material in question first hand . one content moderator , on condition of anonymity , said her colleagues and supervisors never saw violent imagery because her job was to remove the most heinous items before they could . instead , she was asked to describe it . i watched people s faces turn green . joi podgorny is former vice president at modsquad , which provides content moderation to a range of marquee clients , from the state department to the nfl . now a digital media consultant , she says founders and developers not only resist seeing the toxic content , they resist even understanding the practice of moderation . typically cast off as customer service , moderation and related work remains a relatively low wage , low status sector , often managed and staffed by women , which stands apart from the higher status , higher paid , more powerful sectors of engineering and finance , which are overwhelmingly male . i need you to look at what my people are looking at on a regular basis , she said . i want you to go through my training and see this stuff and you re not going to think it s free speech . you re going to think it s damaging to culture , not only for our brand , but in general . brian pontarelli , ceo of the moderation software company inversoft , echoes the observation . many companies , he told us , will not engage in robust moderation until it will cost them not to . they sort of look at that as like , that s hard , and it s going to cost me a lot of money , and it s going to require a lot of work , and i don t really care unless it causes me to lose money , he said . until that point , they can say to themselves that it s not hurting their revenue , people are still spending money with us , so why should we be doing it ? when senior executives do get involved , they tend to parachute in during moments of crisis . in the wake of last december s san bernardino shootings , eric e . schmidt , executive chairman at google , called on industry to build tools to reduce hate , harm , and friction in social media , sort of like spell checkers , but for hate and harassment . likewise the words of former twitter ceo dick costolo in an internal memo , published by the verge in february . we lose core user after core user by not addressing simple trolling issues that they face every day , he wrote , concluding , we re going to start kicking these people off right and left and making sure that when they issue their ridiculous attacks , nobody hears them . as if it were so simple . mora blanco worked for five years at twitter , where she said , there was a really strong cultural appreciation for the trust ampamp safety team , responsible for moderation related to harassment and abuse . she joined the company in and soon became manager of the user safety policy team , where she developed policies concerning abuse , harassment , suicide , child sexual exploitation , and hate speech . by the end of her tenure in early , she had moved to the public policy team , where she helped to launch several initiatives to prevent hate speech , harassment , and child sexual exploitation , and to promote free speech . for reddit , leaving users largely to their own devices has translated into years of high profile catastrophes it was embedded within the company , that the trust ampamp safety team were doing important work , she said . even so , she found , her team didn t have the tools to be effective . the trust ampamp safety teams had lots of ideas on how to implement change , she said , but not the engineering support . prior to , according to mora blanco and former twitter engineer jacob hoffman andrews , there was not a single engineer dedicated to addressing harassment at twitter . during the past two years , the company has taken steps to reconcile the need to stem abuse with its commitment to the broadest interpretation of unmoderated free speech , publicly announcing the formation of an advisory council and introducing training sessions with law enforcement . according to a source close to the moderation process at reddit , the climate there is far worse . despite the site s size and influence attracting some to million page views a day reddit has a full time staff of only around people , leaving redditors to largely police themselves , following a reddiquette post that outlines what constitutes acceptable behavior . leaving users almost entirely to their own devices has translated into years of high profile catastrophes involving virtually every form of objectionable content including entire toxic subreddits such as ampnbsp r jailbait , r creepshots , r teen girls , r fatpeoplehate , r coontown , ampnbsp r niggerjailbait , ampnbsp r picsofdeadjailbait , and a whole category for anti black reddits called the chimpire , which flourished on the platform . in the wake of public outrage over celebgate the posting on reddit of hacked private photos of more than women celebrities a survey of more than , redditors found that percent of those who wouldn t recommend reddit cited hateful or offensive content or community as the reason why . after the survey was published in march , the company announced , we are seeing our open policies stifling free expression people avoid participating for fear of their personal and family safety . alexis ohanian , a reddit co founder , and other members of the reddit team , described the company s slow response to celebgate as a missed chance to be a leader on the issue of moderating nonconsensual pornography . two months later , reddit published one of its first corporate anti harassment moderation policies , which prohibited revenge porn and encouraged users to email moderators with concerns . reddit includes a report feature that is routed anonymously to volunteer moderators whose ability to act on posts is described in detail on the site . alexis ohanian described reddit s slow response to celebgate as a missed chance to be a leader . but the survey also laid bare the philosophical clash between the site s commitment to open expression , which fueled early growth , and the desire for limits among the users who may fuel future growth percent of complaints from extremely dissatisfied users were due to heavy handed moderation and censorship . the company continues to grapple with the paradox that to expand , reddit and other platforms will likely have to regulate speech in ways that alienate a substantive percentage of their core customer base . when asked in the summer of about racist subreddits that remained in place despite the company s new policies , ceo steve huffman said the content is offensive to many , but does not violate our current rules for banning , and clarified that the changes were not an official update to our policy . by then , as slate tech columnist david auerbach wrote , reddit was widely seen as a cesspool of hate in dire need of repair . within weeks , reddit announced the removal of a list of racist and other communities that exist solely to annoy other redditors , and prevent us from improving reddit , and generally make reddit worse for everyone else . the sharp contrast between facebook , with its robust and long standing safety advisory board , and reddit , with its skeletal staff and dark pools of offensive content , offers up a vivid illustration for how content moderation has evolved in isolated ways within individual corporate enclaves . the fragmentation means that content banned on one platform can simply pop up on another , and that trolling can be coordinated so that harassment and abuse that appear minor on a single platform are amplified by appearing simultaneously on multiple platforms . a writer who goes by erica munnings and asked that we not use her real name out of fear of retaliation , found herself on the receiving end of one such attack , which she describes as a high consequence game of whack a mole across multiple social media platforms for days and weeks . after writing a feminist article that elicited conservative backlash , a five day twitter flogging ensued . from there , the attacks moved to facebook , youtube , reddit , and chan . self appointed task forces of reddit and chan users published her address and flooded her professional organization with emails , demanding that her professional license be rescinded . she shut down comments on her youtube videos . she logged off twitter . on facebook , the harassment was debilitating . to separate her personal and professional lives , she had set up a separate facebook page for her business . however , user controls on such pages are thin , and her attackers found their way in . i couldn t get one star reviews removed or make the choice as a small business not to have reviews on my page at all , she said . policies like this open the floodgates of internet hate and tied my hands behind my back . there was no way i could report each and every attack across multiple social media platforms because they came at me so fast and in such high volume . but also , it became clear to me that when i did report , no one responded , so there really was no incentive to keep reporting . that became yet another costly time sink on top of deleting comments , blocking people , and screen grabbing everything for my own protection . because no one would help me , i felt i had no choice but to wait it out , which cost me business , and income . several content moderation experts point to pinterest as an industry leader . microsoft s tarleton gillespie , author of the forthcoming free speech in the age of platform , says the company is likely doing the most of any social media company to bridge the divide between platform and user , private company and the public . the platform s moderation staff is well funded and supported , and pinterest is reportedly breaking ground in making its processes transparent to users . for example , pinterest posts visual examples to illustrate the site s acceptable use policy in an effort to help users better understand the platform s content guidelines and the decisions moderators make to uphold them . in response to the film fifty shades of grey , pinterest was hustling to develop new bdsm standards when we met with charlotte willner , now pinterest s safety manager , the film fifty shades of grey had just been released . she and her team were hustling to develop new bdsm standards . we realized , she later explained by email , that we were going to need to figure out standards for rape and kidnapping fantasy content , which we hadn t seen a lot of but we began to see in connection with the general bdsm influx . the calls were not easy , but it was clear that her team was making decisions on a remarkably granular level . one user was posting fetish comments about cooking barbie size women in a stew pot . should this be allowed ? why not ? the team had to decipher whether it was an actual threat . a full size woman can t fit into stew pot , the team figured , so the content was unlikely to cause real world harm . ultimately , they let the posts stand that is , according to willner , until the stew pot guy began uploading more explicit content that clearly violated pinterest s terms and her team removed his account . on that same south by southwest panel , rosen expressed concerns about both corporate regulation of free speech and newly stringent european union regulations such as the right to be forgotten . censorship rules that have a lower standard than the first amendment are too easily abused by governments , he said . yet he offered some warm words of praise , saying that companies such as google , facebook , and twitter are trying to thread an incredibly delicate and difficult line and the balance that they re striking is a sensible one given the pressures they face . he added , judges and regulators and even really smart , wonderful google lawyers are doing about as good of a job with this unwelcome task as could be imagined . it was a striking remark , given google s confirmation , only days earlier , that it had hired controversial chan founder christopher poole . prominent industry critic shanley kane penned an outraged post describing poole as responsible for a decade of inculcating one of the most vile , violent and harmful communities on the internet . for marginalized groups , she wrote , the decision sends not only a bad message , but a giant fuck you . several sources told us that industry insiders , frustrated by their isolation , have begun moving independently of their employers . dave willner , and others who spoke on the condition of anonymity , told us that or people working in moderation have started meeting occasionally for dinner in san francisco to talk informally about their work . one front line expert , jennifer puckett , has worked in moderation for more than years and now serves as social reputation manager heading up the digital safety team at emoderation . she believes that moderation , as an industry , is maturing . on the one hand , the human expertise is growing , making that tableful of young college grads at youtube seem quaint . people are forming their college studies around these types of jobs , mora blanco says . the industry has phd candidates in internship roles . on the other hand , efforts to automate moderation have also advanced . growing numbers of researchers are developing technology tooled to understand user generated content , with companies hawking unique and proprietary analytics and algorithms that attempt to measure meaning and predict behavior . adaptive listening technologies , which are increasingly capable of providing sophisticated analytics of online conversations , are being developed to assess user context and intent . if the moderation system is a factory , this approach moves what is essentially piecework toward assembly . in may , dave willner and dan kelmenson , a software engineer at facebook , patented a d modeling technology for content moderation designed around a system that resembles an industrial assembly line . it s tearing the problem of huge volume into pieces to make chunks more comprehensible , willner says . first , the model identifies a set of malicious groups say neo nazis , child pornographers , or rape promoters . the model then identifies users who associate with those groups through their online interactions . next , the model searches for other groups associated with those users and analyzes those groups based on occurrences of keywords associated with the type of malicious activity and manual verification by experts . this way , companies can identify additional or emerging malicious online activity . if the moderation system is a factory , this approach moves what is essentially piecework toward assembly , he said . and you can measure how good the system is . working with microsoft , hany farid , the chair of computer science at dartmouth college , developed something called photodna , which allows tech companies to automatically detect , remove , and report the presence of child exploitation images on their networks . when we spoke , farid described the initial resistance to photodna , how industry insiders said the problem of child exploitation was too hard to solve . yes , it s horrible , he recalled everyone executives , attorneys , engineers saying , but there s so much content . civil liberties groups , he recalls , also balked at an automated moderation system . talk to those people today , he said , and they ll tell you how successful photodna has been . photodna works by processing an image every two milliseconds and is highly accurate . first , he explains , known child exploitation images are identified by ncmec . then photodna extracts from each image a numeric signature that is unique to that image , like your human dna is to you . whenever an image is uploaded , whether to facebook or tumblr or twitter , and so on , he says , its photodna is extracted and compared to our known ce images . matches are automatically detected by a computer and reported to ncmec for a follow up investigation . he describes photodna as agnostic , saying , there is nothing specific to child exploitation in the technology . he could just as easily be looking for pictures of cats . the tricky part of content moderation is not identifying content , he says , but the long , hard conversations conducted by humans , not machines necessary for reaching the tough decisions about what constitutes personal or political speech . farid is now working with tech companies and nonprofit groups to develop similar technology that will identify extremism and terrorist threats online whether expressed in speech , image , video , or audio . he expects the program to launch within months , not years . while tech solutions are rapidly emerging , the cultural ones are slower in coming . emily laidlaw , assistant professor of law at university of calgary and author of regulating speech in cyberspace , calls for a clarification of the applicability of existing laws . for starters , she says , section of the communications decency act needs immediate overhaul . companies , she argues , should no longer be entirely absolved of liability for the content they host . for more than five years , harvard s berkman center for internet and society has pushed for industry wide best practices . their recommendations include corporate transparency , consistency , clarity , and a mechanism for customer recourse . other civil society advocates call for corporate grievance mechanisms that are accessible and transparent in accordance with international human rights law , or call on corporations to engage in public dialogue with such active stakeholders as the anti defamation league , the digital rights foundation , and the national network to end domestic violence . what we do is informed by external conversations that we have , explained facebook s bickert in early march . every day , we are in conversations with groups around the world so , while we are responsible for overseeing these policies and managing them , it is really a global conversation . we have one set of content standards for the entire world . some large established companies like youtube , pinterest , emoderation , facebook , and twitter are beginning to make headway in improving moderation practices , using both tech and human solutions . in the eight months since ceo dick costolo s departure , twitter has reached out to users and advocates in an effort to be more responsive . in early february , patricia cartes , twitter s head of global policy outreach , announced the formation of a trust ampamp safety council , a multidisciplinary advisory board comprised of organizations and experts . still , members of bodies such as this one , and facebook s safety advisory board , established in , operate under ndas , meaning the conversations taking place in these places remain behind the scenes . in , google founded google ideas now jigsaw , a multi disciplinary think tank to tackle challenges associated with defending against global security threats and protecting vulnerable populations . meanwhile , a virtual cottage industry of internet helplines the world over has cropped up , such as zo quinn s crash override network , an online abuse helpline for schools and revenge porn hotlines in the united states and the united kingdom . as these policy debates move forward in private , platforms are also taking steps to protect their front line moderation workers . medina told us that representatives from google , microsoft , yahoo , facebook , and kik have recently attended shift s resilience trainings . facebook s hundreds of moderators located in menlo park , austin , dublin , and hyderabad says silver , head of facebook s community support team , now receive regular training , detailed manuals , counseling and other support . the company brings on experts or trains specialists in specific areas such as suicide , human trafficking , child exploitation , violence against women , and terrorism . moderator decisions on reported pieces of content are regularly audited , she says , to ensure that moderation is consistent and accurately reflects guidelines . we have one set of content standards for the entire world , explains facebook s bickert . this helps our community be truly global , because it allows people to share content across borders . at the same time , maintaining one set of standards is challenging because people around the world may have different ideas about what is appropriate to share on the internet . many us based companies , however , continue to consign their moderators to the margins , shipping their platforms digital waste to special economic zones in the global south . as roberts recounts in her paper digital refuse , these toxic images trace the same routes used to export the industrial world s physical waste hospital hazardous refuse , dirty adult diapers , and old model computers . without visible consequences here and largely unseen , companies dump child abuse and pornography , crush porn , animal cruelty , acts of terror , and executions images so extreme those paid to view them won t even describe them in words to their loved ones onto people desperate for work . and there they sit in crowded rooms at call centers , or alone , working off site behind their screens and facing cyber reality , as it is being created . meanwhile , each new startup begins the process , essentially , all over again . meanwhile , each new startup begins the process , essentially , all over again and even industry leaders continue to rely on their users to report and flag unacceptable content . this reliance , says nicole dewandre , an advisor to the european commission on ampnbspinformation and communication technology policy , is an exhausting laboring activity that does not deliver on accountability . the principle of counter speech , by which users are expected to actively contradict hateful or harmful messages , firmly puts the burdens and risks of action on users , not on the money making platforms who depend on their content . perhaps for that reason , counter speech has become an industry buzzword . susan benesch , founder of the dangerous speech project , which tracks inflammatory speech and its effects , notes that while counter speech is an important tool , it cannot be the sole solution . we don t yet understand enough about when it s effective , and can often put the counter speaker at risk of attack , online or offline . sarah t . roberts , the researcher , cautions that we can t lose sight of the baseline . the platforms , she notes , are soliciting content . it s their solicitation that invites people to upload content . they create the outlet and the impetus . if moderators are , in dave willner s estimation , platforms emotional laborers , users are , in the words of labor researcher kylie jarrett , their digital housewives ampnbsp volunteering their time and adding value to the system while remaining unpaid and invisible , compensated only through affective benefits . the question , now , is how can the public leverage the power inherent in this role ? astra taylor , author of the people s platform , says , i m struck by the fact that we use these civic minded metaphors , calling google books a library or twitter a town square or even calling social media social but real public options are off the table , at least in the united states . though users are responsible for providing and policing vast quantities of digital content , she points out , we then hand the digital commons over to private corporations at our own peril . on january th , , mora blanco packed up her desk and left twitter . from her last position in public policy , she no longer had to screen violent images day after day and , after months of laying groundwork , she told us , things had started to shift and move along lines i d always wanted . she and her coworkers from legal , safety , support , public policy , content all the pieces of the puzzle all across the platform had started meeting weekly to tackle online harassment and threat . we got to sit in the room together , she said , and everyone felt really connected and that we could move forward together . but she d finally earned enough money to take a year to train as a hair stylist . just as important , she felt she could finally leave without betraying her colleagues , especially those working on the front lines . today , mora blanco is studying cosmetology at the cinta aveda institute in downtown san francisco . she loves her new work , she told us , because it allows her the freedom to innovate . i love to think big , but i am really passionate about being creative . what are you doing here ? her instructor sometimes asks . you could go out and make so much money . occasionally she takes an online safety consulting gig she hasn t completely ruled out jumping back in . but things would need to change , she said . i d like to be a part of that change , but i need to be convinced that the attitude toward this advocacy work is going to be treated seriously , that the industry is going to be different . correction a previous draft of this piece suggested google acquired youtube in october of . in fact , that acquisition took place in october of . catherine buni is a writer and editor whose work has appeared in the new york times , theatlantic . com , the los angeles review of books , and orion , among others . soraya chemaly is a media critic , writer and activist whose work focuses on free speech and the role of gender in culture . her work appears regularly in salon , the guardian , the huffington post , cnn . com , ms . , and other outlets , and she is a frequent media commentator on related topics . design by james bareham product by frank bi edited by esther kaplan and michael zelenko lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gt lt ! var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene if android webos iphone ipad ipod blackberry iemobile opera mini i . test navigator . useragent body . addclass mobile device gt 	 the order came from the sultan of brunei s nephew . it was , and prince abdul hakeem , then years old , had inherited two things access to a billion fortune , and his family s penchant for spending it . the secret six a half dozen groundbreaking ferraris were built for the prince of brunei . only one made it out of the jungle aliveby ryan zummallen photography by paul barshon the order came from the sultan of brunei s nephew . it was , and prince abdul hakeem , then years old , had inherited two things access to a billion fortune , and his family s penchant for spending it . in the s and s , the monarchs of this tiny , oil rich nation in the south china sea bankrolled a fleet of special custom vehicles , ordering the most coveted cars in the world by the half dozen or more . their notorious collection located in nondescript concrete garages , surrounded by razor wire , and patrolled by armed nepalese soldiers known as gurkhas numbered in the thousands . visitors described rows and rows of warehouses , filled to the brim with luxury cars , sometimes organized by make , model , or even color . in his online newsletter , ferrari broker michael sheehan described one floor dedicated solely to black mercedes sl s , another to red ferrari testarossas , and yet another to bright yellow bentleys and lamborghinis . one particularly star studded showroom included a ferrari gto evo , f lm , f , and three mclaren f s . several of these cars could be found nowhere else in the worldseveral of the cars in these warehouses were one of a kind , built specifically for brunei , and could be found nowhere else in the world . for his next order , prince hakeem again wanted something special a ferrari with a semi automatic transmission . at the time , the technology didn t exist on any street legal vehicle in the world . that didn t give him any pause . prince hakeem was used to getting what he wanted . according to a fortune article published in , as a teen prince hakeem had decided he wanted to learn to play american football , so the royal family paid joe montana and herschel walker to come to brunei and teach him the game . no one was allowed to tackle the prince , who scored touchdowns every time he touched the ball . on his th birthday , he received billion in cash . for a job like this , prince hakeem knew just who to turn to legendary automotive design house carozzeria pininfarina , which had already completed one off versions of ferraris , bentleys , jaguars , and other historic marques for the royal family . it s estimated that in less than a decade , pininfarina had built more than cars destined for brunei . the assignment came to paolo garella , pininfarina s prototype manager . garella s team would take the ferrari testarossa , a pillar of automotive style and performance , and crank up the adrenaline . it was a tall order , but garella had the experience , talent , and vision necessary for the job . what garella s team built would become one of the most mysterious and compelling supercars ever , one that would come to be known as the ferrari fx . born and raised in italy , garella knew by age five that he would make cars his life s work . after seeing the ferrari pinin concept the first , and still the only four door ferrari ever produced at the torino auto show , he committed to becoming an engineer and creating one of a kind designs . he quickly established an enviable career in the late s , garella spent five years working at goodyear , testing prototypes like , as luck would have it , the ferrari testarossa around its famous circuit de mireval in france . he then returned to italy , developing hybrid and electric racecars for pti albatech . in pininfarina came calling , and garella became manager of the prototype manufacturing and engineering department , working on experimental , often top secret projects . photos from the s show him with the pushbroom mustache and wide , round glasses typical of the era often , with a beaming smile . garella was when the fx project came to him , and uniquely qualified to make the prince s dream car a reality . pininfarina opted for the ferrari testarossa as the platform for the new car . with its supercar proportions and mid engine layout , it was the premiere horse in the ferrari stable . having designed the original testarossa in the early s , pininfarina was very familiar with the car . in fact , they had already been involved in a custom job based on the testarossa , called the ferrari mythos , a drool inducing prototype shown at the tokyo motor show . ferrari made it clear the mythos was not for sale . somehow , two cropped up in the brunei warehouses anyhow . the only requirement , garella says , was the semi automatic transmissionwith the platform chosen , garella and his team could turn to the task at hand . the only requirement , garella says , was the semi automatic transmission . until then , supercars like the testarossa almost exclusively featured five or six speed manuals . semi automatics came from the world of motorsports , where they began appearing in rally cars in the late s , and formula one cars in the early s . instead of relying on the driver to depress the clutch , manually engage a new gear , and then release the clutch before accelerating , the semi automatic used computers to execute shifts with input from the driver via buttons , paddles , or a lever in a fraction of the time . built for quickness and nothing else , semi automatic transmissions were far too jerky and unrefined for the road in the early s . pininfarina faced a tall order in adopting one for the fx . pininfarina turned to british racing outfit prodrive , a company that had made a name for itself with subaru in the world rally championship in the early s . prodrive was already in the process of gauging public interest in a semi automatic transmission for the street that could be fitted directly to a manual gearbox buttons on the steering wheel would shift gears while an electronic control unit worked the clutch . pininfarina saw an opportunity to collaborate , and assigned an engineer whose sole responsibility was working with prodrive to adapt their system for the fx . prodrive transmission was mated to the stock ferrari six speed manual gearbox already in the testarossa that garella had picked out . it wasn t a perfect fit . while the clutch was hydraulic , engaging different gears was pneumatic . prodrive had a system that was a little bit complex , says garella . it had a number of problems and was not really straightforward . the transmission was going to need continued work , and in fact required constant attention from mechanics to be driveable at all . but it was the best option available at the time . the rest of the fx internals came together without much issue . pininfarina moved the radiator from the back of the car to the front , to make room for the rear mounted transmission s additional electronics , and to capitalize on the increased airflow from the redesigned front end . the engine was tuned , and the exhaust was converted into a snarling straight tubi system . the catalytic converters on the . liter v were removed , pushing its horsepower northward . everything else was left stock . with the engineering complete , garella and pininfarina turned to what they do best the exterior design . the result was stunning , if polarizing . though the deeply inset headlights bring to mind camaros of the era , and quickly became dated , sculpted dual intakes bring an elegance to the aggressive slope of the front end . massive , scooping hips presaged the ferrari modena designed , of course , by pininfarina that wouldn t come out until . at the rear , the car s roofline flows down like cooling lava , smoothing out into a point . quad round taillights from the ferrari punctuate a dark mesh grille . from the rear three quarter perspective , the fx radiates aggression , and tremendous potential for speed . the transparent plastic cover over the mid mounted engine has twelve portholes one for each cylinder that simultaneously invite and distort the view inside a ferrari funhouse . a stylized fx logo on top of the engine makes it clear this is no run of the mill ferrari . it is the only such emblem on the car . pininfarina tested the design in its on site wind tunnel , and came away pleased . the car was definitely better than the testarossa , says garella . and i think it was a quite attractive design for the car at that time . then chairman sergio pininfarina personally showed the completed fx to gianni agnelli , the former head of ferrari parent company fiat , who simply said we are lucky to have such clients . pininfarina built the entire outer shell from carbon fiber , which is lighter than aluminum , stronger than steel , and was , at that time , unfathomably expensive . it was also difficult to work with , as very few companies had experience with the material . pininfarina went through three suppliers before finding the quality necessary . the pininfarina office in germany originally constructed the prototypes , but after several mishaps and botched models , the work was brought back to the in house design center in cambiano , italy . at one point , pininfarina built an entire bonnet for the fx and sent it to brunei , just to see how it reacted to the sun and humidity of the stifling south asian climate an exercise that would prove prophetic . the quality gradually improved . we worked a lot to have perfect surfaces , says garella . at the end , it was the best carbon fibre body brunei had . we are lucky to have such clients . pininfarina completed the fx in late , with the transmission being its crowning but still problematic achievement . it was unlike anything done before . pininfarina built three fxs , and continued experimenting with the prodrive transmission , adding it to a couple ferrari f s more than a year before ferrari made its f f the first production car with a semi automatic transmission , in . pininfarina even put one in another brunei project , the equally evasive jaguar xj known internally as the j . two were built one caught fire and was destroyed , the other s location is simply unknown . delivering a car to the royal family of brunei isn t as simple as rolling up in a transporter . pininfarina often loaded the cars into a massive antanov aircraft , then sent them to brunei unfinished and had crews complete the work on site . the cars needed to be perfect before the royal family saw them . occasionally , this led to panic inducing deadlines . the team once flew a custom bentley b to brunei the night of a birthday party for prince jefri , hakeem s father . condensation from the flight made the car soaking wet , and many of the electronics weren t working . the car had to be hand dried , and delivered to the palace in the nick of time . hours later , though , garella got a call that the steering wheel wouldn t line up perfectly straight . the team pulled the wheel apart and were still working when prince hakeem suddenly walked outside to present the car to his father and the entire court . garella hid behind a pillar the royal family was not pleased to find their newest vehicle in pieces . around am , brunei officials seized their passports , effectively holding them hostageanother time , converting a ferrari gto to right hand drive had somehow caused the turn signal indicator to stop automatically returning . the team began repairing the problem at pm and as time went on , their hosts grew impatient . around am , brunei officials seized their passports , effectively holding them hostage . garella and the team stayed up to finish the work , and reclaimed their passports around am . i think still that this was the longest night of my life , he says . yes it was stressful but also fantastic . i love it , for an engineer to have the possibility to do a project with an almost unlimited budget is a lifetime dream and i was there . to garella s relief , there weren t any such difficulties with the fx . in early , garella and a select few associates made the , mile trek to brunei to deliver the three custom ferraris during the height of the royal family s car buying frenzy , he made this trip every other month . the cars came off the plane ready to be presented , and prince hakeem was very pleased with his new toys . satisfied with the progress of the build months prior , hakeem had ordered three more fxs this time , based on the newly released f m , a lighter , faster platform that would come with an extra horsepower , a lightweight crankshaft , and titanium connecting rods . not only that , but the family decided to send the new cars to oxfordshire , england based williams f , one of the most successful teams in formula one history , in order to better tune and refine the complicated transmission . five of garella s fxs were painted the same familiar ferrari red the other , fx no . , was painted a deep sapphire blue . it s the only fx that actually made it to williams , and the only fx that escaped the decaying garages of brunei . once it had possession of the car , williams used a team from their f arm to build the new and improved transmission system in fx no . . they replaced the prodrive components , taking special care to remove all prodrive branding . williams plugged in the semi automatic unit they had been using in formula one since , and ran immense amounts of wiring through the car . they also replaced the buttons on the steering wheel with paddles . the paddles in the fx appear primitive by today s standards they are made of metal , with red on the left for down shifts , and green on the right for up . but it was shaping up to be a marked improvement over the first fx . the transmission was still being tuned when the asian markets crashed . in the summer of , the free fall of the thai baht sparked a domino effect that spread across the asian markets , and quickly set off a global financial meltdown . buoyed by its vast oil reserves , brunei emerged relatively unscathed . the following year , however , a company called amedeo development corporation owned and operated by prince hakeem s father , jefri collapsed , leaving behind billion in debt . prince jefri s brother , the sultan , ordered a review of the country s financials vanity fair once reported that accountants were assigned to the case and found jefri had raided some billion of brunei s oil funds as his personal piggy bank , using amedeo to fund extravagant public and personal projects . jefri s exploits during this fantastic spending spree have since become the stuff of legend . his family of four wives and at least children lived lavishly across london , paris , los angeles , and elsewhere . he commissioned life sized bronze sculptures of couples having sex , just to offend his more conservative brother mohamed . he owned a foot yacht named tits , and called the lifeboats nipple and nipple . court documents would reveal that jefri ultimately spent some million with pininfarina alone . some estimates pegged the total number of cars in his priceless collection at more than , others , closer to , . other heads of state and wealthy people have had impressive collections of bespoke cars , but i am pretty sure the royal family of brunei is unparalleled in this regard , says ed kim , vice president of industry analysis for auto pacific . certainly nothing like what they were doing back then is happening now . though jefri was the chief financier of the collection , his brother the sultan , who once held the title of richest man alive , certainly has his own excessive and frightening habits he owns and regularly pilots a boeing with a gold and crystal interior , and participated with jefri in a sex harem that included dozens of women . some of these women were models and actresses that later claimed they were lured into joining , and sued the brothers . it would be na ve to suggest the sultan was unaware of his family s obscene spending . garella personally witnessed private concerts by the likes of the gipsy kings and sting on palace grounds . michael jackson once performed in brunei for a fee of million , in a stadium built specifically for the event . williams made a phone call . american businessman dick marconi picked upstill , the sultan has held his throne for nearly years , and successfully distanced himself from the global scorn that forced jefri to flee the country . the sultan removed jefri from his positions as brunei s minister of finance , and head of the brunei investment agency bia , that housed the oil funds that jefri had likely been using to keep amedeo afloat . in , prince jefri turned over his assets . meanwhile , the prince s groundbreaking ferrari sat in a british workshop , suddenly with no owner . williams made a phone call . american businessman dick marconi picked up . about . million and years later , i m staring at my reflection in the indigo carbon fiber weave of ferrari fx no . in tustin , california . this is mr . marconi s baby , says marconi museum operations director todd ottosen , more than once , as he carefully lowers the entire back section of the fx . before closing it , he makes a show of effortlessly lifting the carbon fiber engine bay up and down , with two fingers . pretty cool , huh ? you can t even do that with the f . the marconi museum is located inside an unassuming warehouse in a southern california business park and houses one of the most eclectic , star studded car collections you could conjure up . ferraris from every era are scattered about , along with icons like the delorean dmc and lamborghini countach , and ultra rare finds like the cizeta v t and aston martin db ar zagato . several retired indy and formula one racecars are parked on the floor others , like the mclaren mp that ayrton senna drove during his championship season , hang vertically from the walls like mile per hour drapes . the museum is the passion project gone wild of dick marconi , a co founder of herbalife , who has used his fortune to bring automotive brilliance to the public . admission is free there s a suggested donation that benefits the museum s childrens foundation . this is where ferrari fx no . has spent the majority of its life , occupying a space between the ar and another pininfarina creation for the royal family a forest green convertible based on the ferrari four seater , called the venice like the fx , there are several of these still in brunei , possibly dozens if you count the custom sedan and wagon versions . though it may be a relatively pedestrian existence for the fx , one of the most compelling automotive mysteries in a world full of them , the car s allure is still strong . rumor has it marconi has repeatedly turned down offers to sell the car for no less than million . automotive journalist winston goodfellow is one of the few people to have driven the fx outside of marconi museum mechanics , when he reviewed the car for an issue of forza magazine in . in his article , goodfellow raved that the low weight and advanced technology in the fx made it a thrill to drive while this ferrari pulls with more alacrity than any tr , what makes the fx truly extraordinary when run hard through the gears is the way the engine works in concert with the transmission it delivers an excitement that the heavier , production trs or any or can t touch . one thing i will say , that does still linger , is it remains one of the coolest things i ve driven . fifteen years after that drive , the experience of the williams transmission is still clear in his mind . one thing i will say , that does still linger , is it remains one of the coolest things i ve driven , he remembers . goodfellow s impressions may provide the clearest perspective to the car s potential , and that of the williams semi automatic system , that we ll ever have . you could feel it going through the motions of what it did , even though it was all paddles . that gave it this perfect blend of coming digital couple with beautiful analog sensations . it had a unique taste that was most appealing , particularly that howling exhaust . some of the cars at the marconi museum get out more than others . the fx , for example , made a couple of appearances in local car shows during the s , but has otherwise been a homebody . on a routine test drive about two years ago , the fx limped back to the museum spewing white smoke , and hasn t run since . in total , fx no . has approximately , miles on the odometer . if they still function a big if it s likely that the five other fxs have rarely or more likely , never been driven at all . few have seen it fewer still have seen what it s capable of . vincent marconi , a year old mechanic , who also happens to be dick s grandson , has seen the fx s guts spewed out all over the floor . last year he and larry englehart , owner of ferrari technology in nearby orange , began the long journey of making sense of the transmission , and getting the car running again . it s still a work in process , and it s a slow process , says vincent . it s a combination of f and space technology , and there are no schematics . vincent describes a system truly ahead of its time . the gearbox is the stock six speed from the f m , with small modifications to the gears and differential . the attached prodrive semi automatic system features fascinating technologies , like an early version of automatic rev matching to prevent power loss between shifts . prodrive appears to have never brought its innovative transmission to market , unable to smooth out the wrinkles . even now , it will likely take a williams technician visiting the car again to get the computer systems ready to run . vincent marconi and englehart plan to get back around to finishing the project one day , but the museum has lots of cars that need attention and the fx isn t very high on the priority list . still , the payoff is enticing . it works bitching once everything is rocking and rolling , says vincent . lt ! function var l function new pym . parent ferrari photo gallery graphic , m snippet thin gtgarella , now , resembles his younger self , though the glasses are thinner and the mustache is grayer . he remains a force in innovative design and construction . he spent years at pininfarina , the final seven as head of special projects . in recent years , he s been the invisible hand behind two of the most celebrated one off designs of the past decade . the first is the pininfarina new stratos , a modern interpretation of the famous , wedge shaped lancia stratos . the other is the ferrari p by pininfarina , commissioned by the filmmaker jim glickenhaus . it s built on a ferrari enzo but completely redesigned to pay homage to the legendary ferrari p . garella would also become project manager for the company s associated racing program , designing the p competizione , which was built on a ferrari f scuderia and homologated to race in the nurburgring hours . in , it placed th overall and won its class . last year , the team debuted and raced the scg , a new variation that shattered the lap record at the ring and fielded two entries in the hour race . all of the glickenhaus racing cars are street legal , and compete with new york license plates . another one off project is underway , but that s all garella can say . in an email , glickenhaus described garella as being not fazed by problems and willing to work until they are solved . still , the fx holds a special place on his long list of accomplishments . garella often visits the us to attend events like the pebble beach concours d elegance in monterey , and in , he looked up the marconi museum and made the trip down the coast to tustin . dick marconi was waiting for him , and the two posed for pictures with the fx a legend created by one and saved by the other . the car wasn t running then , but its futuristic carbon fiber was still there as were its eye popping design , and its embattled but ambitious transmission . its advancements in design , construction , and technology make the fx a sort of automotive missing link . the fx was definitely ahead of its time for having a semi automatic gearbox , says kim . the sultan and his brother really were r ampampd for many high end automakers . they were building custom bespoke cars that not only had unique bodies and interiors , but sometimes exotic technologies . and the money was limitless . garella maintains that the true masterpiece of the fx is its body . not for the design , but for the materials . today , carbon fiber technology is commonplace in supercars , and even many sports cars . bmw now uses carbon fiber reinforced plastic cfrp for both the frame and the body of their i , as well as multiple parts of the new series luxury sedan . the fx helped set the stage for a new movement in mass production as automakers aim for weight savings to improve performance and fuel economy . and the money was limitless . for me personally , and i think also for pininfarina , it was the project in which we learned most about carbon fiber and the composite process , he says . i think for sure that was the project where we brought back the maximum know how at that point . never intended for public consumption , the fx led to the adoption of many new ideas that are common practice in the cars that drive our streets every day . for now , it waits in the museum for an overhaul that may never come , in exile from those that commissioned it the product of a man who poured years into making it a reality and would use it to influence his trend setting creations in the future . when he visited the marconi museum , the sight of the fx was a welcome one for garella . prince hakeem wanted to have all the cars with semi auto transmission , says garella . he thought that this was the future . he was right . design by james barehamproduct by frank biedited by michael zelenko and chris ziegler lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gt	 on christmas eve , , beyonc and jay z hit a small soho boutique for a , shopping spree . normally , this might not have been newsworthy . but the boutique in question was babeland , an upscale sex toy shop known more for its collection of butt plugs than balenciaga . within days , the story was all over the tabloids appearing first on radar , then making the rounds to virtually every news outlet with an interest in bey , jay , or babeland . for most reporters , the story seemed to be less that the carters had bought sex toys their sexual adventurousness having already been well documented in drunk in love and more that they d spent so much . how , exactly , was it possible to spend thousands of dollars on marital aids ? pleasing the massesjimmyjane took vibrators from sleazy to chic now , can it take them mainstream ? by lux alptraum on christmas eve , , beyonc and jay z hit a small soho boutique for a , shopping spree . normally , this might not have been newsworthy . but the boutique in question was babeland , an upscale sex toy shop known more for its collection of butt plugs than balenciaga . within days , the story was all over the tabloids appearing first on radar , then making the rounds to virtually every news outlet with an interest in bey , jay , or babeland . for most reporters , the story seemed to be less that the carters had bought sex toys their sexual adventurousness having already been well documented in drunk in love and more that they d spent so much . how , exactly , was it possible to spend thousands of dollars on marital aids ? though the couple s shopping list was never publicly revealed , one source noted that the purchased items included something gold plated , which set a number of reporters off on a tear . refinery offered up a list of possible contenders , with the jimmyjane eternity a sleek , diamond studded , gold vibrator retailing for , leading the list . the clerk who waited on the carters told me that the gold plated item in question was , in fact , the lelo olga , but that the couple had also acquired the jimmyjane hello touch , a finger vibrator popular with couples . how , exactly , was it possible to spend , on marital aids ? to those who hadn t paid attention to pleasure products since carrie bradshaw met the rabbit habit on sex and the city , the story was something of a revelation . gone were the days of cheaply made , and occasionally toxic , vibrators . a new class of items had taken over the market , and they were fashionable , aspirational , and high end . how did we get from the rabbit habit to the little eternity ? much of the credit goes to jimmyjane , a small , san francisco based sex toy company . over the past decade plus , it has aggressively worked to create a high end , luxury category within the pleasure product industry . but now the company that defined the luxury sex toy market is poised to release an entirely new line , livesexy . a mid priced homage to the company s celebrated premium products , livesexy promises to bring affordable luxury to the market , finally making the aspirational jimmyjane a much more accessible brand . can the brand that brought sex toys from sleazy to chic lead the charge to finally make them completely mainstream ? jimmyjane s intro after over a decade in san francisco s potrero hills , jimmyjane moved offices to larkspur , ca in the summer of . the company s two story office sits in a cute little office park nestled between the water of san francisco bay and sir francis drake boulevard . inside , the decor is chic and white , with display cases showing off some of the company s signature products as well as the awards they ve won , and framed posters from past ad campaigns adorning the office walls . since october , jimmyjane has been under the management of robert rheaume , a self described category and brand builder whose resume includes stints at odwalla , pepsico , lifefactory , and sigg usa . an outgoing , affable man with tan skin and a broad smile , rheaume speaks at length when he gets excited which he often does when the conversation turns to the future of his company . vibrators were introduced as a treatment for the vaguely defined female trouble known as hysteriarheaume isn t the only new face at the jimmyjane office . apart from jimmyjane s vice president of communications , molly murphy , who s been with the company since , everyone i spoke to joined the company within the last year . that includes industrial designer carolina formoso , a stylish , dark haired woman who speaks in lightly accented english . hired in , she won rheaume over by including a vibrator she d designed as a school project in her portfolio . though jimmyjane s mission to make vibrators everyday objects feels radical , in actuality it s a kind of a return to the past . vibrators were introduced to the american public as medical devices , a treatment for the vaguely defined female trouble known as hysteria , whose symptoms only seemed to subside after the inducement of orgasm then known as a paroxysm . initially invented as a way to provide relief to doctors and their overworked wrists , by the s , vibrators had become common household items , a wellness device deemed so innocuous they were even advertised in the sears catalog . but sometime in the early th century , vibrators began to appear in stag films , and suddenly the jig was up . soon the products became the domain of sleazy , sex crazed perverts a reputation they retained until at least the s . that s when pioneers like dell williams and joani blank opened female friendly sex toy shops that began to reposition the vibrator as an essential tool for female pleasure . but the available products still lagged behind their boosters ambitions . it wasn t until the turn of the century that a higher quality product emerged on the market toxic jelly rubber was abandoned for body safe silicone , dry cell batteries were replaced with rechargeable lithium ion ones , and some manufacturers even began to offer warranties . in the most stunning turn of all , a few companies began to position their erotic products as luxury devices an aspirational fashion accessory sported by enviable icons like kate moss and beyonc . suddenly , vibrators weren t just the sexually liberated woman s dirty little secret they were a sign of sophistication and chic . suddenly , vibrators were a sign of sophistication and chicand jimmyjane is largely responsible for that shift . the company was founded in , when industrial designer ethan imboden saw an opportunity to inject innovation and high end design into an industry better known for cheap products made from shabby materials . imboden , a stylish , attractive man who combines high design chic with bay area startup savvy and energy , wanted to create the kind of sex toy line a designer could be proud to have in their own bedroom one with beautiful branding , body safe materials , and thoughtful , ergonomic engineering and design . his first product was the little something , a slim , metal rod with a single speed and a replaceable motor that ran near silently an especially impressive bit of engineering when you consider the close relationship between vibration and sound . initially eschewing sex shops , imboden s team targeted mainstream retailers , positioning their products as accessories to a luxury lifestyle rather than a cheap , seedy thrill . by , the company had developed relationships with mainstream retailers like fred segal , c . o . bigelow , and harvey nichols a year later , jimmyjane products were being stocked at the wynn in las vegas . as the aughts drew to a close , it started to seem as though the brand was everywhere in parisian sephora in bed bath ampamp beyond in brookstone even in the minibar of w hotels . jimmyjane president robert rheaumeyves b har lent his talents , designing three different vibratorsand it wasn t just retailers who were under the jimmyjane spell . the company won numerous design awards , receiving recognition not just from the adult industry but also mainstream publications including i . d . magazine , businessweek , and fast company . tank girl creator jamie hewlett and dave stewart from the eurythmics came on board to collaborate on limited edition lines . yves b har , the founder of fuseproject and chief creative officer of jawbone , lent his talents to the company , designing a series of three different vibrators forms , , and that challenged the idea of what a vibrator could , or should , be . investors took notice . in , the company was featured in a new york times article that noted jimmyjane had six venture capitalists among its investors and was gearing up to raise a second round in the neighborhood of million to million . the company claimed the round would also include marquee funds . to many , it seemed clear that jimmyjane was on track to change the consumer experience of sex toys , but also the entire nature of how adult products were created , funded , and enjoyed . but despite their numerous successes , jimmyjane still managed to fall short of their lofty goals . early partnerships with mainstream retailers didn t live up to their potential jimmyjane may have gotten their products in the door , but in many cases , customers just wound up confused both by their presence and their price . pricey vibrators were already an unusual item pricey vibrators at bed bath ampamp beyond left customers baffled . while investment helped kick the company into hyperdrive , it also created expectations that were hard to live up to . as accomplished as the company was , it was still fighting an uphill battle against anti sex stigma , while also tackling the expensive proposition of developing high quality , beautifully designed hardware . the cost of designing their first multispeed vibrator nearly tanked the companyvibrators can be expensive to bring to market in a piece , imboden explained how designing the form , jimmyjane s first multispeed vibrator , nearly tanked the company . the product which featured cordless charging and was fully submersible was incredibly complex . imboden wrote that the product ended up eight months behind , over budget , and selling at almost zero margins , a phrase few vcs are eager to hear . in february , it was announced that diamond products a holding company with a focus on the sex toy industry had acquired jimmyjane . jimmyjane now found itself partnered with pipedream products , another diamond products subsidiary that , in many ways , represented everything jimmyjane had been founded to upend . pipedream s extensive offerings include the sort of cheap , crass products more readily associated with darkly lit porn stores than high end sex boutiques blow up dolls and huge , hyper realistic dildos . though jimmyjane s product development , creative , online , sales , and day to day operations teams would remain in san francisco , fans of the brand feared that this was the beginning of the end especially when imboden left the company to join design firm frog . across the industry , many wondered whether this new jimmyjane would sustain the innovation , enthusiasm , and creativity that had defined the company in its first decade . jimmyjane s intro how is rheaume different than his predecessor ? i can tell time . ethan can build a clock and tell time , rheaume says modestly . ampnbspwe re sitting at the conference table in his office the only private room in jimmyjane s largely open work space . the full livesexy line , arranged by color , sits laid out across the table in front of us . a print of lips on the wall behind rheaume s table coordinates nicely with the the pink and dark purple hues of the livesexy line . rheaume sees himself as simply the custodian of imboden s vision , but his tenure has already resulted in a dramatically different business strategy . in the two years since acquisition , jimmyjane s methods have changed where product roll outs used to be a rare , heavily hyped affair , new products are now added to the jimmyjane catalogue at a rapid clip . it took three years to debut forms , , and in contrast , forms , , and appeared in quick succession over the course of . roll outs used to be heavily hyped affairs now new products are added at a rapid clip the product cycle has been much faster , murphy says . we needed to introduce more products , she continues , noting that it s something you need for your retailers , and just to keep the company relevant , keep it growing . enter the livesexy line , a marked departure from the original vision of jimmyjane as an aspirational , exclusive brand . the livesexy line is pitched as affordable luxury , a way that more budget minded customers can still get in on the jimmyjane experience . where the original jimmyjane products all retailed for well above , the livesexy products are available for as low as and no more than . this isn t the first time that the company has made a play for budget minded consumers . jimmyjane introduced the usual suspects line in , which selected popular vibrators like the rabbit vibe , pocket rocket , and slimline , remade them in white , and provided them with classy jimmyjane branded packaging . the usual suspects weren t original , but the jimmyjane touch had a magic effect our customers love them because they had a warranty and they had beautiful , giftable packaging , coyote amrich , purchasing manager for san francisco based sex toy shop good vibrations , told me . for some consumers , the packaging and branding were enough to elevate otherwise unexceptional products . but with the livesexy line , jimmyjane is doing something different , crafting a mid market homage to the company s existing jimmyjane products . the intro mimics the shape of the two pronged form the intro shares the form s body hugging curves . the livesexy products aren t merely the form toys with cheaper parts they ve been thoughtfully redesigned for a mid tier budget and a beginner mindset . as i surveyed the toys by her desk , formoso walked me through the work that went into creating a line that s both stylish and accessible . the livesexy line uses less expensive dry cell batteries instead of rechargeable lithium ones . because the casing for the former is so much larger , it necessarily requires a larger toy but formoso feared that merely scaling up the size would render the products clunky and cheap feeling . when you re designing something , you don t want it to look like you just scaled it up or stretched it in illustrator , formoso says . you have to really go back and redesign how the components are going to fit in . the goal is to lock in loyal customers long before they re able to afford one of jimmyjane s pricier productsthe intro , a thin , rectangular panty vibe that looks more like a remote control than a vibrator , may have been her biggest challenge . if the product had merely been scaled up , it would have been huge perhaps twice the size of the original a potential deal breaker for a vibrator intended to be discreetly tucked inside a user s underwear . formoso s solution was a product that s longer than the original , but comparable in width and thickness . for a product that retails at less than the luxury version , that s a tremendous achievement . the toys aren t merely bigger and cheaper , they re also simpler to use . unlike the forms , the intro toys offer a single button , with three speeds and three modes . the forms have buttons . it s a simpler , more user friendly interface one that s less intimidating for beginners . i took my own experience from the first time i ever thought about buying a vibrator , formoso says . when my friend showed me a vibrator for the first time it was beautiful , and it had all these functions . all these modes , all these speeds . and it was great , but it was a little too overwhelming for me , because i hadn t used a vibrator before . formoso hopes that the livesexy s simplified offerings will ease new users into the world of pleasure products , encouraging them to explore and educate themselves . ultimately , says rheaume , the goal is to lock in loyal customers long before they re able to afford one of jimmyjane s pricier products . in the same way that cadillac might sell a young buyer an ats in the hopes that they ll eventually upgrade to a ct , jimmyjane sees the livesexy line as a way to familiarize younger , or budget minded , buyers with the designs of high end offerings . if you ve fallen for the intro s two pronged body and dual motors , you ll be eager to switch to the more compact form , which offers a rechargeable battery , more modes , and a more nuanced interface . above jimmyjane s intro below , the form set back from the bustling santa monica boulevard , the west hollywood pleasure chest is partially obscured by lush greenery . though its neon signs don t scream upscale boutique , inside the store the west coast sibling of the shop where carrie bradshaw discovered the rabbit vibe a friendly , educated staff helps customers pick from a wide selection of toys , lingerie , and other adult products . products at the pleasure chest are organized both by price and type , and jimmyjane products can be found throughout . the form line occupies a coveted display along the back wall , where the store showcases its premium products . nearby sat a tower showcasing toys from competitor lelo and other similarly priced offerings from companies like fun factory also receive dedicated shelf space . the pleasure chest offers an almost overwhelming selection of toys , highlighting another of jimmyjane s challenges . in imboden entered a space suffering from a dearth of decent products rheaume s company faces a field crowded with competitors . in there was a dearth of decent products today there s a field crowded with competitors twelve years ago , it was like , thank god , there s a new product we can add , good vibrations amrich told me . and now we pick and choose by necessity . thanks in part to jimmyjane s work , starting a sex toy company carries a lot less stigma than it used to . and that means an incredibly crowded market . according to amrich , sex toy trade shows are now full of brand new companies , offering full lines with thousands of products . unlike some of its peers babeland in new york , or good vibrations in san francisco the pleasure chest displays many of its wares in their packaging , which could make a difference for the livesexy line . out of the box , the intro might not seem radically different from something like the similarly priced california exotics body ampamp soul connection but compare the packaging side by side , and the intro clearly broadcasts a higher level of class . if popularity of the usual suspects line is any indication , that branding could make all the difference . though vibrators are ostensibly just about sensation the prettiest toy is ultimately a failure if it doesn t lead to an orgasm they re also signifiers of who we are and how we want to be seen . the livesexy line also gives newcomers a way to explore many different types of stimulation for less than the price of a form an appealing prospect given that , once used , a vibrator can t be exchanged or returned . taking a risk on a pricey vibrator only to discover its shape doesn t work for your body is an unappealing proposition . not everyone is convinced that the livesexy line holds promise . i wish they had come out with different shapes , amrich told me . as a concept , i really love high end brands coming out with affordable lines , she continued , pointing to products like fun factory s jam , joupie , and jazzie as entry level vibrators that familiarize new , or more budget minded , buyers with a brand s offerings . jimmyjane s director of product development , miranda doylefor amrich , the replication of the form line s shapes , but at a lower price point , runs the risk of cannibalizing the form line s existing market . in a small boutique , where shelf space is at a premium , it can be difficult to justify stocking two aggressively similar product lines particularly when there are so many other competing products at both price points . the first run of the livesexy line has already sold outnonetheless rheaume remains convinced that the livesexy line was the right move . we absolutely explored if not dozens , hundreds of different shapes and designs , rheaume told me . but we always fell back on our classic designs . in a market where other brands were already knocking off jimmyjane designs , offering inferior products and subpar experiences at lower cost , it made sense to reclaim the designs and create a budget minded line in house . why not take our classic jimmyjane shapes that have already become ubiquitous in the marketplace and own them back again ? rheaume asked . according the rheaume , the move is paying off he told me that after making the rounds at trade shows , the first run of the livesexy line has already sold out . as the company expands , boutiques like good vibrations may be less essential to jimmyjane s bottom line . though the company remains loyal to the stores that have made it successful , rheaume routinely mentions retailers like target and walgreens both of whom have begun stocking vibrators in recent years and have already approached jimmyjane and even healthy grocery chains like whole foods , wegmans , or sprouts as possible retail spaces . it s in this context that the livesexy line may make the most sense . while the form line s products might be too expensive for the average big box customer , the intro toys could be very attractive to this audience especially if they re competing with low end products from companies like trojan and durex , whose wares currently dominate the aisles of mainstream retailers . compared to those toys , the livesexy line is a paragon of high design . at their lower prices , the livesexy line makes the products feel more like a sexy splurge than a serious investment . back in the early days of jimmyjane , when the form was stocked by retailers like bed bath ampamp beyond , sales associates for whom the product was something of an anomaly weren t up to the challenge of educating the consumer about the value of a pleasure product . now they won t have to . jimmyjane s intro we want to make sure that the retailers we align with are people that believe in the category and more importantly believe in our brand , rheaume says . i believe if we do it right , with the right partner it will bring incremental users into the space . and typically when you bring incremental users into a category or space , they will seek out those specialty stores for the broader , deeper , richer experience and possibilities that are available to them . rheaume , a comic book fan , likens it to manga and comic books being stocked by barnes ampamp noble . many feared the bookselling giant would lead to the end of specialty comic book stores like forbidden planet , but that wasn t what happened . instead , box stores attracted a whole new audience an audience that then went on to support smaller stores that offered a broader selection and more knowledgeable staff . what made me so excited about coming over to this assignment was ethan and the team back in , they transcended the category . the category today would not look anything like it does today if jimmyjane did not give birth to it , rheaume tells me back in his office . i think there s another opportunity here for jimmyjane to democratize the sex toy experience by bringing the premium experience to the everyday user . no one knows yet if jimmyjane s new strategy will be successful . selling affordable , well made vibrators to whole foods patrons may not have been ethan imboden s original vision . but it could easily have a far greater impact on the sex toy landscape than everything else the company has accomplished thus far . if the company is successful , they ll have helped the vibrator restore its reputation , returning it to its status as a common household object . only this time , the women buying their vibrators from the modern day equivalent of the sears catalog won t need to be coy about what , exactly , they re purchasing . and that , ultimately , is the most important cultural shift of all . portrait photography by vjeran pavicdesign and product photography by james barehamedited by elizabeth lopatto and michael zelenko lt ! var width window . width window . resize function if this . width ! width width this . width if width lt span . dropcap . removeattr class gt	 for a long time , the hopes and dreams of many virtual reality fans could be summed up with two words oculus rift . helped by the rise of cheap smartphone displays , oculus co founder palmer luckey took a technology that most people considered a retro curiosity and convinced them that it could change the world . the rift let you skydive without a parachute . it helped artists show the world through another person s eyes . it simulated beheading . it put you in fictional settings that ranged from kaiju fighting robots to jerry seinfeld s apartment . virtual reality isalways almost hereby adi robertson photography by james barehamfor a long time , the hopes and dreams of many virtual reality fans could be summed up with two words oculus rift . helped by the rise of cheap smartphone displays , oculus co founder palmer luckey took a technology that most people considered a retro curiosity and convinced them that it could change the world . the rift let you skydive without a parachute . it helped artists show the world through another person s eyes . it simulated beheading . it put you in fictional settings that ranged from kaiju fighting robots to jerry seinfeld s apartment . and then , slowly , the rift got company from competition like the htc vive and playstation vr , as well as totally new vr categories like google cardboard and oculus own mobile gear vr headset . consumer virtual reality went from a gaming peripheral to an all purpose entertainment device , and then to the next great evolution in computing . while oculus rift was no longer a synonym for virtual reality , oculus remained a central player , especially after facebook purchased it for an estimated billion . there was just one problem nobody knew what the rift would look like , or when it would come out . luckey and the rest of oculus leadership were adamant about not making promises they couldn t keep , or delivering an undercooked product two things that doomed consumer virtual reality decades ago . but after nearly four years , the finished oculus rift has shipped to its very first group of customers , and it s time to see whether the headset that started it all is still pushing the cutting edge of virtual reality . oculus rarely brags about its industrial design , but one of the best things it s done is make something so stereotypically geeky look relatively natural . the consumer rift is full of clever and thoughtful touches , starting with the delightfully soft rubberized carrying case it ships in , which makes the whole thing feel like a cyberpunk hacker s console . the all black headset is downright understated by gaming hardware standards , with a front of smooth rubber , sides coated in coarse cloth , and lenses surrounded by a web of lycra . it s tethered to a pc by a single wire , which runs out your left temple and along one of the adjustable side straps . william gibson s best known foray into virtual reality might be neuromancer , but the rift feels more like something from his design obsessed novel pattern recognition it s the kind of minimalist product that its brand allergic , coolhunting protagonist cayce pollard might approve of . the screen s clarity depends on precisely how it s angled toward your eyesgetting the rift to fit right can prove elusive at first . while there s a small focus knob at the bottom , a lot of the screen s clarity depends on precisely how it s angled toward your eyes , and it s easy to give yourself a headache by strapping it as tightly as possible to keep the best fit . but once you get used to wearing it , the headset feels lighter and more comfortable than most of its competition , sealing against your face with a firm but pliable ring of foam . since i have yet to break a sweat in the rift , i can t say how easy it is to clean , but the ring is removable and replaceable although there s no spare included . i also don t have to deal with wearing glasses , but my verge colleagues who do have had a positive response they could either fit the headset over moderately sized frames or , depending on their prescription , get the screen in focus without them . along with a cylindrical black tracking camera on a slender inch stand , the rift comes with ampnbsptwo accessories an xbox one gamepad and a small , simple device called the oculus remote . unlike sony and htc , oculus isn t launching the rift with a full controller of its own , since its oculus touch hardware will arrive in the second half of this year . for now , the chunky and colorful xbox gamepad seems slightly out of place alongside the sleek rift design . the oval shaped black remote , by contrast , fits right in , although its construction doesn t feel as solid as the rest of the system . the rift is something i d be happy to have in my living room , and compared to the developer focused oculus devices of years past , it s a breeze to set up . the meter headset tether ends with one usb and one hdmi port , and the tracking camera is plugged in with its own usb cable there s no external power cable or controller box for either piece . you ll just download oculus windows app and run through a short , though descriptive , setup checklist before getting into vr . granted , getting to this point requires having a powerful gaming desktop , which can produce plenty of glitches on its own . and since most pcs have only one hdmi port , you ll need to use a different connection for your monitor , an extra and not totally intuitive step for many people . for the most part , though , it s as easy as i can imagine installing a totally new kind of computer hardware to be . screenshots from top to bottom eve valkyrie , chronos , darknet none of this matters if the view from inside the rift is no good and fortunately , it holds up . the headset contains a pair of lenses , a gyroscope and accelerometer , a pair of decent quality removable earphones , and two x screens . the image they produce is bright and relatively clear although it still has a bit of the graininess that almost all vr headsets struggle with , and the overall resolution is about the same as the single screened gear vr . any bright lights in the center of the virtual world sometimes reflect what looks like a lens flare around the edges of your vision , but it s minimally distracting . the rift s field of view doesn t seem better than previous versions , but it s wide enough to give you a decent amount of peripheral vision . there s almost no visible latency as long as you stay within sight of the camera , it mirrors your head movement precisely , even when you turn completely around . the rift s single tracking camera doesn t give you as much space to move around in as the room scale htc vive or a two camera oculus touch setup , but it supports a few steps in any direction i measured a functional square of space around six and a half feet wide and four and a half deep . the biggest problem is that it s impossible to tell where that space ends until you step outside it , causing a sickening jerk as the world stops responding to your motion . right now , it s not particularly noticeable , because almost none of the rift launch titles ask you to move . a few make sense standing up , like the diorama like tower defense game defense grid , but the vast majority seem intended to play in a stationary chair , looking straight forward with occasional turns of the head . the result is a lot of games where vr feels like an addition , not a transformation . most of the first person experiences could translate to flat screens without much trouble , and some like space exploration game adrift are already coming to both vr and flatscreen platforms like pc and playstation . the plethora of third person action games like lucky s tale might need to be redesigned slightly for players who can t lean over the environments , but they re still close adaptations of established formats . the titles that feel most clearly designed for virtual reality were early experiments that came to gear vr before the consumer rift . that includes keep talking and nobody explodes , which takes advantage of a headset s isolating effects , and darknet , whose sprawling puzzle maps would look painfully cramped on a smaller screen . the result is a lot of games where vr feels like an addition , not a transformationin some cases , vr still fills genuine gaps in a familiar experience . ccp s eve valkyrie could certainly have been developed as a standard space fighting game , a genre whose controls usually confound me . but somehow , being able to see the cockpit all around me makes it easier to understand how my ship should move , and using the rift s head tracking to fire missiles feels much better than pointing a joystick . racing or flying simulations aren t things that could only be done in vr , but it s arguably the best place for them . conversely , vr friendly design occasionally hampers a game . chronos , a beautiful fantasy game that s become one of my favorite rift launch titles , uses the same combat mechanics as dark souls . unlike dark souls , the camera moves between fixed angles for each area instead of directly following the player . this gives you a perfect view of its beautiful environments , and it cuts the risk of motion sickness to almost zero . but it also means that large enemies can block your view of the protagonist , and the camera will disorientingly pop to a completely different location if you move too far during a battle . the ultimate goal for vr gaming , though , is to get to a point where we re talking about experiences instead of the technology that enables them . and the rift s launch is the first time i ve played anything that could rival a decently made non vr computer game for polish and scope . having high quality hardware to play with has helped make this possible nothing is fun if you can t see the images clearly and get sick after half an hour , two common problems with the very first rift development kits . so has the fact that developers now stand some chance of making money off their work . whatever the exact confluence of factors , chronos and eve valkyrie are more than just good picks if you happen to have a vr headset . if you like flying or fighting in video games , they ll make you want a vr headset so you can play them maybe not badly enough to spend , but it s a start . beyond that , it may take some time to make the rift s virtual world more coherent and interesting . the main headset menu exists in a stark modernist room with a rumpled and totally incongruous carpet in the middle , a weird bit of skeuomorphism that s just substantial enough to feel like it ought to be personalizable . instead , there are only flat icons for a store , a library , and a list of friends that can join you in eve valkyrie or other multiplayer titles . if you re not interested in playing games , you can experience a few interactive short films on the rift , like oculus lost or penrose s the rose and i . virtual reality studio jaunt has an app , and oculus has its own photo and video tools , which play both vr and non vr files from your pc or sources like twitch and facebook . but the rift doesn t seem to have imported the gear vr s various non gaming social experiences , its vr versions of netflix and hulu , or its large collection of degree video apps . a feature that would have allowed xbox one owners to stream non vr console games to the headset , promised last year , also won t be live at launch . whatever else you can do , there s no doubt that games like eve valkyrie and chronos provide the headset s most immersive moments . when we talk about immersion in vr , we re often talking about two separate effects . the first is a sense of realism , of connecting your physical body perfectly to your virtual presence . the second is the sort of immersion that a really engrossing role playing game like fallout can induce the knowledge that you could lose a whole weekend to it without even noticing . think of it as i m really there versus i m never leaving . the rift feels as close to being a brain in a jar as humanly possiblethe oculus rift can produce less of this first type than the htc vive right now , and it probably will until the touch controllers ship . but that might actually mean that it offers more of the second . where our vive development kit s weight and motion controls tire me out enough to want periodic breaks , i can easily spend two or three hours at a time in the rift i could probably go almost indefinitely if i didn t have to check email and jot down review notes . vr game developers have yet to produce the kind of plus hour time sinks that are standard in pc and console gaming , but it s been almost as hard to tear myself away from chronos as it was to turn off the playstation during my bloodborne addiction . this allays one of my biggest fears about virtual reality that headsets will remain a platform for minute novelty experiences instead of ambitious longform games and fiction . on a purely physical level , however , i m more ambivalent . motion controlled virtual reality experiences games and apps that ask me to mime things like shooting or painting with my hands have gotten me physically engaged with computing in a way i ve never been , and they leave me feeling better as a result . i love the feeling of getting real exercise in a virtual sword fighting game , or of walking around a real room to see the artwork i ve created . sitting down with the rift , meanwhile , feels as close to being a brain in a jar as humanly possible . james bareham playing non vr video games is already a sedentary activity , and i find myself moving even less in the rift , since i can t get distracted by my phone or lean over to grab a drink of water . as oculus writes on a warning screen that appears every time you boot up the rift in using this headset , you will lose the ability to see and hear what s actually around you . in third person experiences , you can t even see that you have a body . i come out of stand up vr games energized , even when my arms ache and i m sweating . i leave long seated rift sessions with the same fatigue i get from spending a night hunched over my gaming pc , with the occasional side of nausea and eye strain . i m in no position to advise anyone on the potential medical risks of vr , but i haven t had any serious issues with the rift so far . very long virtual reality excursions think days , not hours have anecdotally weakened people s eyesight for short periods , and my own eyes would hurt a little after a couple of hours , like a more extreme version of staring at a computer screen late into the night . my other problems have been similarly mundane . vr s constant head tilts exacerbate a neck and shoulder pain that i developed a few months ago , and games that involve a lot of fast walking with a controller still make me sick . at one point i got out of a morning session dizzy and lightheaded i wondered if i had finally experienced some kind of reaction to leaving reality until i realized that i was just hungry after pushing my meals back for more rift time . just a few more months has been the mantra of virtual realitytalking about any physical downsides to vr plays into all sorts of unpleasant dystopian tropes . you ve got shades of the matrix , where people s bodies atrophy while they re living in a machine constructed dreamworld of the zombie like vr junkies in shadowrun and of every other movie , book , and video game about people ruining their real world lives to enjoy a virtual one . and there is something a little eerie about putting on a headset in a room with other people , then coming out hours later with red grooves worn into your cheeks and realizing that you re all alone . but it s not fundamentally different from any other intense gaming session , except that vr s nearly mystical reputation primes us to blame or praise it for every unusual feeling we experience around a headset . if anything , the vive and oculus touch have shown us how much motion controlled vr could improve the status quo . just a few more months has been the mantra of virtual reality since people started getting excited about the oculus rift , and saying it after the headset is released feels like either a huge cop out or a sign that the vr we want may never actually arrive . but it s impossible to think of all the unreleased oculus touch experiences i ve tried like three dimensional painting tool quill , old west shooting gallery dead ampamp buried , and a vr version of rock band and not feel like the rift s best days are still ahead of it . for the first time , though , there s something to do while you wait . the high cost of buying and running high end vr headsets makes them inaccessible to many people , and the rift in particular is relentlessly focused on gaming . within these limitations , though , the rift makes a good case for seated vr , and it lays a solid foundation for what s to come . the headset you can buy today is not oculus most ambitious vision for virtual reality ampnbspbut it s a vision that oculus has successfully delivered on . good stuffgreat looking industrial designa few really good seated vr gamespromising future game catalog with touch controllersbad stuffexpensive , especially with gaming pc cost figured innot much to do outside gaminglack of motion controls at launch is a big weaknessverge score design by james barehamproduct by frank biedited by ross miller lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gt lt ! var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene , invertx true , inverty true , limitx false , limity false , originx . , originy . gt	 matt mcrae is fired up about remote controls . or , more specifically , about getting rid of them . mcrae is the chief technology officer of vizio , a company that sells more tvs and with them , remotes than any other company in america . and he thinks remote controls are very , very stupid . i can t believe we have rubber buttons and a plastic housing with double a batteries , he says . we re navigating from remotes that were invented in the s . that needs to be dynamited . remote , controlledhow vizio and google radically reinvented the tvby nilay patel photography by paul barshon matt mcrae is fired up about remote controls . or , more specifically , about getting rid of them . mcrae is the chief technology officer of vizio , a company that sells more tvs and with them , remotes than any other company in america . and he thinks remote controls are very , very stupid . i can t believe we have rubber buttons and a plastic housing with double a batteries , he says . we re navigating from remotes that were invented in the s . that needs to be dynamited . what if all the tvs in your home were just extensions of your phone ? and mcrae has dynamite in hand . vizio s new p series tvs are a radical departure from the rest of the industry . unlike the smart tvs that dominate the market , the p series completely lacks an on screen interface there are no apps or menus or controls or even picture settings on the tv itself . there s nothing . instead , vizio has partnered with google to redesign the entire tv experience around the google cast streaming protocol , the same technology used in the wildly popular chromecast streaming stick . the p series comes with a six inch android tablet , and everything is controlled by the new vizio smartcast app . there s also an ios version of the app , and any other app or service that supports cast can send content to the tv . it s a simple idea with enormous implications what if all the tvs in your home were just extensions of your phone ? the era of having a couple of buttons on a physical remote that sits there and does nothing else is going to end , says mcrae , his voice rising . we re the ones who are going to end it . vizio chief technology officer matt mcraepeople have been trying to smash computers and televisions together since the s , a concept generally called smart tv . hang out with people building smart tv interfaces long enough , and you ll notice an entire language has evolved around it . they talk about leaning back versus leaning forward and solving foot interface issues and replacing input one and a host of other terms that all revolve around a single problem no one has ever managed to really solve navigating tv interfaces sucks . a better remote control is not the answer . it s particularly awful if you have to hunt and peck with cursor keys on a regular remote , but no other solution is that much better . it doesn t matter if you ship a full size keyboard with a trackpad , like sony and logitech have done in the past . it doesn t matter if you stick a bunch of qwerty keys on a regular remote to make typing easier , like tivo and vizio have each tried . it doesn t matter if you build the world s sleekest touch remote and ask people to use apps on the screen , like the new apple tv . it doesn t matter if you go all in on voice search and let people just ask for what they want , like roku and amazon and a host of others are doing . none of these ideas have ever cracked the fundamental problem tvs are for watching things , not doing them . a better remote control is not the answer , says mcrae . that s the wrong way to think about it . we ve done touchpad remotes . we ve done keyboards . we ve prototyped motion sensing . we ve gone down all those paths and we think they re all cul de sacs . the answer is to get rid of the remote control as a device category . any screen should be a remote control . vizio is a quiet company ampnbspmost people don t even realize that it s based in america , headquartered in irvine , california . it s also a tiny company , with just about employees . yet by designing products in the states and leveraging tight relationships with manufacturing partners like amtran and hon hai to undercut competitors pricing , vizio has come to dominate the us tv market in recent years . vizio tvs routinely sit atop the charts at review sites like cnet and the wirecutter , and the company currently leads in both smart tv and overall tv unit shares over rivals like samsung and sony . the company doesn t spend a ton on marketing , instead focusing on what it calls the reco rate , or how likely vizio owners are to recommend the products to their family and friends . mcrae proudly says it s the highest in the industry . but over time , vizio s yahoo based via apps smart tv platform had become dated the company needed a new platform . the company could have picked any number of other smart tv solutions including google s own android tv but mcrae wanted to do something more radical try and reset the entire model of how people interact with the screens in their lives . the mental and strategic leap is breaking up navigation and consumption , he says . a handheld device has proven to be an extraordinarily adept navigation device , and it has become an extraordinarily personalized experience . that is not something a television hanging on a wall ten feet away from you will ever be . a tv should be focused on rendering video in the most perfect way possible . the company s solution is the vizio tablet remote , which isn t a remote at all it s a six inch tablet running stock android lollipop on an eight core snapdragon processor with a very nice p screen , a soft touch back , dual speakers , and a wireless charging cradle . it lacks any dedicated buttons to control the tv it only turns into a remote when you open vizio s new smartcast app or kick off a streaming session from another app that supports cast , like hulu or netflix . but you don t have to cast anything to the tv at all after all , it s just an android tablet . you can go ahead and watch netflix on the smart remote if you want . you can download apps from the play store . you can cast netflix to the tv and use the tablet to check twitter . you can let a kid play games on the tablet and control the entire tv with the smartcast app on your iphone . the tablet is basically another small tv . the tablet is basically another small tvthis seemingly simple approach represents a complete reversal of the industry standard idea that mobile devices are second screens in the living room the phone in your hand showing your twitter while you watch game of thrones on tv , for example . vizio understood the power of bringing the interaction model to the second screen , says mario queiroz , the google vp in charge of cast . they understood the ability they would have to build a lot of experiences you couldn t build on the first screen . with the new p series , the vizio tablet remote is the first screen , and the k hdr television is the second . it s hard not to contrast vizio s kill the remote strategy against apple s new apple tv , which is entirely built around the new touch based siri remote . apple is extending ios into the traditional first screen tv interface vizio wants to erase that interface entirely . companies that are newer to the living room space have yet to go all the way down to the end of the cul de sac , but they will , says mcrae when i ask him about apple . they ll get there and they ll realize that they re stuck , and no matter what you do with a tiny little remote control in your hand , you re not going to be able to provide the advanced navigation consumers demand from apps and services . vizio s mcrae , design vp scott mcmanigal and software and services head bill baxter look at a prototype smartcast speaker . work on the p series started two years ago , after google first introduced the popular chromecast streaming stick . vizio had already built an android tv streaming box called the co star , and quickly reached out to google s cast team . it was kind of a meeting in the lobby , just very quickly , because we d been working with that team , says mcrae . vizio wanted to use cast as the platform to power its next generation of televisions , but there was a lot of work to be done cast didn t support actually running a tv . it also didn t support two major innovations vizio was keen on introducing k streaming and the new dolby vision high dynamic range standard , both of which represent major upgrades over standard tvs . it s not like a physical dongle just slapped in the back , says mcrae . it was actually a very deep integration . you want to be able to cast right on top of hdmi and have it seamlessly switch . their product will get better and better over time . the cast software is interacting directly with the tv firmware , says queiroz . our experience with chromecast significantly helped with building the vizio tv experience , and what we re learning with working with a partner like vizio will definitely help us with the chromecast lineup . vizio and google worked closely to extend the capabilities of cast , eventually building an entirely new framework for cast that let it hook into the p series while allowing vizio s code to control things like technical picture settings . both sides were wary of creating another variant of cast , confusing or fragmenting one of the largest streaming platforms on the market . the work eventually led to a unique system design google actually controls the cast software on the p series , which is kept separate from the rest of vizio s software . it will stay completely up to date with all the chromecast dongles in the field , says mcrae . google has the ability to update the cast library at will . all of the innovation we re putting into google cast will be fed into the vizio tvs , just as it is with the chromecast . their product will get better and better over time , says queiroz . we re constantly updating the platform . the updates won t all happen simultaneously , but queiroz says one of google s goals is to keep the entire cast ecosystem pure and in sync with feature updates . we re building a great cast experience , and they re building a great tv , says queiroz . google is open to other tv makers using cast in the same way , but the company started with vizio because they really wanted to get it right . we re at the very start of this , but we think there s a lot more we can do , queiroz says . there s a really huge ecosystem we can build here . and building a huge ecosystem around a platform is the entire game in television right now . this is an all out smart tv platform warvizio filed to go public last year , and the company s s filing suggest that it was platform concerns that prompted mcrae and his team to run away from a traditional smart tv platform strategy . we do not currently have arrangements with all of the popular content providers , including some content providers that are available on competitive devices , such as espn and hbo go , the filing states in its risks section . furthermore , our arrangements with our current content providers typically involve no significant long term commitments if we are unable to provide a competitive entertainment offering through our smart tv discovery and engagement software , our ability to attract and retain consumers would be harmed . meaning vizio s current smart tv platform doesn t have some of the most popular services , and there s no guarantee any services will be available in the future . and the problem is getting worse it s hard to imagine any video service having the time , resources , or desire to create apps for every platform in the massively fragmented smart tv landscape . samsung tvs run tizen lg tvs run webos . sony uses android tv amazon s popular fire tv devices run their own version of android with a separate store and support . roku has its own platform the xbox one and playstation each demand custom apps . and apple commands overwhelming developer interest and attention and has repurposed ios into tvos for the new apple tv . this is an all out smart tv platform war , and a lot of people are going to suffer through a lot of badly ported and hastily designed apps before it s all over . when netflix and hulu update their mobile apps , they re also updating the p series experiencebut by dropping any desire to put apps on the tv itself , vizio completely sidesteps the platform war entirely . every app in the android and the ios app stores that supports google cast is a p series app . and ios and android apps are the apps developers care about most , so they re often the best apps from a given service . that means when netflix and hulu update their android and ios apps , they re also updating the p series experience . vizio doesn t need to beg hbo and espn to support its tvs anymore , because they already support google cast and thus the p series . there s no nfl sunday ticket app for the apple tv , but the ios and android apps support cast , so p series owners can pay to stream football . and if a new app comes out that doesn t support cast , vizio has google and millions of chromecast owners to help make its case . our goal is that every app is available on every google cast device , says queiroz . from an actual engineering perspective , this tv is actually as complex and smart , if not more so , than any tv we ve ever made , says mcrae . we ve just made it seem extraordinarily simple . prototypes of vizio s smartcast tablet remote and wireless charging dockvizio isn t totally crazy . the p series will still accept the same ir remote commands as any other vizio tv for power , input selection , and volume , and it even comes with a small standard remote in the box to control those settings . if you already have a vizio tv and generally use a cable box or universal remote , you can swap a new p series tv into your setup and perhaps never know the difference , apart from the upgraded picture quality . but mcrae says testing reveals that most people only use the standard remote out of habit for a few days then they switch to the tablet entirely . the pace of people moving to the tablet was faster than i would have told you before we got hundreds of these things in the field , he says . it was quicker than i think any of us had expected . vizio s designers didn t want the tablet wandering around the houseif all remotes have one thing in common , it s that they inevitably get lost . but vizio s designers didn t want the tablet wandering around the house like any other device . we fumbled around with a few different ways of creating a home for the tablet , says vizio design chief scott mcmanigal . it really needed to have a connection to the tv . the work centered around rethinking what vizio calls the ceremonies of using a television . this is something that should have a ceremonial home in the living room , says mcrae . all those little ceremonies became really important . ultimately , the company had what mcrae calls an aha moment in the p series design process a wireless charging dock that uses magnets to pull the tablet down into alignment with a satisfying tug . the dock also holds the tablet upright so it can display notifications from across the room . if you have the smartcast app open when you put it on the dock , it ll automatically return to the main control screen when you pull it off . in testing , the team found that although the tablet has enough battery capacity for days of standby , the dock led people to grab the tablet when they wanted to start using the tv and replace it when they were done a new ceremony . the team also decided to omit a tv power button from the tablet , a subtle , but calculated decision . with a standard tv , you walk into the room , grab the remote , and hit power to begin browsing for something to watch . but the vizio team wanted to keep navigation focused on the tablet . if we had a hardware power button for the tv , we would have done something relatively stupid , because we were actually forcing an old ceremony on a new use case , says mcrae . we went through hundreds of these things . we don t have a separate team building our tablets , and then a separate team building our tvs , he adds , in obvious reference to samsung . the tablet and tv were designed in a single room , by a single team . that s the only way you could do it . they have to go together , says mcmanigal . they re very paired to be a premium experience . the tablet and tv were designed in a single room , by a single team . early prototypes of the tablet also featured more customization of android , but mcmanigal and his team decided against it . our initial assumption was that you d want to have all the remote control buttons on the home screen , he says . but it just became very cluttered and very difficult to determine exactly which buttons you d need . instead , the tablet remote features stock android , which means vizio can update it faster . it also means that the smartcast app can work in mostly the same way on every other android device it doesn t rely on any custom features to show notifications or place playback controls in the notification shade . the tablet also lacks an ir blaster it s not a universal remote , and can t control anything else in your home theater rack just yet . but vizio also happens to be the leading vendor of soundbars in america , and it s already showing off cast enabled soundbars and speakers . they ll come out later in the year , completing the ecosystem . audio products with tiny little ir remotes are just horrible , says mcrae . exporting the navigation element out to a screen that you re familiar with changes how you interact . we re really excited about opening a new wave of interaction with the devices in your house . tvs have historically been very , very dumb , and they re still among the dumbest gadgets in the home for many people , they re just displays for smarter devices . making them smart brings with it the same tradeoff as in the other smart devices in our lives data collection can dramatically improve consumer experiences , but at the expense of privacy . vizio has stumbled into a couple privacy related controversies in the past year a class action lawsuit alleges that the company is collecting personal information on its customers . meanwhile , the company s ipo filing revealed plans for a ratings service designed to compete with nielsen by anonymously collecting over billion data points a day from internet connected vizio televisions . mcrae says the lawsuit is based on speculation and that vizio will vigorously defend itself , but the ratings plans continue , and the technology is built into the p series . the p series blurs the lines between television and mobile devices we collect data on an anonymous and aggregate level there s no personal information collected at all . it s ratings , says mcrae . we re using it to make the product better , and we re using it to improve user experiences . we believe that next generation user experiences will benefit greatly from recommendations knowing that people who like football also like to watch seinfeld . if a consumer feels uncomfortable with that , we want them to opt out , and we re happy if they opt out . but new p series further blurs the lines between television and mobile devices . mobile devices are built on tracking both apple and google collect anonymous usage and diagnostic data from their phones unless you opt out , and virtually every major mobile app contains analytics tracking code as well . bringing television this far into the mobile era raises a new set of questions about what we re comfortable having tracked . mcrae doesn t seem worried . smartcast makes it a lot easier to actually communicate with end users and ask whether they want to opt in or out . moving navigation to a tablet is actually good at that . we want to make sure consumers are always comfortable interacting with the vizio brand . we re trying to be as privacy compliant and transparent as possible . tvs are unwieldy things that tend to get hung on a wall and stay there for a while they don t get upgraded nearly as often as cellphones , tablets , and laptops . the displays might still look fine after a few years , but the processors quickly fall behind the curve and things get even slower and more irritating to use . samsung has offered modular processor upgrades to combat this problem apple has stayed out of the tv hardware market in part because of it . but the new p series doesn t have any high end processing in it it just needs enough horsepower to decode and play a k hdr video stream over google cast . look , the octo core processor shouldn t be in the tv , it should be in the tablet you re holding , says mcrae . you may buy a new phone a year from now that has even more horsepower . guess what ? you ll be able to play a new class of games and streaming that up to our television without having to buy a new tv . has vizio invented its last tv ? considering the bleeding edge k hdr display in the p series , that seems like it could make the upgrade cycle even longer . i ask mcrae if vizio has just invented its last tv . we don t worry about device life cycle , he says , very seriously . our job is to build the best product we can build and have it last and be relevant to you for as long as possible . the p series represents a simple seeming but incredibly bold bet on what consumers find relevant in a television a bet that the only thing worth displaying on a tv screen is content , not navigation . it s a bet that people , especially younger people who ve never had cable , will want to buy a tv that s actually just a second screen for their phones . ampnbspand it s a bet that vizio can keep coming up with new ways to convince you to upgrade your tv . every time we build the tv that will end all tvs , especially when it comes to picture quality , there are new boundaries we can push , says mcrae . we ve got at least another three to five years of continuing to push the envelope on color and dynamic range . we feel very confident that we will be able to come up with more reasons for you to buy a television . design by james barehamedited by michael zelenko	 the first lady needed a turnip . by the fall of , turn down for what , lil jon and dj snake s triple platinum trap meets edm single , had swallowed pop culture whole . jimmy fallon and robin wright were dancing to it on the tonight show jonah hill and channing tatum posed while it blared on the soundtrack of jump street across youtube , teens and kittens alike bobbed their heads along . spin called it an undeniable force . michelleobamaan exclusive look at how the first lady mastered social mediaby kwame opam photography by james bareham lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gtthe first lady needed a turnip . by the fall of , turn down for what , lil jon and dj snake s triple platinum trap meets edm single , had swallowed pop culture whole . jimmy fallon and robin wright were dancing to it on the tonight show jonah hill and channing tatum posed while it blared on the soundtrack of jump street across youtube , teens and kittens bobbed their heads along . spin called it an undeniable force . . embed container position relative padding bottom . height overflow hidden max width . embed container iframe , . embed container object , . embed container embed position absolute top left width height and then michelle obama joined the party . that october , mrs . obama held a vine q ampampa for her let s move ! initiative , calling on kids and their families to send in video questions about healthy eating , cooking , and gardening . over the course of five days , she answered a series of family friendly queries ranging from what s your favorite fall vegetable ? sweet potato to what s your favorite food memory ? getting pizza as a reward for good grades . it was cute , but not especially memorable . then , youtube star and president obama impersonator iman alphacat crosson chimed in . on average , he asked the first lady in his best obama baritone , how many calories do you burn every time you turn up ? mrs . obama s team seized the opportunity . the next day , members of the white house s office of digital strategy and joanna rosholm , the first lady s press secretary , suggested a riff on turn down for what . rosholm called down to the kitchen was there a turnip in the white house ? mrs . obama got the joke right away . i know who lil jon is , she tells the verge . my kids are singing it . i got it immediately , and i was like , okay , that could be cute . within minutes of seeing crosson s vine , the first lady was in fdr s map room , filming her response . turnip for what , she deadpanned into the camera , a glorious purple and white root vegetable in hand . the bass dropped and mrs . obama closed her eyes , bouncing to the beat . simple and self consciously silly , the vine racked up more than six million views in a single day . the headlines were effusive michelle obama makes best vine ever for turnip for what wrote jezebel . best vine ever cried us weekly . for decades , social initiatives have been a mainstay of the first lady s office for lady bird johnson , it was the environment for former librarian laura bush , literacy . over the last seven years , mrs . obama has focused on four major initiatives reach higher , for teens pursuing higher learning let s move ! , to fight childhood obesity let girls learn , for educating women and girls around the world and joining forces , for aiding veterans and their families . but mrs . obama s tenure also coincided with the rise of social media during the obama presidency , twitter went from upstart to global newswire facebook now counts over . billion users and instagram and snapchat platforms that didn t exist a decade ago dominate pop culture . with a click of an iphone , mrs . obama can now reach audiences mrs . johnson and mrs . bush could only have dreamed of . people can get to know me directly . they can see that i m kind of silly sometimes , that i care . social media bypasses the middle man , mrs . obama says . people can get to know me directly . they can see that i m kind of silly sometimes , that i care . they can feel the passion , and they don t have to have it filtered through another source . and young people in particular like that . we knew long ago that any time we re doing any sort of communications for the first lady there needs to be a digital component , says caroline adler , the first lady s communications director . increasingly , there s no real way to connect directly with audiences except digitally . outside experts speak highly of the first lady s efforts . she s really mastered the medium , says michelle barna stern , vp of social marketing at digital ad firm i . she s personable . she s accessible . she s authentic , relatable . and she also has such a great sense of humor . but social media is a double edged sword one tone deaf tweet , poorly timed vine , or thoughtless facebook post can spell embarrassment . that s unlikely with the in house social media task force mrs . obama has built a close knit collection of strategists , initiative directors , and managers who work to craft a digital portrait of a first lady at once cool , caring , and in touch . a first lady who can turn up with a turnip and make the country swoon , but still advance serious initiatives . re centerit s a little known fact that the first lady s office doesn t have any congressional authority or any independent funding , says adler . we got nothing ! adds mrs . obama , cracking the room up . it s mid january , and a large team from the verge is at the white house filming the first ever degree video interview with the first lady and getting a glimpse into her social media hit factory . mrs . obama is swarmed by stylists , staffers , and countless camera operators . amid the chaos she is warm and funny , playfully ribbing her staff and poking fun at the verge delegation . the obamas are uniquely able to be authentic , in a bunch of new ways and through a bunch of new channels . after the interview , i shake hands with the first lady , introducing myself as the writer who has been meeting with her staff . hopefully everyone behaved themselves ! she says , throwing an eye around the room . we d arranged for a shot with several younger staffers taking selfies with the first lady , and the atmosphere is lively as people crowd around the monitors to take a look . almost ! i joke . alright , we ll take names later , she quips back with obvious affection for her team . the room breaks into laughter once again . george w . bush was the president you could get a beer with , but no one accused him or laura of being cool . bill clinton was personable , but his cool ended at playing the sax . hillary s cool is detached and technocratic , raw power wielding a blackberry behind sunglasses on a private jet . but the obamas are different the president reportedly texts with jay z and calls private meetings with kendrick lamar his favorite rapper in the oval office the first lady counts beyonc as a personal friend , and isn t afraid to show off some mom dances on the tonight show . kyle lierman , the white house s associate director of public engagement , says the obamas are uniquely able to be authentic , in a bunch of new ways and through a bunch of new channels . the obamas charisma in front of crowds and cameras makes them natural ambassadors to a younger generation . and their two young daughters sasha and malia give them insight into what resonates and more importantly , what doesn t . i ve got two gen zers living under my roof , says mrs . obama . they don t think we re cool at all . but i know what they re watching on vine , and i know what they re giggling about . when president obama was a guest on zach galifianakis between two ferns to promote the affordable care act the first time a sitting president appeared in an online series even sasha and malia were impressed . when president obama was a guest on between two ferns , even sasha and malia were impressed we re talking at the dinner table about his day , says mrs . obama , drawing the scene . maybe he talked to putin , maybe he s talking about a nuclear deal . but the minute he said , yeah , and i taped this thing between two ferns , malia was like , what ? the conversation stopped . this generation , they re looking for authenticity , they re looking for what feels real and natural , mrs . obama went on . we know we have to meet young people where they are they re not watching the nightly news , they re not watching the sunday morning shows , they re not reading the newspapers . they re on their phones . the shift to digital communication has been a boon for an office with a limited budget mrs . obama s team can now reach millions of young people at almost no cost and sidestep time intensive bureaucracy . we have to be very entrepreneurial , find opportunities and amplify them with surprisingly limited resources , observes adler . it s a lot like a startup . a harvard grad who previously worked for the state department under hillary clinton , adler is poised and professional , always ready to expand on mrs . obama s points . that quickly becomes a theme as i talk with the staff the first lady sets the goals and has the natural charisma to connect to her audience , but it s the team that does the hard work of developing strategy , coming up with ideas , and vetting some out there pitches . from left to right maggie morrow , assistant to the deputy chief of staff hugh mcdermott , scheduler to the first lady julia kim , former assistant to the deputy chief of staff sriramya gainedi , special assistant to chief of staff joseph mahshie , trip coordinator kristina broadie , deputy associate director of social officeif was the year of turning up , was the year of the dab . cam newton s signature touchdown dance move went viral as his carolina panthers made a super bowl run . suddenly , everyone was dabbing . would the first lady dab for the verge , we asked ? it seemed like a surefire viral sensation . and hillary clinton had just dabbed on ellen , perhaps the ultimate sign of broad cultural acceptance . it couldn t be safer . would the first lady dab for the verge ? rosholm , the first lady s press secretary , laughed at the idea but promised to inquire . she took the pitch to mrs . obama s inner social media quorum her communications team and the office of digital strategy . every day , these groups meet to discuss initiatives and figure out how best to execute them across the many platforms used by the white house and first lady . those platforms include facebook , twitter , instagram , and spotify the white house had just launched on snapchat when we visited . frequently , these conversations pull in the white house social secretary , as well as the first lady s office of presidential correspondence and the office of public engagement . mrs . obama sits at the center , listening to pitches , giving feedback , and ultimately making the executive decisions . there s a misconception that social media is simple , because technically anyone can get on twitter and get on facebook , says i s barna stern . there s a tremendous amount of strategy , thought , and investment that really goes into it . what s clear is that mrs . obama has an understanding of how to utilize the platforms and social media best practices in order to reach her goals . jason goldman , the white house chief digital officer recruited from stints at google , twitter , and medium , says the team s decisions happen quickly . i ve been completely surprised at how much faster this place feels than working in startups , he says . goldman has a laid back demeanor but becomes animated when discussing social media . the advantage of these platforms over traditional media is that they re very measurable . you get feedback on what people like , and what works . the first lady is the one asking us to do more , to figure out new platforms we can use to break new ground . in my conversations with mrs . obama s team , it became clear that they care about views , clicks , and engagement as much as any media organization . the term the staff uses over and over is land will a piece of media land ? will people engage and participate in the message it s sending ? we re looking for the right moment to land it might land a week later , or it might land two years later , says kori schulman , the deputy director of digital strategy under goldman . we re actually in an amazing position where the first lady is , many times , the one asking us to do more , to figure out new platforms we can use to break new ground . it s exciting because it s uncharted territory , adds krishanti vignarajah , mrs . obama s policy director . but it s also daunting . a marshall scholar with a law degree from yale , vignarajah advises the first lady on international affairs . when we launched the let girls learn playlist , it was like , is this actually going to get any traction ? is this an interesting way to engage ? this leads to internal debates about what will land . mrs . obama puts it more bluntly we always say , well , can we make it go viral ? can we make it ? is it gonna ? is it going to resonate ? but there s another component whether all those views actually have an impact . and that impact the counterpoint to landing is conversation . in my talks with the staff , the word conversation was uttered times . i counted . mrs . obama puts it more bluntly can we make it go viral ? mrs . obama always tries to use social media not just to speak to people , but to get them to be part of the conversation , says vignarajah . the first lady wants her audience young children , teenagers , parents , and soldiers to discuss the issues she s advocating for . it took an entire decade for people to understand that the internet is fundamentally a platform of human conversation , says goldman . it s about participating . ultimately , the dab was rejected after consulting with the team , rosholm told us that dabbing s hazy connection to marijuana culture ruled it out . hillary clinton could dab all she wanted to , but the first lady would abstain . of all her platforms , the first lady truly shines on vine , where the white house has over , followers . the six second video platform is perfect for her mix of straight talk and goofy humor . and to help push her initiatives , the first lady s team calls on vine superstars , users that mrs . obama casually refers to as vivers , or very important viners . vivers michael and carissa rae alvarado met in as extras on a music video shoot in los angeles . there was instant chemistry , michael says , and by the pair was married . at around the same time , they started filming themselves on vine performing covers under a new name us the duo . ampnbsptheir renditions of hits like lana del rey s summertime sadness and blackstreet s no diggity earned them five million vine followers , spots on network morning shows , and eventually , label attention . in march , the alvarados became the first vine musicians signed with a major label . they ve released two albums so far , and are preparing to put out a third independently . the first lady truly shines on vine last october , the first lady invited us the duo to the white house to help promote better make room , an initiative that encourages teens to make room in their senior year schedules for the college application process . when you get a call that says michelle obama wants to meet with you , you stop whatever you re gonna do and make it happen , says michael . us the duo were joined by five other vivers for the three hour event lele pons , king bach , j r me jarre , amymarie gaertner , and chris melberger . for their vines , us the duo sang a better make room inspired cover of fifth harmony s bo king bach slid into the scene woefully underdressed in basketball shorts before moonwalking his way out to justin bieber s sorry and j r me jarre gave an impromptu french lesson . in all , the vivers produced nine pieces of content that have generated more than . million views to date . this group of five viners they had million followers between them , says eric waldo , a five year veteran of the department of education who now spearheads the reach higher campaign . and after we put out videos with them , suddenly kids knew what we were talking about . we had kids coming in here saying , i saw the video king bach did . that s incredible . after we put out videos suddenly kids knew what we were talking about . the partnerships aren t limited to vine . mrs . obama s team recognizes that while she may be one of the most influential people on the planet , she still needs help reaching certain audiences . for example , the first lady s youtube channel for let s move ! has just , followers . so she ll partner with millennial flypaper like collegehumor and funny or die to film shorts about the so called snackpocalypse featuring stars chlo grace moretz and tyler posey to promote healthy eating or do an off the cuff interview with tyler oakley , who has more than eight million youtube subscribers , to talk education . some of the content produced during these partnerships addresses mrs . obama s initiatives head on others touch on them only obliquely . the trick , says waldo , is a light touch . the success of our model isn t to just read the same psa and say , please make sure you go to college , he says . she s going to rap with jay pharoah and have a sense of humor and make fun of herself a little bit . that approach makes mrs . obama seem more accessible , slowly but surely raising awareness with each share . but how far can any social media campaign take mrs . obama s initiatives ? can a hashtag reduce childhood obesity ? can a vine improve college enrollment ? i think we have been able to move the needle on a range of issues , says the first lady . when we first came into office , there were people questioning whether childhood obesity was even an issue . now we re seeing the conversation has in fact changed . can a hashtag reduce childhood obesity ? the numbers partially bear out her belief in the power of conversation in , the centers for disease control and prevention reported that obesity fell drastically in children ages , though overall it remained unchanged across children . at . percent , the veteran unemployment rate is at its lowest in eight years . but other numbers point to harder issues between and , overall college enrollment dropped from percent to percent . and unesco reports that equal access to primary and secondary schooling has reached less than half of the world s countries , leaving millions of girls around the world without an education . starting online conversations might raise awareness of these issues , but long term change will require that those conversations turn into real action . meanwhile , the country has its eyes locked on six would be commanders in chief , each with their own social media strategy hillary clinton has arguably the strongest instagram account of any of the contenders bernie sanders supporters are feeling the bern on tumblr ted cruz trolls donald trump on snapchat and trump himself has created a movement partly through his powerful and unparalleled use of twitter . whichever administration enters the white house in will be building on the obamas foundation . there will never be another first digital presidency . and it may be a long time before another turnip for what ? the obamas have set a high social media bar for the next first family and they re not quite done yet . this platform is so unique , mrs . obama says of the white house . we will never have it again . so we will spend these twelve months on every issue making sure we re driving to the very end . we figure we want to drop the mic on some of this stuff . published on march , videoexecutive producers nilay patel , tre shallowhorn director tom connors director of photography ian mcalpin art director james bareham sound design andrew marino post production supervisors miriam nielsen , noah shulman animation marcus mullins , scott waraniak of lunar north color max jeffrey vr producers craig gilbert of total cinema , lucas wilson of supersphere production vr operators joergen geerds , mark waldendesignersjosh laincz , kelsey scherer , jason santa maria , tyson whitingeditorsnilay patel , michael zelenkocopy editor aaron mat editorial assistance chaim gartenberg lt ! var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene if android webos iphone ipad ipod blackberry iemobile opera mini i . test navigator . useragent body . addclass mobile device gt	 two years ago , john oliver called tom wheeler a dingo . the host of last week tonight had set his sights on the then raging net neutrality debate , acerbically calling out broadband providers like comcast and verizon for their throttling antics and intense congressional lobbying . midway through the segment , oliver dryly pointed to president obama s appointment of former cable and wireless lobbyist wheeler as the new head of the federal communications commission the equivalent of needing a babysitter and hiring a dingo . the dragonslayera year ago , fcc chairman tom wheeler saved the internet . in this exclusive interview , he tells us what s nextby nilay patel two years ago , john oliver called tom wheeler a dingo . the host of last week tonight had set his sights on the then raging net neutrality debate , acerbically calling out broadband providers like comcast and verizon for their throttling antics and intense congressional lobbying . midway through the segment , oliver dryly pointed to president obama s appointment of former cable and wireless lobbyist wheeler as the new head of the federal communications commission the equivalent of needing a babysitter and hiring a dingo . now that they are overseeing their own oversight , it is hardly surprising that cable companies are basically monopolies , said oliver . you know my mantra competition . this claim that the fcc has been captured by the very interests it is supposed to regulate has been around for years . the path from a commission seat to an aisle seat inside comcast s private jet and vice versa has been wide open for years former fcc chairman michael powell is now the president of the national cable and telecom association , which counts comcast as its largest member . former fcc commissioner meredith baker . left the agency to work for comcast . the list goes on . but wheeler pushed back against oliver and various other critics including me who felt the fcc was soft pedaling on net neutrality and on regulating telecom companies in general . and in the past year of his chairmanship , the fcc has turned into a sharply pro consumer and pro competition agency with the passage of the open internet order , net neutrality is now the law upcoming rules will prevent carriers from collecting and selling user data without permission a spectrum auction next month will lay the groundwork for g mobile internet and now wheeler has his sights set on making tv providers open their cable networks . speaking exclusively to the verge the day before he appeared in front of congressional republicans investigating the net neutrality vote , wheeler was candid and direct about his desire to protect upstarts . you know my mantra , he says . competition , competition , competition . far from being captured by telecom companies , wheeler seems to relish the insight his lobbying history has given him about their operations . and he s using that insight to fight the multi headed dragons of the television , wireless , and broadband industries on multiple battlefields , all at once . and he s winning . nilay patel so oliver called you a dingo tom wheeler yes . because he was upset you were put in charge of regulating an industry you first represented . it s been about a year since you passed net neutrality , and you re back at it with the push to unlock cable boxes . it seems like something s changed like your approach has gotten more aggressive . i m the same guy i was then . i think it s just that people didn t know who i was . what was the cable industry like when i was lobbying for them ? they were the underdog . they were the folks trying to climb up the hill , and broadcasters and telephone companies tried to stop them . what was the wireless industry like when i was there ? they were the young guys coming up the side of the mountain . what was i doing when i was a vc ? i was funding startup companies that were challenging the incumbents . my heart has always been with the insurgents , not the incumbents . and nobody stopped to really look at that they just wanted to make this judgement . but i m the same guy i always was . my heart has always been with the insurgents , not incumbents . let s start with net neutrality . it s been a year since it passed , but there s still a lawsuit challenging it , and the senate republicans just put out a report saying president obama inappropriately and secretly influenced the fcc into regulating broadband providers as common carriers under title ii of the communications act . so i ll ask you directly when did you decide to push for the stricter title ii regulations ? wheeler s initial approach to net neutrality was much looser , relying on the fcc s broad authority to promote broadband competition to set rules . after intense public outcry , the oliver video , and a push from obama , wheeler switched to the much stricter title ii approach . title ii has always been on the table . as we went through the process it began to be really clear that the commercially reasonable test was untried . i was comfortable i could apply it , but after i was gone somebody would look back and say , oh , this means reasonable for the commercial entity . that s the wrong interpretation . but as you know we d always had title ii in the proposal . then i coupled that with my experience representing the wireless industry we went to congress and asked to be made common carriers ! so it was that kind of an evolutionary process . this idea that there were some kind of secret instructions from the white house has been around for more than a year , and i m sure it will be around a year from now . it s a quick and easy take , but it s a quick , easy , and wrong take . the second allegation is that the staff of the fcc raised concerns internally about needing more comment . do you have a response to that ? that s the job of the staff , to constantly say , wait a minute , what are the details here , and are we building the record as it needs to be built ? and as you know i pushed it . i was hoping to move on net neutrality in november , and i said , nope ! we re not ready ! i said that publicly . i didn t say it as some kind of secret thing . i actually put out a statement saying , we re going to hit pause because we need to continue to develop the record . and if you go to the lawsuit one of the things that they re arguing right now is that we didn t do a good job building a record . so i guess it made sense to pause . so that lawsuit is out there , and the telecom companies seem to be actively pursuing that lawsuit . why do you think congress is deciding to wade into this mess now ? you re asking me to interpret the republicans in congress ? you gotta ask them ! laughs you re asking me to interpret the republicans in congress ? i m the least qualified person in america to do that . and now we re seeing a bunch of wireless carriers do sponsored data and zero rating , which seems like they might violate net neutrality . t mobile s bingeon is the most interesting to me i don t know where i stand on it . they re throttling data zero rating is the controversial practice of excusing certain apps and services from data caps , which effectively makes everything else more expensive . why do you think that s more interesting than go ? just out of curiosity . verizon s new video service go doesn t count against the data cap for verizon s mobile customers verizon says go is an independent subsidiary that pays for sponsored data just like any other company . my take is that go is actually way worse . it s a separate company inside verizon and they re straight up paying to have their data privileged . with t mobile they re at least doing a blanket throttle and affecting everyone equally . either way it seems like a lot of carriers are trying to dance through the bright line rules of net neutrality . where do you stand ? we were quite specific in the open internet order saying we weren t going to address zero rating because we could argue it both ways . you can see where it s helpful if it reduces cost and increases choice . you can see where it s harmful if it discourages and discriminates . so it s the poster child for why we wanted to make sure we had a general conduct rule in place . what we re doing right now is looking at the various schemes that have been developed , and we ve asked folks on multiple sides of the issue to come in and sit down and help us understand so we can think our way through this . i think the key to the open internet order is the concept of regulatory agility . and zero rating is a classic example of that . i can argue there are some aspects of it that are good , and i can argue there s some aspects of it that are not so good . the job of the regulator is to figure out , okay , now how do i deal with this ? so do you see a distinction between go and bingeon ? i don t wanna get into that , but that s the issue that i m wrestling with . so zero rating is the current net neutrality battle . where do you think it goes from here ? what s your next battle ? privacy . what do you think the boundaries will be ? why is the information generated by an internet search different ? there are three key concepts one , that broadband companies are collecting data on me and it isn t being held securely . two , they re collecting data on me and they ought to be telling me what they re collecting and what it s being used for . and three , i ought to have the choice to say whether i want them to do that or not . when these companies were operating as phone companies , the information generated by a phone call couldn t be released unless the consumer said so . you ve got to ask yourself the question why is the information generated by an internet search different ? all the carriers told me that title ii is an existential threat to their business , and there s a lawsuit and congressional hearings to challenge it . meanwhile , these companies are trying to sidestep the rules with sponsored data . verizon bought aol for ad tech and now you re going after how they can use that data . that s three battlegrounds and now you want to tackle cable box unlocking . do you have enough time to get this done ? we re here now , and we re not going to be here a year from now . why should you sit around and just think about doing things ? do em ! so let s get into cable box unlocking . no one s really thought about it for a long time . when i go and talk to the cable companies , they say , look , we re doing apps ! as their solution to freeing up the content . what do you say to that ? why do we still need to worry about the hardware if they re going to move to the app model ? wheeler just passed a proposal that would require tv providers to allow any device to access tv programming right now nearly every tv service has a proprietary cable or satellite box . the cable companies hate this , of course . i m fascinated by that response , because the reality is there s nothing different about an app . an app is just doing things in software that used to be done in hardware . the question is whether the app is open or closed . and if they close the app it s just as awful as a closed piece of hardware . the cable companies all say that they re the ones that go out and negotiate with video programmers and networks , and spend all the money on content . what s the argument to unbundle their stuff and let it be open to every app ? nobody is saying to the cable operator that they have to change anything that they do , other than provide access to competitive boxes . and the law is pretty clear it says there needs to be competitive navigation devices . well , let s obey the law ! i don t know whether you saw the open meeting where we voted on this , but i threw up on the screen a letter from ncta endorsing the idea . but that was their previous plan , with cablecard and then tru way , which totally failed . they were gonna own the middleware previous efforts to allow other devices to connect to cable networks have been complicated , buggy , and failed spectacularly . how bad was it ? comcast ceo brian roberts once tried to convince steve jobs to build a cable box and jobs refused because he wouldn t use the required software . i thought ampnbspyour article on this was terrific . when you quoted brian roberts saying say goodbye to the set top box at ces and he brought out the guy from panasonic , i thought that was a terrific piece of reporting . nvidia now has a box , but the cable operators refuse to interface with it . folks like mitsubishi have said on the record that they wanted to build something but the cable operators wouldn t give them access . nvidia now has a box , but the cable operators refuse to interface with it . i am just dumbfounded by the response because they have no difficulty interfacing with an ipad . they have no difficulty interfacing with google android . this would work exactly the same way , and all of the sudden it s the end of the world . i ve chronicled all of these tv product failures in one way or another , and i m surprised the tech companies aren t way out in front providing you cover on open navigation . but when we go to ask google , microsoft , and apple about cable boxes , they all have no comment . have you heard from them ? do you feel support from silicon valley ? it s not what s driving us , and it s not essential to this . i mean , this is a simple question . there are two things intersecting . one is the law , which is black letter and very explicit . and the second is technology that finally allows a solution other than this cobbled together cablecard solution . so , okay , we exist at the point in time where technology is allowing something like this to happen , and the law has said for the past years that it should happen . alright , let s make it happen . this feels connected to net neutrality , at least in spirit . they are metaphorically analogous it s about openness . it s all about openness . but there s something much more real underneath it . a company like time warner cable provides both video and broadband services , and they re trying to build streaming skinny bundles , because broadband service is a much higher margin . is there a conflict here ? our job is not to balance things out and pick winners or losers . our job is to let the market work . you know my mantra is competition , competition , competition . let me take this in another direction . we started this conversation and you said you ve always represented the upstart . and the first few sets of upstarts you described were access layer technology upstarts cable tv , wireless internet . is there another internet access technology you see that can provide competition to wired and wireless broadband ? or is that infrastructure so fixed in place now that we need to focus on competition in the layers above ? what a great question ! and i don t have the answer for that , nilay . but here s the thing that is fascinating to me those networks are built on assumptions from the industrial economy , i . e . scope and scale assumptions . but digital networks operate at zero marginal cost . there is an inherent conflict between those two . zero marginal cost has allowed us to have all of these great innovations like the app economy and the web . at the same time , you need to be producing a return on that investment . but you know , the situation right now is that the revenue per subscriber for the broadband providers has gone up since the open internet order went into place . the fcc says this claim is based on an internal analysis . the public numbers we looked at seemed to indicate that these figures are mostly flat . we re living through an evolution from industrial economics to digital economics . which of course is logical because people are buying more , because more is available . it makes all the sense in the world . we re living through an evolution from industrial economics to digital economics . and that will , by far , outlast my tenure here , but it s the underpinning of what s going to happen over the next ten years . but there are still wires in the ground and antennas in the air . there s a lot of industrial scale work that needs to get done . i m not saying that we re walking away from the issues you need to get a return on that . but the interesting thing was you used to have to build when you wanted to increase the capacity of a telephone line . you had to build a new circuit , right ? but when you want to increase the capacity of fiber you put on new electronics . and the economics of both of those are huge . you see at ampampt and others talking about how they re going to software defined networks the cost of software defined networks are a fraction of the cost of hardware defined networks . the economic model is changing . what we re doing is we re living through an evolution between two ways of approaching the world . that s fascinating to me . we re talking about wired and wireless in the same breath . the open internet order wiped away the idea that wireless is special enough to be regulated differently . but i still constantly hear the wireless companies say there s a spectrum crunch and that s why they have to do things like zero rating . you seem to be saying that that model should be fading away . no , i think that there is a spectrum issue . i mean there s no doubt about it do you think crunch is as bad as they tell me ? well , you know , i m days away from running a spectrum auction . laughs so i don t think i m going there , nilay . you should be saying there s no spectrum left you should be running up the prices ! it s the last sale ! last chance to get a lease ! it s the last sale ! last chance to get a lease ! laughs but as you bring up software defined radios , they are able to mine more capacity out of a fixed amount of spectrum . do you think that that brings the economics in line with what they re able to do on the fiber side or is it actually different ? i think it s different in a whole bunch of ways . so for instance , we always talk about this thing called reasonable network management . network management for a wireless network is massively more complex than network management for a wired network , because they have to manage around all the inherent difficulties that say you really shouldn t be able to do this in the first place . physics is working against you , and they re measuring network activity in milliseconds . so the management of a wireless network is much more complex and active than the management of a wired network . that also gives it greater efficiencies in using the spectrum it s got . however , i think both have to be opened . you know , if wireless is now carrying , percent of all the internet access , how could it possibly not be open ? there s the device question , too . we don t have easily moveable handsets on carriers in the us . i can t just buy an at ampampt phone , stick a verizon sim card in it and walk away . do you think there s a way to get to a place where there s easier switching between carriers ? well the problem we had in g was that we had two standards . then you got g , which kind of evolved through multiple standards . you can port pretty well with lte right now . and with g i think it s going be a question of what the standards are going to be again . i don t know . but what s promising about g is that this summer we re gonna open up the spectrum . the europeans are bound and determined to have a standards process that replicates what created g to create g , and they want us to participate . and my response to them is that i don t participate in industrial policy . nobody said the marketplace is not without pain . what we re going to do is make spectrum available faster than anybody in the world . this summer we re going to hash out some of the rules for g spectrum . and then we re going to get out of the way and we re going to say to our carriers , go , use it , do whatever you want with it ! that s what got us to leadership in g , and i think that s what will give us leadership in g . let me give you the obvious pushback . that got us to leadership in g , but it left sprint basically cratered because they invested heavily in wimax , which blew up in their face . is there a place where you d come in and have a standards setting process or no ? so now you re an acolyte of industrial policy then ? laughs hey , i m just asking the questions ! but it s true , right ? sprint made a billion dollar wrong bet and they ve never recovered from it . well , i mean , yes . nobody said the marketplace is not without pain . we ve talked a lot about the big fights you have on your docket now cable box unlocking , privacy , making sure title ii stays alive . are there any other dragons you want to slay ? we re gonna run through the tape . sure , we re gonna reform the lifeline program so that low income americans have access to st century networks . we re going to address the provision of broadband data services by monopoly carriers . you know , the so called special access issue . we re gonna run through the tape here , nilay . okay , so you re going fast , you ve got a lot of projects . but obviously you re going to have a successor . what sort of advice do you give your successor , especially in the context of the these big industries and their lobbying ? what advice do you have about keeping the office independent and being pro consumer ? i don t know how i can tell my successor anything other than to use his or her best judgement . but i can tell you that one of the things that has been very helpful to me is my experience as a lobbyist . it s kind of spooky sitting in this office as i m speaking to you right now , because i used to come in here on my knees begging for things , saying that unless the chairman did it my way , it would be the end of western civilization as we know it . laughs i m wondering if i can tell you this story you have to now ! early on , literally my first week on the job , i brought all of the representative organizations together in a series of meetings . and i began and this is something that is really high on my priority list with all the representatives of disabilities groups . i said you are never going to have an fcc chairman that is more in your corner and wants to do more to make sure we harness the technology of the st century to address the challenges of individuals with disabilities . rommel , you magnificent bastard , i read your book ! i had them at the first meeting because i wanted that to be symbolic and to send a message . but when we got to the various industry groups i said to them , you know , i ve sat in your shoes and i know the challenges of your job . i said my favorite movie is patton , and and there s a scene where patton is having his first battle with rommel in north africa , and he had just finished reading rommel s book on tank tactics . he s looking down on the valley and he sees the fight going on and he sees that he s winning . and george c . scott says rommel , you magnificent bastard , i read your book ! and i said to these guys , hey , you know , i may not have written the book about how to lobby , but i ve read it and maybe i even contributed a chapter or two . i used to be the one dishing it out . i understand the realities . i understand how they argue things . i understand what you have to do to hold an industry coalition together . i understand the challenge of their job . i respect the challenge of their job . and i think i m somewhat inoculated to the effects as a result of it . so real talk do you think it s a requirement to have been a lobbyist to be an effective regulator ? oh , no , no . i m just telling you my personal experience . and i am not the guy to reflect on who it would be next year . you know , here s what i will tell this person , whoever he or she is it s a fabulous time to be in this job . this is a time where the digital world is redefining everything else in the world , and we get to sit here right in the middle of it . and , yes , we get to deal with really tough , really complex issues . my goodness , what a blessing , what a privilege . disclosure comcast s nbc universal division is a minority investor in the verge s parent company , vox media . photo of tom wheeler by david ramos getty imagesdesign by james barehamedited by michael zelenko lt ! var width window . width window . resize function if this . width ! width width this . width if width lt span . dropcap . removeattr class gt	 as last year began , the app developer pixite held its company retreat at a converted old west movie set outside of palm springs . they spent a few days dreaming about the future while eating barbecue and sipping whisky in the sun . but was not a good year , and by last month the company s dreams had narrowed to survival . this year s retreat took place at the company s office in san diego , a handful of rooms perched above a hair salon . the printer was broken , so the agenda was distributed by email . as last year began , the app developer pixite held its company retreat at a converted old west movie set outside of palm springs . they spent a few days dreaming about the future while eating barbecue and sipping whisky in the sun . but was not a good year , and by last month the company s dreams had narrowed to survival . this year s retreat took place at the company s office in san diego , a handful of rooms perched above a hair salon . the printer was broken , so the agenda was distributed by email . i m sorry it s called a retreat and we re still in the office , says eugene kaneko , one of the company s co founders , as the daylong meeting begins . the company s six employees frown at their laptops , where the numbers in a google doc chart a steady decline . if money were better , we d be in the desert . unfortunately that s not the case . since kaneko founded the company with scott sykora in , pixite has released eight applications dedicated to photo editing and design . each has been featured by apple as a best new app photo editor tangent and design tool assembly won year end awards from apple . between and , downloads of pixite apps jumped from , to . million , and annual revenue doubled to , . pixite grew along with its cash flow , expanding from two to six employees as it explored ways to link its apps together and grow a loyal base of customers . then the bottom fell out . last year downloads flattened , and pixite s revenues plunged by a third , to , . suddenly , a company that needed to bring in , a day to break even found itself making , or less . pixite has no reserves of venture capital to fall back on aside from a , seed investment from a carnegie mellon fund for alumni entrepreneurs , pixite has funded itself . this past december , kaneko emailed me out of the blue . he didn t know it then , but i m a fan of the company s apps fragment , which applies prismatic effects to photos , is one of my favorite artistic tools . as an independent bootstrapped app company , we are struggling , kaneko wrote . if things don t turn around , we ll need to lay off half of our staff in the next few months . he invited me to come to san diego and observe the struggle up close . kaneko would open up pixite s books and share every piece of data that i requested while , over the course of two days , his team locked itself in a room and attempted to chart a path forward . pixite would either figure it out or die . last month , apple announced it had paid billion to developers since the app store opened , saying the store was responsible for creating and supporting . million us jobs . more than half a million ios developers have created apps the company s worldwide developer conference is so popular that tickets have to be distributed via a lottery . apple made our company , sykora says . if apple didn t exist , we wouldn t have a company at all . and the market for apps is growing between ios , android , and smaller platforms , apps could generate billion annually by , ampnbspaccording to market research firm app annie . but the app store s middle class is small and shrinking . and the easy money is gone . for a time , pixite was a shining example of the businesses made possible by the app economy . like thousands of other developers , pixite s founders took what had been a side project and turned it into a full fledged career . but the company s recent financial problems illustrate a series of powerful shifts in the industry toward consolidation and corporatization . for all but a few developers , the app store itself now resembles a lottery for every breakout hit like candy crush , hundreds or even thousands of apps languish in obscurity . certain segments of the app economy remain vibrant ludicrously profitable , even . apps for massive social networks , on demand services like uber , and subscription businesses like netflix and spotify remain in high demand . then there s gaming last year , percent of all app revenues went to games , according to app annie . supercell , the top grossing developer of clash of clans , reported revenue of . billion in . it spent million on marketing . but for a large swath of these app developers particularly those without venture capital and sophisticated marketing tactics the original app store model of selling apps for a buck or two looks antiquated . in , percent of apps were paid downloads , selling for an average of . apiece . by last year , a mere percent of downloads were paid , and the average price had fallen to . . today , profiting from the app store most often requires a mix of in app purchases , subscriptions , and advertising . meanwhile , a fatigue is setting in among customers . there are now more than . million apps in the app store android users have . million to choose from , but by , the majority of americans were downloading zero apps per month . and it turns out people simply don t use most of the apps they do download . according to comscore , the average person spends percent of their time on mobile devices using only three apps . massively profitable new software platforms come around very rarely but when they do , consumers race to fill them up with utilities , productivity tools , and games . the gold rush only lasts so long , though . after a while , the saturation of apps catches up to the user growth , says ryan sarver , a venture capitalist at redpoint ventures . and people are no longer searching they ve got the apps that they need . consumer boredom with apps is a key reason that the smart money in silicon valley began turning last year to messaging apps and bots , which many observers believe could represent the next phase of the internet . no one can credibly say that the app store is dying . but the range of opportunities in consumer software has narrowed dramatically to a couple of swim lanes , venrock vc david pakman told me . and so as pixite s on site off site begins , kaneko leads with grim news . our cash reserves are low , he says . we started out with , at the beginning of . now we only have , in the bank . sykora looks at a series of charts of pixite s app sales on his laptop . every chart tells the same story . all the apps are slowly drifting , sykora says . down , down , down . both kaneko , , and sykora , , grew up in san diego before venturing to northern california to study engineering . kaneko is short and radiates nervous energy sykora is tall and conveys a quiet calm . the duo met while working on freelance web design gigs after coming back to san diego . a client hired kaneko to build a website for djs to sell their beats , and sykora agreed to help him build it . they ve worked together ever since . when the app store opened in , many internet companies took a wait and see approach . google , facebook , amazon , and pandora all released basic apps , but that left a lot of room for independent development . iphone owners were hungry in those days for the new experiences enabled by their phones , downloading more than apps a month , according to admob , which was later acquired by google . and they were willing to pay by july they were spending a collective million a month . in the first months of its existence , , apps were added to the app store . many were games , a trend that continues to this day . but quirky independent apps dominated the inaugural list of the year s most downloaded software the top seller was a virtual koi pond the list also included an app that simulated drinking a beer . there was also a booming market for basic utilities top sellers included a level tool , a spell checker , and a voice recorder . in october of , sensing an opportunity , kaneko suggested he and sykora build an app for browsing pictures stored online . google owned picasa , one of the era s most popular web browsing clients , had no native iphone application , and its mobile web app was slow . in a few months , kaneko and sykora built an iphone app for picasa using its public api , and sold it in the app store under the name web albums . the iphone s superior camera was spawning a generation of smartphone photographers , and because the iphone allowed developers to access its camera , photography soon became a popular app store category . many of these photo apps offered tools that would eventually became native features in ios utilities for cropping , adding flash and hdr effects , and sharing photos over bluetooth . another set of utilities focused on sharing your photos to the web uploading and viewing photos on flickr , for example . it was in this last group that kaneko and sykora saw their opportunity and it turned out to be bigger than they imagined . the two hoped their cent app might bring in a few dollars a day while they worked on other projects . instead , in its first full year in the app store , web albums brought in , . first it was awesome ! this is a decent part of my income , i should spend more time on it , sykora says . then it got to the point of like i should probably not take every freelance job . then i should not take any freelance jobs . then i started getting rid of clients . that was an awesome set of transitions to go through . web albums was a simple utility , but a surprisingly profitable one . it turned out that picasa s web app let users view only the first photos in an album web albums had no such limit . the developers had sought only to make a functional client they accidentally built a superior one . with little competition , web albums became the first result in app store searches for picasa an invaluable boost to sales . a simple idea , executed competently but with little flair , was now feeding two families . from left to right ben guerrette , creative director eugene kaneko , product manager scott sykora , lead developerit couldn t last . they knew it couldn t last . surely google had a team of engineers working away on its own version of web albums , one that would erase their sales overnight ? in fact , it wouldn t arrive until mid , in the form of google photos . we ll be blown out of the water and we ll be dead , kaneko recalls thinking . it put pixite in a strange position . normally in a business you put money back into your main money maker , sykora says . we were in a situation where we were like , we need to stop putting time into this and force ourselves to step away and figure out what the next step is . kaneko and sykora incorporated pixite a portmanteau of pixel and excite and set about looking for an answer . they found it in a san diego co working space , in the form of ben guerrette . guerrette , a self taught designer , developer , and digital artist , had built the sort of creative tool that would come to define pixite . deco sketch let you draw simple shapes and animate them , and while it never made much money , it helped guerrette build connections to a growing community of iphone photographers and editors on instagram . by , guerrette was working at rdspace , a san diego co working club for the creative where pixite had set up shop . after the launch of web albums , pixite sought to repeat its initial success by making a series of similar photo utilities . between and , while the tech world was still catching up to the idea of native apps , pixite built and sold a variety of unglamorous photo viewing and uploading tools for facebook , flickr , and dropbox . in a fit of optimism , in pixite also built an app for transferring your facebook photos to a then new social network called google . for the app store , it was an era of wild expansion and enormous cultural impact . in the app store swelled to , apps , just as the american dialect society named app its word of the year . supercell was founded that year in helsinki two years later , its games were generating . million a day . uber launched , giving rise to a new category of on demand services . the next year , the store celebrated its billionth download . venture capitalists interest in the app economy followed accordingly . kleiner perkins caufield byers , one of the most prestigious vc firms in silicon valley , tripled its investment in apps to million in . one of those investments , a three year old gaming firm ngmoco , sold to japan s dena that year for million . pixite s ambitions were more modest . web albums remained the bulk of the company s business , but revenues were growing from , in to , two years later . at rdspace , the company s success had not gone unnoticed . i was like , these guys are the real deal , guerrette recalls . they make money making apps ! guerrette pitched kaneko and sykora on an app that went beyond viewing and uploading photos to manipulating them creatively . around that time , a niche community of iphone photographers had begun layering simple black and white geometric designs over their photos to make them pop on instagram . but it was hard to do you had to download the images from dropbox onto your phone , then layer them on top of your images using another app . guerrette proposed an app that included the designs as filters , letting you manipulate and post them to instagram directly . tangent , the app that resulted from guerrette s proposal , was finished three months later . the app was featured in the app store a highly valuable free promotion that all developers dream of . it went on to sell . million copies . two more creative apps soon followed . at the end of , apple named tangent one of the year s best apps . the company had sold nearly , units , earning revenues of , . lt ! new pym . parent pixite revenue graphic , m snippet thin gtthe revenue told a story of surprising success . but the path that pixite s founders took to get there would cost them later . the mistakes appear obvious in hindsight pixite was building apps that sat uncomfortably between professional design tools and novelty consumer apps . it failed to create a distinctive brand , instead giving each app a name unrelated to everything that came before . apart from web albums , its apps were hard to find using the app store s search tools , and the company never invested in advertising . and pixite clung to using the one time purchase business model , which led to a perpetual cycle of boom and bust as each launch generated a single revenue spike followed by a rapid decline . it didn t have to be that way . lightricks is an israeli company that resembles pixite in some respects . it also makes photo editing tools , gives them distinctive names , and sells them for a few dollars apiece . but lightricks also invested years in building its signature apps , facetune and enlight , and spent heavily on marketing . it wrote software to predict how much it needed to spend on facebook ads to stay on the bestseller charts , where the added visibility generated additional sales . its marketing is overseen by a co founder whose background is in artificial intelligence , and the marketing team is largely made up of engineers who run dozens of campaigns around the world hours a day . the result facetune , an app for taking better selfies that sells for . , sold more than million copies in its first two years and was the sixth highest grossing app in the app store in . enlight , a comprehensive photo editor that combines a wide variety of filters and effects , saw similar success . by last year lightricks had hired people , was on pace to earn million in annual revenue , and raised million in venture capital . meanwhile , pixite s approach exposed it to another risk hiding in the paid app business model flops . pixite aimed to release one app a quarter , giving it just three months to design , code , and ship each product . that limited the scope of what its apps could do . and with only four products coming out each year , a misconceived app could be disastrous . the company learned that lesson in when it released shift , a very late to market app for applying colored filters to photos . after four months in development , it earned only , in revenue , covering less than two weeks expenses . this despite the fact that it was one of two apps the company invested in porting to android , an effort that has yet to generate meaningful sales . still , pixite ended with . million downloads and nearly million in revenue . it would be the company s peak . pigment , pixite s coloring book appat this year s retreat , kaneko announces some news pixite has opened up a line of credit from its bank , letting the company borrow in case it lacked the money to cover expenses . in , the company produced two more projects that failed to hit . source , an ambitious effort to build a website for artists to share the work they make with pixite s apps , had floundered . assembly , a vector based design tool , had struggled as well . the team hoped source would promote artists work and inspire the next generation of casual photographers to be creative with their own pictures , using pixite s apps to do so . but falling sales during the development of source caused a panic , and work stopped . we hit , a day and everyone was like fuck me , what do we do ? guerrette says . we had to put that away for a little while . we only make money when we make apps . the arrival of google photos in may finally drove a dagger into the heart of web albums . with about three months of cash in the bank and a new sense of urgency , pixite poured all of its resources into developing an app meant to capitalize on the current fad of adult coloring books . pigment , which is free to download and offers a paid subscription for new books , lets users digitally color landscapes , geometrical shapes , and characters using a variety of brushes . about , people have downloaded the app to date . the subscription revenue offered the company a temporary reprieve . but by this year s retreat , downloads were already declining , and a rival named colorfy was dominating search results . it wasn t clear how to reverse the slide . why do we have a mission statement ? guerrette asks . it s the second day of meetings , and the pixite team is engaging in the most corporate of exercises the effort to capture the company s purpose in a sentence . unlike most companies , pixite tends to write a new statement every year . it s supposed to give you direction , says kaneko , who is drawing on the whiteboard . over the past day , kaneko has been jotting down pixite s priorities for the year . at the top build high end products that people respect . just beneath financial stability . over the next half hour , a mission statement emerges . build tools that empower artists evolves , in fits and starts , to build creative experiences and tools for your inner artist . kaneko then writes down three main takeaways from the week find a sustainable business model for the long term . focus . improve marketing . last year we were in a good place financially , so it was very idealistic , says ryan harter , the company s android developer . we talked about users a lot more . this year we re maybe a little too focused on keeping the company alive , sykora adds . well not too focused . the team laughs nervously . back in san francisco , i meet with danielle levitas , senior vice president of research at app annie . i believe in the future of apps , levitas says . she says that between now and , downloads of non game apps will quadruple around the world . but those numbers mask a radical shift in the app economy most of the growth will come from foreign markets . and the app stores are dominated by giants facebook and google make eight of the ten most used apps , according to comscore . in the united states , where more than percent of people already own smartphones , apps are approaching the saturation point . accordingly , the cost of acquiring new users continues to increase . ads that let users install apps directly can range from to per user . if your app only costs to begin with , ads are a non starter . if there s a path forward for independent developers , it has to begin with a strong sense of purpose . pixite can seem as if it s still grasping for it . underlying the tension is a basic difference of opinion between pixite s co founders . kaneko wants to focus on building tools for design professionals , while sykora is convinced there is a much larger audience of consumers seeking tools for creative play . if pixite s apps could help to reach and grow that market , sykora says , it could capture a large part of it for itself . outside gaming , the market for apps today values utility above all . consider the case of omni group , a highly respected developer that has been building productivity tools since the days of next . the company s ios apps range in price from for a flexible writing app called omnioutliner , to an unheard of for omniplan , a project manager . ken case , its founder and ceo , says ios is the fastest growing part of the company s revenue . it s very important strategically to be there , case says of ios . and it s very important for exposure . still , he adds , it s not actually where the bulk of our revenue comes from . desktop software still accounts for the majority of sales . but case is fundamentally an app store optimist selling software has always been hard , he says . in terms of how much money people are willing to spend , it s no worse than it ever has been , he says . the market of people who want to spend money on software and feel like it s worth it is still out there . two things developers say would help their businesses become more sustainable free trials and paid upgrades . tools we need for work , like the ones omnigroup makes , will stay on our home screens forever . but other apps are now more faddish than ever before . it used to be that if you got over million monthly active users , that was an incredible threshold , says redpoint s sarver . now you can get or million and still come right back down . i ve just become really disheartened about an app s ability to break above the noise and reach the consumer . pixite is trying to focus on the positive thanks to pigment , the company is currently bringing in enough to break even . but only two months into , it s unclear how long users will renew their pigment subscriptions . the download chart for pigment looks like the rest of pixite s apps a big spike at launch , followed by gradual decline . to build a sustainable business , the company needs more downloads . it s definitely fallen off , kaneko says . we feel like we should probably have times as many downloads . the company recently brought in a business coach to help it refine its mission again . kaneko has taken over the company s marketing efforts , and it plans to advertise for the first time this year . eventually , the coloring book fad will pass . but if it can help pixite figure out a subscription business in the meantime , it could serve as the lifeline that sees the company through to the next thing . just like web albums did back in . or pixite could decide to abandon creating apps altogether , shifting gradually to making apps for other people . the market for software supports freelancers and solo entrepreneurs . it supports big venture backed startups . but bootstrapping a six person team has never looked harder . it seems to be aggregating to a smaller set of winners who are getting more of the rewards , sarver says . it s trending to only get harder and harder than it is right now . back at the retreat , after dinner at a brew pub , the team sets off in search of more to drink . it is a perfect san diego evening , cool and breezy , and a sense of optimism prevails . the team has a renewed sense of focus , and something resembling a plan . this year would not be the end of pixite . but it felt like the end of something . let s keep walking till we hit the ocean , someone says , and they make their way toward the beach . product by frank bidesign by james barehamedited by michael zelenko	 on may th , , a package containing , in cash arrived at a fedex store in palo alto , california . the bills had been washed in lantern fuel , as per instruction , then double vacuum sealed and placed inside the cavity of a stuffed animal , which was then gift wrapped . the store had been chosen carefully it was open all night , and located just feet from a caltrain station . the package was general delivery , to be picked up at the store by a man named patrick stout . the dragnethow a man accused of million dollar fraud uncovered a never before seen , secret surveillance deviceby russell brandom illustrations by cam floyd on may th , , a package containing , in cash arrived at a fedex store in palo alto , california . the bills had been washed in lantern fuel , as per instruction , then double vacuum sealed and placed inside the cavity of a stuffed animal , which was then gift wrapped . the store had been chosen carefully it was open all night , and located just feet from a caltrain station . the package was general delivery , to be picked up at the store by a man named patrick stout . the money was being closely watched . the package had been prepared by a criminal informant , working in cooperation with a joint task force of agents from the fbi , irs , and us postal service , who were investigating a tax fraud scheme . the informant had been arrested and flipped months earlier , betrayed by yet another informant . now they were after the mastermind . two officers tried to follow stout , but he recognized the tail and slipped awayaround o clock the next morning , the target appeared . a wiry white man in a dark hoodie came in through the back entrance , presented a driver s license in the name of patrick stout , picked up the package , and left the same way he came in . he tore open the package near a dumpster behind the store , pocketing the stuffed animal , and headed toward the train . two officers tried to follow , but he recognized the tail and slipped away . agents rushed to the station but couldn t find him among the early morning commuters . the trains could have taken him anywhere from san francisco to san jose , with connections to each city s airport . just a few minutes after the pickup , stout was gone . it was as close as the cops would get for months . from there , every lead seemed to dry up . stout s driver s license was fake the address didn t exist and the id number belonged to a woman in bakersfield . stout kept talking to the informant , joking that he was becoming paranoid . he didn t know who he d spotted following him at the fedex store , but he was shy about setting up another cash drop . a few weeks later , stout had , in gold bars mailed to the same fedex office , but by the time investigators found out , the pickup had come and gone . the informant led the task force to a nest of bank accounts where he d been instructed to deposit money , but they were all in false names sam blat , benjamin cohan , aaron johnson . there was more than , spread across the accounts , all of which could have been shuttered and seized using evidence the task force already had but that would just have spooked the target . they wanted to catch him , not to scare him off . their best lead was the ip address stout used to file the fraudulent returns , which traced back to a verizon wireless aircard registered under the name travis rupard . rupard or were rupard and stout the same person ? had bought it through another post office box with another fake id , kept active just long enough to receive the device . the whole point of an aircard is to provide internet access that s not tied down to a fixed address , which made tracking down the owner tricky . when rupard used the card , verizon knew which cell tower he connected to usually somewhere around san jose but they couldn t tell much more than that . three months after the fedex episode , on august rd , the task force descended on an apartment complex near the san jose airport , rented in the name steven travis brawner . agents caught rupard outside the complex , and served a search warrant on his apartment and storage unit later that day . they found , in us currency , ounces of gold , and ounces of silver , along with the dark gray hoodie tying him to the drop at the train station and a verizon aircard tying him to the bank accounts . by the time the case was over , the agents would recover more than . million . working from prison , rigmaiden unravelled decades of secrecythe suspect was charged with counts of wire fraud , counts of aggravated identity theft , and three other miscellaneous charges enough to keep him in jail for the rest of his life . taking his fingerprints three days later , the police finally worked back to his name not rupard , or stout , or brawner , or aldrich , or any of the others . his name was daniel rigmaiden . but there was something else , something that wasn t reported on the seizure affidavit , the complaint , or any of the documents that followed . to track rigmaiden down , the investigators had used a secret device , one that allowed them to pinpoint their target with far more accuracy than verizon could . they called it a cell site simulator , or by its trade name , stingray . neither term was found in the court order that authorized its use . the device had to be kept secret , even from the courts . the stingray had worked perfectly . agents traced the suspect s aircard back to his apartment and now had more than enough evidence for a conviction . but in the years that followed , that open and shut case would turn into something far more complex . working from prison , rigmaiden would unravel decades of secrecy , becoming the world s foremost authority on the device that sent him to jail . by the time he was finished , a covert surveillance device and the system that kept it secret would be exposed to the public for the very first time . this past october , i met with rigmaiden in phoenix , where he s lived since he was released from a nearby federal prison in . in person , he looks like a scrappier j . j . abrams , with thick , black glasses and spiky , black hair . intensely private , he declined to meet at his home , preferring a shopping center some blocks away . it was a mild day and the sun was low , so we decided to go on a hike in an expansive park south of town where the flat plain of the city rises into rocky hills . he doesn t get out much these days , but the trail brought out his old outdoors instincts . as we climbed , he guided me away from brittle rock faces and possible snake pits . normally i wouldn t even come out without a full pack , he told me . you re not really supposed to . rigmaiden has spent much of his life coming to terms with authoritythese days rigmaiden is primarily concerned with the typical worries of a newly released prisoner finding a good job and an apartment willing to rent to an ex con . he likes his probation officer and seems to be adjusting well to life on the outside . but the world has lots of ways of reminding rigmaiden of his time locked up . as we came down from the hills , a city of phoenix maintenance truck rolled toward us , the driver wearing a uniform we couldn t quite place . when we crossed in front of the truck , the driver rolled down the window and pulled out a camera , training it up the mountain and above it , to the sky . were we accidentally trespassing ? neither of us was sure . rigmaiden has to make an official report for every interaction he has with the police , so even minor mistakes can become dangerous . but the official didn t seem to care about us , and we walked past without being stopped . it was a tense , awkward moment , but rigmaiden is used to the feeling . a natural outsider , he has spent much of his life coming to terms with authority , legal and otherwise . i tried the non participation way for years , then i spent five years in jail , he told me . now i ve made the transition to try to change things for the better . born in seaside , california , rigmaiden left home just after high school , living in a string of college towns up and down the coast . he became an expert at forging fake ids and did a good business selling them to beer happy college kids online . eventually , he decided to get off the grid entirely . i just didn t want to be attached to the whole society system , he recalls . i needed to take a step back and take a break from it all . he traded the college towns for seaside motels , or a tent and remote campsites . it was peaceful . what i liked about it was , you had to do everything yourself , he says . he spent one summer in big sur , an isolated stretch of the california coast famous for its massive redwoods and dramatic precipices . he set up camp deep in the forest and developed a taste for free climbing , scrambling over the area s boulders and cliffs . he liked the exertion , the independence , but most of all the heightened sensitivity that came with danger . it s not panic , he told me . it s almost like you re glued to the side of the rock . it s that calculated . because you know if you fall off you re going to die . once , looking out over a foot dropoff , the ground gave way beneath him . he found himself sliding down the face of a cliff . i was grabbing saplings to slow myself down but i ended up just pulling them out . it was this burnt stump that saved me , he told me . eventually , i got back by swinging sapling to sapling . those adventures cost more money than he could make from selling fake ids , so he hit on another scheme , filing tax returns for the recently deceased . he liked the scam , he told me , because he saw it as relatively victimless . he didn t have to steal from anyone who was still alive . all he got was whatever refund money would be coming back to the deceased , often thousands of dollars for a single return . it proved incredibly lucrative , pulling in far more than he needed to survive . rigmaiden developed a rhythm working his id and tax return businesses for six months , squirreling away the extra money , then taking the rest of the year off . each step of his scheme was painstakingly arrangedhe was meticulous about hiding his identity . his name changed constantly , with a new driver s license for each new storage unit or post office box . each step of his scheme was painstakingly arranged from the computers that filed the returns to the post office boxes where the refunds were delivered , to the couriers that picked them up and the bank accounts where they were deposited . he approached it like a mental puzzle . as far as he could tell , there were no links that could trace the money back to him . except for that aircard . he didn t think police had the expertise to trace it , but he knew enough about the physics of wireless signals to be sure it could be done . in radio terms , the aircard was noisy , blasting out data in all directions like a barking dog on a busy street . by the time the signal reached the cell tower , it was mixed in with noise from thousands of other sources but in theory , a person with the right equipment could always trace the bark back to the dog . for years , the weakness of the aircard was a hypothesis but the moment federal agents arrived at his apartment in the summer of , he knew it was real . when he was arrested , rigmaiden s first thought was that the aircard had given him away . the task force had used some device , some device no one knew about . his second thought was that he didn t want to take on all the work that would be necessary to prove it . but even then , he knew there was no other way . i knew i was going to have to learn the legal system to get out of this , he told me . it was two months into his stay at the florence correctional center that rigmaiden discovered the law library . since his arrest , he had been trying to plead his case while scrambling from prison to prison first a local penitentiary in california , then to florence in arizona where the case was being tried . he did his best to keep a low profile at florence , steering clear of mentally ill inmates and making do through random shortages of staples like toilet paper . he wrote note after note to his lawyer , scribbling on the back of prisoner request forms with the inch golf pencils issued by the prison , but it didn t seem to change anything . he was facing a federal case , represented by a public defender . making noise about invisible signals and secret surveillance devices was only going to get him in trouble . still , he knew the government was hiding something . he had seen the warrant for the raid on his apartment , but it gave no sense of how they had tracked him , attributing the information to historical cell tower information and other investigative techniques . but a single cell tower serves thousands of phones at once . even detailed records couldn t have been enough to pinpoint a single apartment complex . there had to be something else . if he was right , it meant the agents had lied to the judge , which could be enough to get the case dismissed . but the key to his argument was buried in murky technical details that only he understood . his lawyer didn t know the first thing about cell tower data . neither did the judge . he found himself drawn to the prison library s open hours , the three hours a week when he could actually get answers . he fired his first lawyer , then a second , then finally got permission to represent himselfhe made a valuable new friend at the library , a disbarred lawyer who was serving time for fraud . rigmaiden learned about the rhythms of a trial , the motions and requests each side uses to stake out territory . eventually , rigmaiden opted for a strategy of total legal war , flooding the court with motions and proposals . when you hire an attorney , he says , they have to pick and choose the things they re going to challenge because of time and resources . but i just challenged everything . he fired his first lawyer , then a second , then finally got permission to represent himself , which let him bump up his library time to five hours a day . he worked six days a week , sometimes hours a day . when he couldn t print the motions , he wrote them out by hand , using the same nubby half pencil . meanwhile , he was also poring through records for any evidence of the mysterious device that had caught him . in october , the court gave him access to his discovery file , , pages of documents that laid the groundwork for the prosecution s case . in the second to last box , he saw the word stingray , scribbled in one investigator s notes . he thought it sounded like a brand name . the prison library didn t have internet access , but the prison s case managers would google search for you if you asked them . eventually , rigmaiden found a stingray brochure from harris corporation , advertising exactly the capabilities he d suspected . now he just needed to prove police were using it . he found what he was looking for in the minutes of a maricopa county board meeting a unanimous vote to buy police equipment paid for by a federal grant . because there hadn t been an open bidding process , the department had been required to submit its invoice for public consideration . the invoice was for a cell site simulator device , built by the harris corporation . in , a hacker named kevin mitnick broke into a software company called netcom , stealing email archives and security programs . he concealed his location with a modem connected cell phone , a hacked together version of rigmaiden s aircard . to zero in on mitnick s cell phone , police used a passive cell site simulator combined with a silent sms from the phone company that forced mitnick s device to check in . it was primitive , but they were employing the same technique that would catch rigmaiden more than a decade later . researchers knew the system was broken , but everybody else had moved onin , rohde ampamp schwarz created a device called the ga , which bundled the ping and capture functions together , effectively masquerading as a cell tower . driving through a neighborhood with your ga , you could see the unique subscriber id for everyone within range , akin to seeing everyone s cell phone number . if one number was particularly interesting , you could drive around the corner and take another reading to triangulate exactly which house or car it came from . the device exploited a fundamental part of how cell networks are built . mobile phones rely on constant communication with nearby cell towers , always listening for signals from a tower that might be closer or less congested than the current connection . as soon as the phone hears a signal , it spits back an identification number . but crucially , the signal doesn t have to prove it s coming from a tower . there s no authentication for the first stage of the process , so a device like the ga could slip right in . security researchers have been concerned about that flaw since the s , some even accusing phone companies of keeping it open just to allow law enforcement to exploit it . but by the time those flaws were being used against rigmaiden , the topic had largely faded from view . researchers knew the system was broken , but everybody else counted it as a theoretical attack and moved on . meanwhile , devices like the ga were gaining popularity in the law enforcement community . in , harris corporation unveiled the stingray , a sleeker , smaller version of rohde ampamp schwarz s earlier model , and it came with an aggressive push into the us market . intelligence agencies began using them overseas to surveil targets or identify their devices . us marshals put stingrays in planes and flew them over cities , collecting tens of thousands of phone numbers in search of a single fugitive s phone . over time , the devices trickled down to local police departments , where they could be used to track down anyone from murderers to purse snatchers . but purchasing the device came with a catch . every time an agency bought a device from harris , they signed an agreement to keep it out of public court records . if stingray methods were ever entered into evidence , harris argued , criminals would catch on , rendering the device useless . agencies still got court orders to use the devices , but they usually looked like a vaguely worded request for phone records . in most cases , the judges never knew what they were signing and defendants never knew how they d been caught . he was a self represented prisoner chasing a mythical surveillance device sure signs of a crankbut they couldn t hide every trace . rigmaiden found signs of harris stingray device in random corners of the web . he searched through harris patent filings , which gave him far more insight into how the devices worked . he filed requests for information on the devices under the freedom of information act , but departments locked up , citing confidential methods . he studied the fugitive game , a page study of the mitnick case , scouring for clues on exactly how police had tracked the rogue hacker . there was no public evidence of the device at the federal level , no documents or statements indicating it was in use . he turned his attention to local departments , hoping they would be less careful . when his library time was up , he would take the documents back , poring over them in his cell . over more than two years , he built a file that sprawled to hundreds of pages , including every last trace of the stingray he could find . rigmaiden needed allies , so he sent his file to half a dozen different privacy organizations , but never got back more than a form letter . not only was rigmaiden a self represented prisoner chasing a mythical surveillance device , but he had filed hundreds of motions these were sure signs of a crank . a normal person would take the plea deal and resign himself to his sentence . rigmaiden s phonebook sized file was testament to how unusual he really was . eventually , rigmaiden sent his file to christopher soghoian , then a phd student who had published work on wireless spectrum surveillance . there was something unhinged about the file , to be sure , but soghoian knew that what rigmaiden was proposing could very well exist . my reaction wasn t , what is this strange device . it was , oh i read about this in graduate school . but i read about it as a thing that was possible , not a thing that the police in baltimore were using , soghoian says . he became convinced rigmaiden was right . soghoian passed rigmaiden s file along to privacy groups like the aclu and eff , many of the same groups who had ignored the package the first time around . but the breakthrough came when he sent rigmaiden s sprawling file to jennifer valentino devries , a reporter for the wall street journal s digits blog . the next month , her story hit the front page of the paper , revealing stingrays to the public for the first time and presenting the unchecked , widespread adoption of the technology as a direct challenge to constitutional rights . when a copy of the paper made it to his cell , rigmaiden was surprised . for the first time , he had reason to think his discovery would matter for more cases than just his own . i knew that it wouldn t be a front page story if it wasn t such a big deal , he told me . he kept up his barrage of motions he filed different motions to continue trial rigmaiden s legal situation , however , hadn t changed . arizona prosecutors wouldn t drop his case just because of a fudged warrant , and while the stingray news weakened their case , they were determined to see it through . he kept up his barrage of motions he filed different motions to continue trial , forcing the prosecution to adapt to his unusual speed . one filing was entirely concerned with the use of the word preliminary in testimony describing a handwriting analysis . after the fbi started ignoring his foia requests , rigmaiden launched a civil suit against the bureau , eventually filing almost two dozen motions on that case before it was dismissed . the criminal docket sprawled to more than , entries . in , prosecutors finally offered a plea deal on his criminal charges . rigmaiden believes the deal had more to do with his persistence than the merits of the case . the reason they wanted to get rid of the case wasn t because they were worried the stingray was going to get exposed more , because at that point it was pretty much already out there , he says . the reason they wanted to get rid of me was because i was doing all that work . i was giving them so much work to do and it was pushing their resource limit . he was still reticent to take the plea which waived his right to appeal but prison was wearing him down , and he ultimately decided he could do more on the outside . in april of , after nine months of deliberation , he took the deal and walked out of florence a free man . in the four years since the first journal article , stingrays have turned up everywhere . they ve been documented at agencies spread across states , used in major cities like new york and chicago as well as smaller departments in memphis , durham , and san jose . in a review , baltimore police admitted using the device more than , times , sometimes for crimes as minor as a stolen cell phone . the us marshals have even lent the devices out to mexican officials hunting down cartels . in each case , the departments had been using the devices for years , long before rigmaiden came onto the scene . meanwhile , an informal network of defense attorneys has cropped up , with public defenders sharing notes on how to spot and deal with stingray cases . because of the intense non disclosure agreements around the stingray , most prosecutors will drop cases rather than defend the use of the device in the face of a well versed lawyer . rigmaiden has become a kind of in house expert for those lawyers , tracking surveillance issues on twitter and consulting behind the scenes . when washington state started drafting a law to limit use of stingray devices in late , someone passed the bill along to rigmaiden . for a month and a half , he spent each morning going over a draft of the legislation , demonstrating the same obsession to detail he d shown in planning his tax fraud scheme and criminal defense . working with a local aclu chapter , he recommended tweaks to the bill , specifying the language and expanding the rules to cover passive surveillance devices and other variants that are still secret . in september , the justice department issued a new policy on cell site simulators , instructing all federal agencies to get warrants before using the devices . for a lot of privacy groups , it was a victory the first clear federal policy on stingray use , openly instructing agents to play straight with courts . rigmaiden was less optimistic . a lot of it is just putting a new face on what they ve been doing all along , he told me . in my case , they had a warrant . the problem was the information on the warrant . rigmaiden now lives a modest life . he gets no money from his legal work , and when i visited , he had just quit a telemarketing job in favor of a slightly friendlier web development gig . he has no car his record also makes auto loans difficult , so the telemarketing job meant a long walk to a bus to a train . last year , he spoke at a defense attorney conference at the university of arizona , an experience he d like to repeat if he can . for now , the terms of his probation stop him from leaving the phoenix area . it was exactly the kind of crowd where you might want to use a stingrayafter climbing down from the hills , we drove to another park , this one a flat stretch of lawn closer to the center of phoenix . it was quiet , empty except for a few couples and about a dozen people gathered near a stage for a benefit event . it was , as rigmaiden pointed out , exactly the kind of crowd where you might want to use a stingray . he had an app on his phone called snoopsnitch , which looks for telltale disturbances in the network , one of the open source stingray hunting projects that s sprung up since the device became common knowledge . that day , the data showed two disturbances , both silent pings from the phone company . neither was necessarily suspicious , although we ll never know why they went out . rigmaiden suspects police have moved on from stingrays to passive receivers , which sniff signals out of the air without disrupting the network at all . it s the kind of thing you could build yourself with open software and no fcc violations at all , although you d need the phone company s help to connect the signals to actual cell numbers . cell site simulators are now at least years old , a long time for any one trick to stay secret . police had been using the devices in secret for years by the time they were trained on rigmaiden . from there , it took another eight years to drag them into the light . even that was only possible because of the chance alignment of a stubborn defendant , a legal shortcut , and a sympathetic judge . if we hadn t picked up the scent on this , they could have gotten another five or years out of it , soghoian says . this is the logic of surveillance , an arms race between police and criminals , but also between police and the legal systems meant to keep them in check . after years off the grid and five years in jail , rigmaiden is now on the side of those systems privacy groups , lawyers , judges . it s a strange place to find himself . how did he make the turn from dodging surveillance to actually fighting it ? he s still not sure , although it probably has something to do with getting older . you have to realize when you re in a situation where you can make a difference , and grab onto it , he told me . i don t think those opportunities arise very often . edited by michael zelenko	 how a weapon against war became a weapon against the web every year , artists and technology enthusiasts meet in linz , austria , for the ars electronica festival , a meetup in the city s downtown , located just off the danube river . the festival is a haven for those with an eye toward the future something between burning man and a ted conference , with visitors navigating scientific equipment , led lights , and colorful installations . international visitors for the event are common enough , but the festival featured an unlikely participant the pentagon . that year , members of an art group called the electronic disturbance theater were invited to demonstrate a program called floodnet . billed as a virtual sit in , users navigated to the floodnet website at a predetermined time , and through a simple java tool , were directed to a targeted website that would reload constantly , every few seconds . with enough people perhaps thousands the sit in caused targeted websites to slow or maybe even crash , rendering them intermittently inaccessible . the ability to neutralize practically any website on demand . . . was a powerful new tool for global civic disobediencethe group set three targets , picked in solidarity with mexico s zapatista revolutionary movement and against neoliberalism and the global economy mexican president ernesto zedillo , the frankfurt stock exchange , and what was then the site of the us department of defense , defenselink . mil . the group called its protests actions , and this action was called swarm stop the war in mexico . the ability to neutralize practically any website on demand what s now commonly referred to as a distributed denial of service , or ddos , attack was a powerful new tool for global civic disobedience . but for agencies like the department of defense , then facing the earliest prospects of war in the digital age , the capability posed a legitimate threat , and a dark omen of what was to come . this year marks the th anniversary of the group s earliest beginnings , and the questions raised by electronic disturbance theater s actions are relevant in ways its creators could not have foreseen . today the ddos attack seems like a fait accompli of digital life in october , a bot powered ddos attack shut down major sites around the internet a caper that exposed the fragility of the internet , as the attack was soon classified as the largest of its kind ever observed . in a documentary from , ricardo dominguez , edt s bespectacled , wavy haired ringleader , explains the group s mission in the sober , scholarly diction of a determined revolutionary electronic civil disobedience is non violent direct action online . edt s precise ideological origins are murky , and not without some controversy . in the s , a group called critical art ensemble was formed in tallahassee , florida . led by steve and hope kurtz , a married couple , the group published two seminal texts in the history of digital protest s the electronic disturbance and s electronic civil disobedience and other unpopular ideas . the texts anticipated a near future when street protests , used to block physical space , would shift to blocking digital space a radical idea for the time . dominguez was a member of the group , although steve kurtz still disputes his contribution to the texts . edt didn t patent the denial of service technique . as molly sauter documents in her book the coming swarm , an italian hacker group called the strano network is often credited with the first major ddos like protest . in , the strano network targeted french government sites with a one hour net strike after the government tested nukes in the pacific ocean an action with limited success . but it was edt , through high profile demonstrations against governments and businesses , that first popularized the idea of politically driven ddos attacks , creating the foundation that others would use well into the future . the incident that brought edt together came in late . the revolutionary zapatista army had rebelled for years against the mexican government , and in december of that year , the violence came to a head when people , including children , were killed during an attack in the state of chiapas , in a town sympathetic to the zapatistas . the zapatistas leaders were clear on who they blamed president zedillo . he condemned the massacre , but surviving witnesses said the gunmen were allied with zedillo s political party . the direct responsibility for this bloody event lies on the shoulders of ernesto zedillo and interior ministry officials who two years ago gave the green light for the army to fight a counterinsurgency war in chiapas , the zapatistas said in a communique . the attack brought edt s members together under a common cause , and a lineup coalesced with four members brett stalbaum and carmin karasic , two artists with technical expertise , formed the coding backbone of the group dominguez and stefan wray , activists more interested in theory , were its philosophers . dominguez and wray , who were already involved in zapatista solidarity efforts in the us , began to discuss the idea of an electronic civil disobedience action . stalbaum wrote an early draft of what would become floodnet , and worked with karasic , who improved on the concept with him . edt planned a series of actions for , starting with a response to the chiapas massacre . in april , dominguez sent out a series of notes alerting people to the plan floodnet tactical version . . would target the website of president zedillo , with the goal of bringing attention to the killings . the group bristles now at the idea it intended to bring down the site , but did foresee the possibility that access would be disrupted . truth not found justice not found . in one clever twist , the program even let users customize messages attached to their server requests , pinging for information like truth or justice . in a stylistic flourish with little practical use in a pre social media era , the users could send word or phrase related queries to the site , which would spit out errors in the server log truth not found justice not found . the first action attempt that month , launched in a pair of two hour stretches , brought in more than , individuals , edt later claimed . the group received reports that , although it did not seem entirely disabled , the site was at times inaccessible . but the group saved its most organized action for the ars festival , which dominguez and wray attended in person a grand demonstration of floodnet , once again targeting zedillo s website , as well as the frankfurt stock exchange and pentagon . the festival had always been a haven for the hacker counterculture , with icons like william gibson making the journey to speak , and participants didn t shy away from the political one prescient exhibit from featured a miniature border wall topped with security cameras . that year , the theme was information warfare , and edt was invited to attend alongside prominent hackers , including groups like the hippies from hell , a radical dutch collective that dominguez says considered edt impure . he remembers offering the use of floodnet to another group in exchange for some beer . as other attendees discussed theoretical ideas , edt was eager to act . their action was planned for the third day of the festival , and it drew considerable media attention . as usual , the group announced its plans in advance , conscious of the attention it might garner , but a sign of sabotage appeared early . that morning , dominguez says , he received a threatening phone call from a spanish speaker , who he claims said , we know who you are , but didn t reveal his identity . dominguez believes it was mexican agents , although this hasn t been substantiated . a screenshot of the original floodnet program . a full , working version of the program has been preserved by rhizome , a non profit dedicated to new media and digital art . at am linz time , web users began flooding the sites . the hits poured in for hours from italy , japan , malaysia even , it appeared , from servers associated with us education and military institutions . that afternoon , the group gave a talk on their work . but then something strange happened . i looked at my desktop and noticed a string of java icons little coffee cups streaming across the bottom of the screen , wray later wrote . and then floodnet just froze . i saw this happen on several machines . similar reports surfaced that some kind of error had halted the protest . countermeasures effectively kept me from participating this morning i m wondering if you could give me an update on how things went , one hopeful user messaged to the group . a small screenshot from the time preserved the error that appeared netscape is unable to locate the server reload your search page . please the server does not have a dns entry . check the server name in the location url and try again . the group couldn t have known what was happening , but wray soon received a message that eventually provided some shocking clarity . the email was from an administrator at nyu , who said they d been contacted by the department of defense , asking questions about edt , which hosted a page with an edt related link on the university s servers . the counterstrike shut down the action , and later that night , stalbaum uncovered what he says now was a kind of media combat weapon a counter java applet that appeared to be crashing machines loading the pentagon pages . when he looked further , he found that it was named hostile applet . the next day , wired published a story on the incident , in which a defense department spokesperson obliquely took credit for shutting down the digital attack . our support personnel were aware of this planned electronic civil disobedience attack and were able to take appropriate countermeasures , the spokesperson said . measures were taken to send the countless demands from the attackers into the great beyond . the group s actions continued throughout the year , as edt expanded to target other websites , including the white house . by the end of the year , the group had drawn the attention of the new york times . radical groups are discovering what hackers have always known traditional social institutions are more vulnerable in cyberspace than they are in the physical world , a story on the group and other hacktivists read . members of edt tend to demur when asked about their role in popularizing ddos attacks . as karasic points out , the group differed from many hackers , who may take action against an entity unilaterally , without the support of like minded internet users . floodnet required participation from thousands to be effective there was something akin to a vote . but the group s most notable legacy may be a radical blurring of the line between provocative art and hacking . the group released a freely available version of floodnet , which other activists could use to launch their own protests , just after midnight on new year s eve . the year s actions completed , the members went their separate ways . in , the airline lufthansa was targeted by a different group , inspired by edt , protesting deportations from germany facilitated by the company . edt s members were tangentially involved in literally every ddos thing that happened in the early s , sauter says . edt s members were tangentially involved in literally every ddos thing that happened in the early s . about , people took part in the lufthansa sit in , and while the airline said it successfully withstood the attack , an organizer was arrested and charged . eventually , he was ordered to pay a fine or serve three months in jail , sauter explains , but another court overturned the ruling , saying the action was a justified form of protest . parts of the commentariat , like the writer evgeny morozov , have since said that this is a reasonable legal interpretation that it is possible to see such actions as a form of dissent but the legal test that may one day decide these issues definitively in the united states still hasn t materialized . meanwhile , both the technology powering activism and the cultural landscape behind it have changed dramatically since edt was active . a small group can take down large parts of the internet without much help , but many continue to do so in the name of protest and art . dominguez himself organized a digital sit in of hundreds of students targeting the university of california president s website to protest the institution s financial policies . dominguez was a uc san diego professor , and still is , although the protest nearly cost him tenure . stalbaum is also a professor at the university , and , although the group has mostly drifted apart , is now a part of electronic disturbance theater . a group with new members , if a similar mission . carmin karasic works as an artist in the netherlands . wray has lost touch with the group . dominguez sees a fundamental difference between edt s work and later activists that took up its cause as activists . our work may end up being useful to a wide variety of communities , but our approach was always as artists , he says . it doesn t mean that we re not concerned with the political , we re not concerned with the conditions we find ourselves in , he continues . but as artists we re not necessarily rapidly mobilized to hit trump tower now . the distinction between art and protest might be lost on the groups using today s version of edt s tactics . in , anonymous supporters launched a white house petition to legalize ddos attacks after a series of arrests related to politically motivated attacks launched by the group . the petitioners argued that a ddos attack was free speech . distributed denial of service ddos , is not any form of hacking in any way , the petition read . it is the equivalent of repeatedly hitting the refresh button on a webpage . the idea had more than a small hint of edt philosophy . the page for the petition has since been taken down . 	 the first bot i ever befriended went by the name of googlyminotaur . the minotaur appeared in to promote amnesiac , the latest album from radiohead , which was and still is my favorite band . i happily chatted with the minotaur about radiohead history , information about the band s tour , and the mp s it offered for download . the minotaur was popular among fans like me million people added it as a friend , and in its lifetime it sent more than million messages . the search for the killer botbots are here , they re learning and in , they might eat the webby casey newton illustrations by peter steineck the first bot i ever befriended went by the name of googlyminotaur . the minotaur appeared in to promote amnesiac , the latest album from radiohead , which was and still is my favorite band . i happily chatted with the minotaur about radiohead history , information about the band s tour , and the mp s it offered for download . the minotaur was popular among fans like me million people added it as a friend , and in its lifetime it sent more than million messages . but the minotaur died a few months after it appeared , along with the rest of the era s bots . the entire field seemed dormant for more than a decade . and then a couple years ago , the bots tentatively came back to life . the minotaur died a few months after it appearedfor xoxco , it started with tacos . by the fall of , employees of the boutique software development company found themselves facing a problem familiar to office workers in austin , texas total midday what s for lunch paralysis . should they order from the beloved veracruz all natural food truck ? from ubiquitous torchy s tacos , with three nearby locations ? or from el primo , makers of what xoxco co founder ben brown calls the best fucking tacos conveniently located in the company s parking lot ? brown , a developer and technologist , was determined to end the staff s daily lunchtime indecision . in the year , someone in brown s position might have simply googled their options . in , they might have opened the yelp or foursquare apps on their phones . but in the fall of brown chose to write a bot a simple piece of software that , when sent a message , returned a single lunch option from among the or so restaurants and food trucks that brown entered into its database . lunchbot , as brown called it , was a simple technology that soon grew more sophisticated . other employees added restaurants to the program later , an updated version accounted for places the team had recently ordered from , preventing consecutive visits to torchy s . in the proud tradition of stupid internet toys before it , lunchbot evolved into a real business . last october , xoxco announced it had raised . million and would henceforth be known as howdy , a bot company devoted to automating common workplace tasks . its product lives in slack , the fast growing team communication service . howdy operates in the background , listening for the keywords and questions that will activate its powers . in its first iteration , howdy automates meetings , asking what people are working on , collating their answers , and distributing them to the team . and yes , howdy will also take your lunch order . in the proud tradition of stupid internet toys before it , lunchbot evolved into a real businessin , a host of trends converged to put the focus of investors and entrepreneurs squarely on messaging interfaces , and the growing number of bots that live inside them . on smartphones , wechat , whatsapp , and facebook messenger emerged as some of the most popular apps in the world . meanwhile , slack put messaging and conversations at the center of work and opened itself up to accommodate developers bots . advancements in natural language processing made it easier to build software that understands our requests and personalizes its responses . growing frustration with the web over the last half decade both the slow growing desktop web , and the just plain slow mobile web has created a market for an alternative . in recent years , the alternative has been native apps . but most apps had a terrible . the average person spends percent of their time on mobile devices using just three apps , according to comscore for developers , buying new users with ads is prohibitively expensive averaging . per installation , according to adparlor , a social advertising company . enter the message bots . as dawns , there s a sense in silicon valley that the decades old fantasy of a true digital assistant is due to roar back into the mainstream . if the trend in past years has been assistants powered by voice siri , alexa , cortana in the focus is shifting to text . and if the bots come , as industry insiders are betting they will , there will be casualties with artificial intelligence doing the searching for us , google may see fewer queries . our ai powered assistants will manage more and more of our digital activities , eventually diminishing the importance of individual , siloed apps , and the app stores that sell them . many websites could come to feel as outdated as geocities pages and some companies might ditch them entirely . nearly all of the information they provide can be fed into a bot and delivered via messaging apps . mark zuckerberg , announced he would spend building an iron man style aithat said , there are bot skeptics . one venture capitalist i spoke to said bots could turn out to be the bitcoin of a seemingly irresistible idea that , after tens of millions of dollars of venture capital invested in related businesses , finds itself mired in a niche . silicon valley is always chasing the next big thing bots may simply be the latest technology to enter the hype cycle . other technologists told me that the technical challenges of building and scaling text based virtual assistants cannot be overcome with the current technology . but that hasn t deterred most of the entrepreneurs i spoke with . messaging is going to be the interface or the anti interface of the next phase of the internet , says robin chan , ceo of operator , an app that uses a mix of artificial intelligence and human workers to let you shop through text based conversations . this is such a mega trend that almost every large application is moving toward this . just this week , mark zuckerberg , announced he would spend building an iron man style artificial intelligence to help him run his household and help him with work . he had been inspired , he said , by the work his team is doing on facebook messenger and its quest to build an ai to answer any question you have . if the smart money has only recently turned to bots , the technology itself has a long history . in a landmark paper , computer scientist alan turing proposed a test to determine whether it was possible for machines to mimic human intelligence analyzing a text based conversation between a computer and a person , could an observer determine which was which ? any bot that sufficiently confused the human evaluator could be said to pass the test . a bot passed the turing test for the first time in . eliza was a program that reacted to users responses to its scripts most famously , it mimicked a psychotherapist . eliza would ask you to describe your problem , scan your response for keywords , and formulate an appropriate response . today we call lots of things bots . there are bots that crawl the web to make it searchable bots that control the behavior of characters in video games botnets of computers that have been organized by hackers to email spam or defraud advertisers or launch denial of service attacks on websites . but eliza pointed toward the emergence of one particular kind of bot a virtual assistant that you access through text . bots bubbled up again in , when a company named activebuddy introduced smarterchild an eliza style chatterbot inside aol instant messenger . you could ask smarterchild to give you the news , weather , or movie times , among other kinds of information . thirty million people added smarterchild to their instant messengers . but aim eventually declined , along with aol , and bots like smarterchild and googlyminotaur went with it . in the meantime , google emerged as the primary access point for every piece of information we desired . for almost a decade , the bots disappeared . then came the mobile device . today there are more than . million apps on ios , and . million on android . the apps have given rise to a host of new services for hailing rides or for ordering takeout , for booking travel , or for messaging co workers . in the desktop era , the glue that bound everything together was the search engine , routing us from wikipedia to orbitz to priceline to yelp . in the mobile era , that glue is the application programming interface the api a bit of software that allows apps to talk to each other . it s an api that lets you upload a photo from your phone to facebook , or order an uber from the google maps app . the golden age of apps is coming to a closebut for developers , getting us to download their apps is increasingly difficult and expensive . outside of games , we spend the vast majority of our time in apps built by facebook and google they make eight of the most used apps , according to comscore . to anyone paying attention , it s becoming apparent that the golden age of apps is coming to a close . but the bot makers say the mobile era has produced another big opportunity a meta app , or a layer that links everything together . to many , the interface for that app looks a lot like sms . text messaging is the single most popular smartphone feature , according to a pew research report . text is often more comfortable even if it s less convenient , investor jonathan libov wrote last year about the medium s superiority to graphical and voice based interfaces . i believe comfort , not convenience , is the most important thing in software , and text is an incredibly comfortable medium . text based interaction is fast , fun , funny , flexible , intimate , descriptive and even consistent in ways that voice and user interface often are not . always bet on text . if instant messaging was once a niche behavior on desktop computers used primarily by young people and , later , office workers on mobile devices , text dominates . asian mega messengers like wechat and line have become giant portals in their own right , connecting users to businesses , on demand services , games , and more . the effect of all this messaging is to make us feel suddenly comfortable with what silicon valley has taken to calling conversational uis user interfaces that you can access through text . user interfaces that scan for keywords and message you back . user interfaces , in other words , that look a lot like eliza . hi , slackbot here ! so begins every user s experience of slack . opened to the public in february of , slack makes an app for desktop and mobile devices that lets you send instant messages to your co workers . because most businesses have never communicated in this way , slack took it upon itself to teach them how , using a friendly script named slackbot . to make things easier for your teammates , i can set up a few personal details for you , slackbot tells you , in a private message , when you first sign on . it goes on to ask for your last name , a photo , and your phone number . all the bot is doing is building a simple profile for you . but in the process , it teaches you how slack works . and because slack was built with external services in mind , it s easy for developers to start building bots of their own . xoxco started with lunchbot . in time , though , the tools built for slack have grown much more powerful one of the reasons why slack s base of daily active users doubled in the second half of . we re not trying to reach consciousness here . on one hand , slack is a business tool its potential audience looks much smaller than say , facebook m , a virtual assistant inside messenger that the social network could someday make available to more than billion people . but slack could become at least as important to productivity as microsoft office once was and the bots that are built there could very well influence bots built everywhere else . last month , slack announced an million fund to invest in companies that build apps that run on top of slack . in its announcement , slack showcased bots there was howdy , the meeting running app from brown s lunchbot team birdly , which makes filing expense reports conversational and awesome , which uses natural language processing to summarize the slack discussions you missed while you were away . along with the fund , slack announced botkit , a tool that howdy built for building other bots . it takes a set of tools and information useful to almost any bot that yeah and yup and yep can all stand in for yes , say and packages them together . brown is a star wars fan on the day we meet , he is wearing socks branded with the logo of the rebel alliance and he likens slackbots to the astromechs of the star wars universe . botkit will build generic bot skeletons developers will infuse them knowledge , memory , and personality . there are r units , and there s r d , brown says . he s different from the other units because of what he learned along the way . at the same time , slackbots aren t pursuing true artificial intelligence not yet , anyway . we re not trying to reach consciousness here , brown says . we re just trying to expose certain functionality through language . for the most ambitious bot makers , reaching true intelligence or something resembling it is among their long term goals . but that sort of ai remains many technological breakthroughs away . in the meantime , some entrepreneurs see big potential in keeping it dumb . we believe within five years , every business will be programming its own bots , says shane mac , co founder of assist , which launched this week . mac and his co founder , robert stephens , envision assist as the front end to all manner of web services , accessed in whichever way you prefer . tell assist where you want to go , and it will tell you your cheapest transportation option , after first determining whether uber or lyft have surge pricing turned on . it will tap into data from its partner olset and recommend a hotel room based on your past lodging preferences . you can access assist through slack , if it has been enabled on your team s account , or through a facebook message . you can even send it a good old fashioned sms . no humans ever see your assist queries . we are percent bots , mac says . this is a strategic calculation it s easier for a small team to build and maintain a fully automated service than to recruit an army of human contractors to handle more nettlesome queries . but it also reflects just how far automated technology has come . inevitably , websites fall into disrepair native apps break with the next iteration of the operating systemmac and stephens say that businesses are going to love the bot era . for years they have invested in building and maintaining expensive , time consuming websites , facebook pages , and native apps in an effort to reach their customers . inevitably , websites fall into disrepair and the information they contain becomes outdated . native apps break with the next iteration of the operating system . and all we ever wanted to know was whether they were open on new year s day ! so what if they could use a slackbot style messaging system to update their hours of operation , current menu , or inventory , and so on ? it s gotta work for the coffee shop on the corner , says stephens , who previously founded geek squad , which he sold to best buy . we would like to be a clearinghouse , where it doesn t require that you download an app to use a service . the assist founders are among the bot builders who see big implications for the web itself . if we flock to bot driven messaging apps to handle more of our customer service needs , what happens to the big chunk of the internet devoted to business information and e commerce ? most websites already aren t being updated , mac says . it s too hard to update them . if there s an easier way that lets them communicate with their customers , they re going to continue to not update their sites , and the sites are all going to die . while some apps are starting at the dumber end of the bot spectrum , virtually everyone assumes bots will grow smarter over time . operator is among those trying to speed up the process . the app , which is now in an invite only beta , was founded by former zynga executive robin chan and uber co founder garrett camp . its aim to be the most exciting shopping app to come across your phone , ever . uber brought you a car , chan says . we ve always thought of operator as another one button journey . that s the interface utopia that we re striving to achieve . open up operator and you see a big blue button marked send a request . tap it , and you ll see options for clothing , home decor , electronics , and a handful of other categories . there s also a catch all something else button . pick one , and a bot will ask you a little bit about what you want . some transactions can be handled entirely by the bot others require human intervention in the form of contractors , which the company calls operators . a business that fully understands your intent is a powerful partner to advertisersanswering a series of questions about what kind of vacuum cleaner you re looking for may not represent any real improvement over browsing amazon listings , but the idea is that over time operator s software will improve , enabling the system to handle more and more queries without human intervention . i think the only way you build this business is to build a network around humans and ai , chan says , refining your own combination to identify and aggregate consumer demand , and then automate as much as possible . facebook m , a virtual assistant that lives inside messenger , is taking a similar approach . a base layer of machine learning automates as many tasks as possible , while contractors do things that machines can t make phone calls , argue on your behalf . it can order burritos for takeout it can negotiate with amazon customer service . for now , m is available only to a small number of users in california . magic , a company that aims to fulfill all of your requests via sms message , is playing a similar game . so is fin , co founded by former facebook executive sam lessin . the company is still in stealth mode , but according to a source who has access to the app , it functions similarly to m . until recently , these services , like google , were free to use . these apps sit at what business types call the top of the sales funnel like google , these messaging interfaces are places where customers can describe their intent . a business that fully understands your intent is a powerful partner to advertisers and potentially a very lucrative enterprise . little wonder , then , that google itself is now reportedly building a smart , bot based messenger of its own . but that isn t the only way to profit . this week magic announced that it would begin charging an hour for an advanced version of its services , to charter private helicopters , buy out of stock items , or even complete an item on your bucket list . in time , says april underwood , slack s vp of product , large enterprise software companies are going to invest in building smart bots . and smaller developers will be able to rely on those companies expertise in machine learning , so that they don t all have to build their own engines for interpreting our texts . i predict by the end of , we re going to see more really great examples of household name companies creating great bot experiences , she says . others speculate that the promise of bots may be exaggerated the most ambitious bots of the day , operator and facebook m , are still in closed beta . and for the most part , bots still depend on platforms they don t control ios , sms , slack which some venture capitalists believe limits their growth potential . benedict evans , a partner at andreessen horowitz , told me that bots face a big challenge as they grow the number and volume of human desires might always outpace our ability to write software that can address them . you re writing recipes , he says . and how many recipes can you write ? there s an interface challenge , too . give people a blank box , and they may not know what to ask for . people try to bolt ai onto every new user interface model . but we don t actually have hal , and may be nobel prizes away from that , evans posted on twitter a few days after we spoke . the problem with no user interface is that , since you don t really have hal behind it , it s almost as opaque as a dos prompt . we don t actually have hal , and may be nobel prizes away from that . but with facebook and google now investing in building virtual assistants , bot makers are betting that people will learn . inevitably , they re going to get educated on this interface , says operator s chan . and in many ways , they re educated already . the messaging interface feels very familiar to anyone who s ever sent a text message , slack s underwood says . you ll text your boyfriend to pick up pizza on his way home why wouldn t you text the same thing to facebook m ? the fact is , as investor semil shah has written , messaging has usurped the browser on mobile devices it s where most of our activity takes place . and once you ve dethroned the browser , which empires will crumble ? could a new e commerce channel rise to challenge amazon ? could a bot outdo google when it comes to understanding what you re looking for ? those companies are rich enough to buy up competitors before they become existential threats . but could you disrupt struggling foursquare or yelp with a conversational ui ? see luka . what about fitness apps ? see lark . what about banks ? see digit , or penny . which media companies are poised to succeed in a world where we consume more information through text messages ? in the bot era , facebook s notify app looks a lot like a media company . what does a media company look like when it optimizes for slack ? in the bot era , facebook s notify app looks a lot like a media companydoes siri add a text interface ? does alexa ? and the web ? the web won t die mediums never do . that said it s going to continue the erosion of the power of the home page , and even the power of the search bar , brown says of bots rise . the more software can notice the signals we re sending it constantly , and deep link us all the way to the answer , the less i have to go browse or search . of course , all this depends on a still rickety infrastructure of services and machine learning actually coming together . it depends on an automated messaging interface that feels as trustworthy as a message to your boyfriend , rather than a mysterious dos prompt . and it depends on bots living up to their billing as friendly , powerful , all knowing assistants . building an ai that can be everything to everyone is obviously appealing , yet we ve seen pitches of this sort fail dozens of times over , says maran nelson , founder of clara labs , which is building a virtual assistant that schedules meetings . the technical challenges to delivering on this promise at scale make this almost inconceivable . for now , using facebook m to order takeout burritos feels like a novelty . what will it take to feel like a superpower ? is it coming within reach , as so many entrepreneurs in silicon valley now believe ? or are we still several advances in computer science from getting there ? we re about to find out . existing bots are getting smarter every day , through the sheer volume of data passing through them . across silicon valley , an armada of new intelligences is now under construction . if there s a killer bot to be found on our phones , may be the year it says hello . correction a previous version of this article incorrectly stated that cortana has no text interface , which it does . edited by michael zelenko	 in its first eight years , the xbox established the company as a powerhouse in the games industry , and one of the best options for streaming apps like netflix , hulu , and pandora . as entertainment trended away from physical media and cable subscriptions , the xbox felt like a test run for microsoft s plan to one day control the living room . save pointhow microsoft plans to make the xbox great againby chris plante photography by daniel bermannobody was more surprised by xbox s fall from grace than microsoft . in its first eight years , the xbox established the company as a powerhouse in the games industry , and one of the best options for streaming apps like netflix , hulu , and pandora . as entertainment trended away from physical media and cable subscriptions , the xbox felt like a test run for microsoft s plan to one day control the living room . with each opulent press conference announcing a new product , microsoft seemed more confident . when it launched the kinect motion controller in , wired called the event the most lavish product launch in video game history complete with cirque du soleil performers , an animatronic elephant , and an xbox orb large enough to crush the front row . by the time the company announced the xbox s successor xbox one three years later , the company was riding a tsunami of success . in theory , the xbox one was an improvement on everything fans loved about the xbox a more powerful kinect , new hardware that merged the console with your cable box , and lots of talk about the cloud . microsoft only forgot one thing the games . during the hour long kick off presentation , six minutes were allotted to new game announcements . video by miriam nielsenfans felt betrayed and poured their fury into forums and game blogs critics dubbed the event a disaster . leadership tried to pivot , using subsequent press events to announce the return of beloved franchises like halo and killer instinct . but the messaging remained muddied and unfocused , requiring constant backpedaling . because of the kinect hardware , the xbox one cost more than its closest competition , sony s playstation . when microsoft finally debuted the system on november nd , , it landed with a thud . it s been trailing playstation ever since . microsoft hasn t abandoned xbox , though . if anything , it seems to be doubling down by investing hundreds of millions of dollars , and adopting an audacious strategy to turn hundreds of millions of windows users into xbox customers . but first , microsoft has one priority win gamers back , at all costs . shannon loftis , general manager of microsoft studios this year really felt like i came home , says shannon loftis . as general manager of microsoft studios , loftis is in charge of producing the next crop of microsoft video games . employees talk about loftis the way soldiers brag about a takes no shit commanderwe re sitting in a break area on the third floor of xbox s headquarters in redmond , washington . a life sized halo statue , guns ready , stands in the lobby beneath us . it s mid morning and quiet a couple dozen employees pass by , but all you hear is the mechanical clack of the coffee machines and the dull pop of a virtual grenade detonating in a testing room a few doors down . in an industry dominated by men wearing ratty graphic tees and sneakers , loftis is chic and professional . she embodies confidence . xbox employees talk about loftis the way soldiers brag about a takes no shit commander . she has a reputation for being fierce and protective , demanding a threshold of quality and timeliness , but shielding studios from forces that threaten to impugn creativity . a year microsoft veteran , loftis has seen the company through good and bad , multiple times through . she was there in the late s when microsoft used games to entice home computer owners to windows . in the early s , she produced games for the original xbox , and was involved in that console s efforts to connect console gamers via the internet for the first time . she oversaw european game development for xbox , including beloved brands like crackdown and fable . and when microsoft began work on the kinect motion controller , loftis headed an internal studio that produced a batch of games and core tech . most recently , loftis served as general manager of xbox entertainment studios , a defunct group assembled around the xbox one launch to produce documentaries , films , and television shows around gaming franchises . today , loftis , like microsoft at large , is refocusing on producing games a large part of her job is finding the developers to create microsoft s next big franchises . not every game made by microsoft is made by microsoft . instead of producing games entirely in house see nintendo s super mario bros . or banking on third party providers like activision s call of duty , microsoft often relies on what some have come to call second party partnerships deep collaborations between console makers and outside studios . it s a win win relationship microsoft studios taps ready made , talented teams of developers , and developers get financing , marketing , and support from microsoft s internal team of producers and engineers . both parties walk away with big credits under their belt and bags of cashthe approach has proved remarkably successful dance central state of decay and gears of war , one of xbox s biggest franchises , began as second party games . both parties walk away with big credits under their belt and bags of cash in their bank accounts . to revive xbox , microsoft needs to land the next big franchise . to do that , the company must persuade game developers with all of their talent and experience to collaborate with them . and to do that , outside developers and potential second party partners must believe in microsoft . that s why loftis first action as general manager of microsoft studios was so crucial she immediately consolidated the small groups that made up the organization into a single entity , streamlining workflow . i see our primary role really as being the proof point , loftis says . we prove to gamers why it s worth playing on the microsoft platforms . we prove to game developers why it s worth making games for our platform . collaborating with microsoft studios needed to be faster , easier , and better . the company s future depended on it . a screenshot from quantum breakmicrosoft is betting big on three properties for recore , crackdown , and quantum break . all three began under previous leadership and company battle plans none has felt the changes of the last few years more acutely than quantum break . a third person shooter , quantum break puts players in the snazzy dress shoes of jack joyce , one of two people given unique time warping abilities during an experiment gone sideways at a fictional , mit like university . as time collapses around him , joyce must use his powers to stop the malevolent paul serene , a man who can see into the future . the story lives in a high brow , low brow greyzone , somewhere between the films of christopher nolan and roland emmerich . judging from teasers , it could break in either direction , but there s no denying the sheer awesomeness of every raw gameplay demonstration . in a demo screened last year , a humongous boat crashes into a bridge , and time stops as the hero leaps across pieces of debris to safety . gameplay from quantum break s demonstration at gamescom but behind the scenes , quantum break has had a bumpy road . one of the two new games announced at the xbox one reveal in , quantum break was initially a poster child for microsoft s push to make the xbox a multimedia convergence point . streaming television and playing games wouldn t just happen in separate , discrete apps . in games like quantum break , they d blend together . in quantum break , the third person shooter would be intercut with a live action video from the villain s point of view . that means the team behind quantum break had to learn the ins and outs of tv production with help of teams in los angeles and redmond , thousands of miles from the developer s office in espoo , finland . quantum break includes a television show four episodes , minutes longthen in , microsoft shifted gears . microsoft entertainment studios was shuttered , and the kinect was no longer automatically bundled with xbox one . quantum break creative director sam lake compares the iterative process of the console s development to that of making a game . step by step , lake says , certain things that had been more important for xbox one became less important , where others turned out bigger than in the original plan . he says at times microsoft s adjustments affected the kind of important and strategic benefits of certain features in the game . quantum break still includes a television show four episodes , minutes long , complemented by some shorter cut scenes but much of its marketing has emphasized its place in the shooter genre . players will even have the option to skip the tv episodes altogether . lake sounds happy with where the project ultimately landed at its core , it s always been a traditional third person shooter . first and foremost , it s this big , story driven , cinematic action game , says lake . it is a core game , in many ways . with some trial and error and experiments along the way . i think that s where xbox one as a console has landed , too where games matter . the evening before i meet loftis , i sat down in a windowless meeting room with chris novak , xbox s design architect . he has two decks for me a powerpoint presentation and an actual , physical deck of cards . this , novak tells me , is the presentation an outside developer gets when microsoft is considering a partnership for a new game . novak is implacable in age , sporting a pressed t shirt , a leather jacket , and gelled hair . he could be or he has the energy of a teenager with the tenacity of someone who works in an industry where million dollar projects go belly up in a month . when we have a company meeting , it takes up a stadium . novak cues up powerpoint . the goal of this presentation , novak explains , is to get the developer to really understand what we can bring to bear , to help them make the game they ve always wanted to do . the meeting is equal parts sales pitch and bonding exercise . novak emphasizes microsoft s sheer scale when we have a company meeting , it takes up a stadium and stresses that partners get to lean on a , person strong tech and entertainment company with competitive knowledge and access to everything from dark fiber networks , to office complexes full of servers , to an extensive user research division that pushes through tens of thousands of people each year . we are a huge company , he tells prospective developers , think about how to wield us . novak then fans the deck of cards across the table . written on each card is a cheeky headline followed by a short blurb . a lot of the cards seem like obvious ideas gameplay gameplay is king while others point to merchandising campaigns and cross media productions . a handful of cards are labeled showcase these represent the most expensive and expansive gambles , the pie in the sky plans xbox wants to emphasize with its new generation of games and hardware . novak asks me for a game idea , and i blurt a series of unrelated words a massively multiplayer zombie bunny adventure like destiny but cuter . unfazed , novak immediately lifts a card labeled cloud computing . we have this thing called azure , novak says . it s billions of dollars invested in data centers all around the planet . novak is off , explaining how cloud computing can enable the zombie bunny adventure game to rethink the traditional mmo . how would the game look if it had a shelf life of one year , five years , a decade ? what is it we really want to do ? what is our big ambition ? zombie bunnies is going to solve cancer . somehow , we start discussing cancer . our vision is that this solves cancer , says novak . zombie bunnies is going to solve cancer . okay great , how can we do that ? we need the cloud architecture to not only enable matchmaking in the mmo , but also to do the dna supercomputing crunching in the background . novak doesn t actually believe xbox or any of its games will solve cancer . what he s really after is the core purpose of a game any game . novak wants to know why you want to make a game , and how xbox can help . in my experience , says novak , there s a card in here for every team . on occasion , microsoft studios goes directly to a developer with a card in mind . for instance , novak says , we wanted to take billions of dollars of risk in order to make cloud gaming happen . but we needed a dance partner to kick those things off at the game level . we were effectively waiting for that person to show up . that person eventually showed up , and his name was dave jones . he is the creative director at reagent games , the lead studio developing crackdown . a screenshot from crackdown crackdown is flabbergasting to watch . players come together to fight crime as well as destroy an entire futuristic city piece by piece , from the newsstands to the skyscrapers . architecture splits into thousands of brittle pieces , and entire skylines fall in catastrophic domino effect . but what looks like an explosion fest from the outside , is , against all odds , an investment in microsoft s global cloud computing ambitions for real . crackdown is an investment in global cloud computing for realdave jones is a godfather of the now ubiquitous open world genre . in , he founded dma design the developer of the first grand theft auto . in , he took the genre online with the original crackdown . jones has also co founded numerous video game developers and tech companies . his latest startup , cloudgine , intends to improve the responsiveness of cloud computing . if it works , video game developers won t have to rely on customers to buy the latest expensive hardware instead more and more computing will happen on far away servers . an early demonstration of the tech shows two identical skyscrapers bursting into pieces one , running on traditional hardware , slows and stutters until it becomes a glorified slide show . the other , taking advantage of additional cloud computing , runs smoothly as chunks of building break and scatter across the screen . because crackdown doubles as a research and development opportunity , microsoft is able and willing to toss in its support . when jones team needs to better understand cloud infrastructure , microsoft provides access to data centers . when the cloudgine team has questions about cloud infrastructure , microsoft s experts give answers . if crackdown sets a precedent , jones tells me , it could revolutionize the entire industry . and both xbox one and microsoft , with years of experience already under its belt , would be positioned to benefit immediately . frankly , says novak , we are changing the way that microsoft cloud computing platform azure s functionality works because of his game . a screenshot from state of decaynot every game that comes through microsoft is a multi million dollar gamble spanning multiple studios across the globe , nor is every game expected to reach the masses . at least not at first . i actually love this notion of finding seed ips , says loftis , and helping game creators realize their very first vision . the more we can engage with that developer , the more releases we can put into the marketplace , the more likely that it might become one of these franchises . loftis points to state of decay . initially released as a downloadable title for xbox in , the open world zombie game sold over , copies in its first hours , and broke the million mark within its first year . the game didn t always run reliably , and bubbled over with bugs . but its core mechanic the player embodied many survivors , all of whom could die permanently was fresh to the genre . it was very much an experiment , says loftis . in , microsoft studios signed a multi year , multi game contract with the studio behind state of decay , undead labs . loftis would not comment , but rumors around the project describe a substantially larger , more ambitious , and presumably more expensive production for a massively multiplayer online game . the seed model encourages creativity while minimizing financial risk similar to piloting a tv show before ordering a full series . downloadable games have no cross country shipping fees , no disc manufacturing , and no partnerships with any brick and mortar storefronts . thousands of developers have left their jobs at thousand person studios to make smaller , more personal projects , giving microsoft a bounty of talent to partner with . concept art for recorerecore is the youngest of microsoft s big titles for , announced just this summer . if quantum break represents xbox one s early ambitions , and crackdown points toward the future , recore fits snugly within the company s current games above all else ethos . little is known about the project developed by armature studios , an austin based developer formed by the heads of the metroid reboot for nintendo , and comcept inc . , an osaka and tokyo based developer founded by keiji inafune mega man , onimusha , dead rising . pressed for details , armature co founder and game director mark pacini humors me recore , at its heart , harks back to a different era in gaming . recore , at its heart , harks back to a different era in gaming , pacini says , and trying to put a new spin on it , based on games that myself and inafune san have done in the past that aren t really being done anymore . he name drops games like metroid and zelda as possible inspirations . when pacini first met with microsoft to discuss collaboration , he was skeptical . he d been disappointed by the xbox one s reveal , particularly the emphasis on film and television , and was unsure he had interest in the console . big publishers , he explains , also have a stigma of being too controlling , gradually expunging creative freedom from their partners with endless demands . microsoft came with a clear idea a game for gamers . if recore really does turn out to be the metroid zelda like throwback pacini hints at , then microsoft will get what it wanted . pacini says microsoft studios has been involved but not prescriptive , a relationship that benefits from a mutual understanding of what both parties wish to create and an abundance of resources . where the development of quantum break evolved with the changing strategies and leadership at xbox and microsoft studios , and crackdown constructed itself around its proprietary technology , pacini describes a much more streamlined approach for recore . that means a pure gaming experience , free of distractions like kinect and smartglass . the runway s been cleared . we can just concentrate on making a really good game those things just kind of get brought up less often , says pacini , and all of a sudden they re never brought up in a conversation anymore , and it has nothing to do with anybody fighting for one thing or another . it s just a natural part of consumers responding to certain things they like or dislike about the hardware . it feels like , for us , the runway s been kind of cleared . so we can just concentrate on making a really good game and putting features in that make sense for this game . are things easier , i ask , with xbox s new leadership , like loftis and xbox head phil spencer ? with a lot of publishers , pacini says , the immediate group that you re working with the publisher development group they re always kind of trying to get it past marketing people , past the businessman , past whatever . our group has to get it past the team at microsoft studio . that s a huge difference . this team , pacini explains , has a history of making games they know what a successful one looks like . back in the quiet corner of xbox hq s break area , i have a question for loftis that is so obvious and so big that i m a little embarrassed to ask why ? why does microsoft bother making games ? the company makes billions off windows and enterprise software , and xbox is a comparably small portion of the profit pie that , as of late , has attracted a good deal of bad attention . xbox headquarters in the redmond campus is surrounded by countless other buildings , many larger and with more complex and lucrative sounding names on their signage . i think one of the best reasons for microsoft to continue to engage in games is just because gamers are also consumers , says loftis . that loyalty , the passion that they bring to their gaming and entertainment experiences , the communities that they build . loftis offers kinect as an example . the motion controller began as a peripheral for games on the xbox , but even before microsoft released an official version for windows , hackers and do it yourselfers began finding other uses for the device , from art installations , to medical applications , to interior design tools . these incredible experiences , loftis says , were so far beyond anything that anybody that worked in the kinect program had ever visualized . it created a fly wheel around a creative ecosystem . that s just good for the world . what s good for the world is obviously good for microsoft . the hard truth is that microsoft s renewed focus on xbox and games and the gamer is bunk if nobody owns the hardware to play them . but the solution isn t and can t be as simple as selling more xbox ones . microsoft s big mistake with the launch of xbox one was ignoring how the typical person consumes media . at launch , the hardware brought together our various forms of entertainment on a singular device . you could play a game , have a skype call , and receive fantasy football stats all at once , and in the same place . this was a jetsons like fantasy years ago , in the era of the original xbox . in , we expect media to follow us wherever we gobut our media habits are neither as static nor as constrained today as they were in . when we read a kindle ebook or stream a netflix show , we may start on a laptop at work , switch to a smartphone for our commute , and finish on a tablet or television at home . in , we expect media to follow us wherever we go . enter minecraft . a little over a year ago , microsoft acquired minecraft , along with its developer mojang , for a reported . billion . yes , billion . if you haven t heard of the lego like online game in which players construct entire worlds with friends , ask the nearest child or parent . for them , the game is inescapable . minecraft has sold over million copies , making it one of microsoft studio s most popular brands . the most successful call of duty sold . million copies . the most successful grand theft auto sold million . minecraft has sold more copies than halo through combined . minecraft s global domination stems from its extreme availability . you can play it on xbox one , xbox , windows , and a dozen other platforms , including microsoft s competitor playstation , apple s ios , google s android , and even amazon s firetv . an acquisition like minecraft , says phil spencer , the head of xbox , makes so much sense because minecraft is so pervasive both as a service , as video , obviously as the game across so many different devices it really is a manifestation of what i think gaming can be . you can t help but wonder if phil spencer was created in some unmarked moonshot laboratory to be equally palatable to both board members and customers . at public events , the man who oversees the future of xbox hardware and software wears indie game t shirts under a blazer . his conversations seamlessly weave between corporate strategy and ornate opinions on forgotten video games of the s . he also sits on the board of windows . it gives me a real good insight into what we re doing with the service and how gaming can show up in windows itself . i feel good about the early steps there . it opens up a ton of opportunities , i think most importantly for our development partners . in the months after minecraft s acquisition , the company has begun merging xbox and windows , not in half steps , but leaps . microsoft has begun merging xbox and windows , not in half steps , but leapsa new xbox app for windows lets xbox one owners stream their games onto their computers , allowing them to play in a different room . features like messaging , voice chat , and activity feeds are included . it s a work in progress , spencer says , with plenty of additions and updates to come . over a billion computers run windows , and over million devices run windows . they re about the only numbers in software that dwarf minecraft s . as we embrace windows users as an active part of the xbox community , it opens up opportunities for our first party games , says spencer . he calls xbox s proximity to windows beachfront property . as of its fall system update , xbox one now runs on windows . along with an improved user interface and the option to play over a hundred xbox games on the hardware , the shift also made the xbox experience , in the words of my colleague tom warren , so much faster . both spencer and windows leadership have talked about the streamlining of development the operating system provides , painting a future in which apps created for one windows device work on all other windows devices . in april , microsoft ceo satya nadella told investors that windows will be a service across an array of devices and will usher in a new era where the mobility of the experience , not the device , is paramount . the initiative has already begun to seep through microsoft studios . lionhead studios , responsible for the fable series , is developing the next fable legends for xbox one and windows . rare ltd . is developing its multiplayer adventure game sea of thieves the same way . core franchises are making their way to pc , too . albeit slowly . gears of war ultimate edition , a polished remake of the original , is scheduled for release on windows in the future . when i ask why the latest halo isn t available on windows , the head of industries and the halo franchise , bonnie ross , points to the headway the franchise has already made away from consoles halo mobile games the halo waypoint social platform and the upcoming halo wars , a real time strategy game for both xbox one and pc . it s being deliberate , says ross . so yes . we will , of course , play a critical role on windows , as i think that we re an important ip for the company . it s doing the right thing at the right time . if and when the time comes for new halo games to appear on windows , the thinning line between console and computer will have all but disappeared . if the xbox one launched with a catastrophic lack of focus on games , it s fair to ask whether this windows strategy doesn t also presage yet more problems , another move to minimize console systems . i love that console experience , says spencer . it s obviously the core of what xbox is about , and xbox one is our most important gaming device inside the company . there s no doubt about that . we also know there are millions and millions of gamers who access microsoft in other ways , whether it s windows , their phone , skype it could be many different things every day . loftis wants to make gaming more inclusive across the board . as head of gaming inside of microsoft , i think about how we make sure that all of those customers feel as supported and engaged as the xbox fans do who own a game console . loftis describes the expansion as broadening their demographics and making gaming more inclusive across the board . most of the games that we ve announced , says loftis , and that we ve talked about so far are obviously very controller centric , says loftis , but believe me we are exploring as many ways to make all of our experiences relevant across all of our platforms as we possibly can . as televisions , computers , and smart devices become the all in one devices that seek to displace consoles , does xbox just become an app or a storefront or a brand ? no , spencer says , i fully expect that you ll see another console from us our best customers are xbox console customers , and i want to keep those people engaged both on the xbox one and anything we might do in the future . i m percent committed to that . i don t want to dilute what the xbox console customer feels , says spencer . i want to expand what we re able to do for more customers . before we wrap our interview , i ask loftis about making games in the pre xbox era . we were a little bit of a renegade group , she says , making games back in the mid s for windows . in those days microsoft was aware that windows was a huge phenomenon but that in order to keep windows relevant we needed to make sure that we were continually pleasing consumers . not just back offices , but to have windows at home as well . that was really our initial purpose . there was this emerging thing called gaming at home let s latch onto that and see what we can do . two decades , multiple leadership shuffles , and billions of dollars later , microsoft s original game plan comes full circle with a twist court gamers , regardless of where one finds them . windows or xbox , work or home , somewhere in between . wherever you go , there microsoft is . a couple weeks after my visit to redmond , shannon loftis got another promotion . though technically her title remains the same , she now shares leadership of microsoft studios with hanno lemke , the general manager of microsoft studios in europe the same studio where spencer and loftis first worked together along with the company s first party studio heads . loftis now has even more say over bigger games . loftis will also become a public face for the company . in years past , former microsoft studios vp kudo tsunoda and spencer made appearances on stage at xbox s biggest and most lavish events . now loftis will get her chance . maybe she will bring back the swagger and spectacle of the past . you can imagine it now loftis is lowered to the stage on a literal xbox shaped cloud . she steps up to the podium , and with a confident grin , proudly announces the latest entry in a property she nurtured from a small downloadable game to aaa blockbusters . you can play it this fall , she ll say , on xbox one and all windows devices . correction a previous version of this article stated that gears of war ultimate edition was scheduled for release on windows this holiday season . the article has been amended to reflect that the game s release is scheduled for an unannounced future date . edited by dieter bohn , michael zelenko	 the one thing you never hear about khalif diouf is how much he laughs . in general , the native new york rapper ampnbspbetter known as le f ampnbspis portrayed as a soft spoken , yet deadly serious provocateur wholly dedicated to his bawdy , politically charged party raps . he helps that image along , of course confrontational onstage , always strictly composed and mean mugging like a couture model in photoshoots , and ready to unleash a social media beatdown on anyone unwise enough to call him transphobic or make bigoted comments about his career . mutant situationswith his debut album , outspoken rapper le f aims to transcend his viral momentby devon maloney photography by alex welsh the one thing you never hear about khalif diouf is how much he laughs . in general , the native new york rapper ampnbspbetter known as le f is portrayed as a soft spoken , yet deadly serious provocateur wholly dedicated to his bawdy , politically charged party raps . he helps that image along , of course confrontational onstage , always strictly composed and mean mugging like a couture model in photoshoots , and ready to unleash a social media beatdown on anyone unwise enough to call him transphobic or make bigoted comments about his career . but in person , that all melts away with the arrival of his big , endearing exclamation point of a chortle , one that bursts loudly and often over whatever space he happens to inhabit for example , a beige booth in a midtown manhattan diner , talking to a reporter about x men . i was just into mutant ampnbspsituations , he says of his nerdy childhood , laughing over a plate of plain french toast . they were out of cinnamon raisin bread . he s ordered a pitcher of water , too , worried he s getting sick before his cmj show at williamsburg s cameo gallery later this week . i always liked iceman , but he just came out of the closet . ampnbsphe said he didn t want to before because he didn t want to deal with the double discrimination . i m like , whatever , i ve been a gay black dude my whole life . get over it . le f s own breakout story plays out like an underground rap superhero saga . in , having lost the production files in the eleventh hour for a song from his debut mixtape dark york , diouf found himself in need of a beat . he called on his friends , the production duo kinandbone , and when they sent over a track , he says , i just drunkenly rapped a new song . that song was wut , still his most well known track to date . despite its slapdash origins , it was a polished , major label quality banger that confidently showcased both his blackness and homosexuality in such a nonchalant manner that his stardom , in all its colorful glory , ampnbspseemed inevitable . in the video for wut video le f dances against an all white background like the star of an animated ipod commercial made flesh , narrating the moves of his brightly dressed backup dancers even when the lights go out , he keeps going , spinning in place while running an afro pick through his close cut , dyed violet hair . the clip doesn t even break the three minute mark , but it only took that long for le f to be officially bookmarked as one to watch . le f s video for wut the song and its video , coupled with a few fiery comments about homophobia in mainstream rap , went viral , and he quickly became a minor iconoclast , a talented artist with a fresh perspective . two years later , he was performing with choreographed dancers on the late show with david letterman . plenty of independent artists have hit late night tv stages in recent years , but for le f , it was a major moment here was a radical queer black artist performing a song about being radical , queer , and black , on national television . middle america had rarely been so visibly confronted by such a marginalized talent it was an electric appearance that the press immediately lauded as a sign of big things to come . le f s biggest hit , now three years old , has begun weighing on himbut three years ampnbspafter wut blew up , the inevitability of le f s success seems far less certain . his second most popular video , s spa day , has under half a million views while wut has been streamed . million times on spotify , his second most popular boom , has only made about , . le f s biggest hit , now three years old , has begun weighing on him . i kind of want to destroy it , he says now at the diner , grimacing . i think there are a lot of people who just see the wut video , but they ll never hear any of the ridiculous , loud , and destructive music that i was also making at the same time . and nothing pigeonholes an artist faster than becoming a one hit wonder a fact of which he s painfully aware . i appreciate that i can have a life from wut , he says . but the fact that he s continued to release new material since then , none of which has garnered the same degree of attention , is frustrating to him . it makes me think that it really wasn t about artistry at all , he says . it was about the hashtag gay black rapper . being oneself often has that sort of price , especially in pop music . but with his debut full length album riot boi , which arrives this week on terrible xl records , he s making a serious attempt to get that fee waived . at six foot three and dressed in all black , with one long , gold earring and a leather bucket hat , le f stands out in a restaurant full of tired , gray haired white men in taupe suits . but like anyone who grew up having to make the best of their misfit status , he s used to it . diouf comes from a line of classical vocalists his mother and grandmother are professional opera singers who have performed at carnegie hall and the metropolitan opera house . i m like the only person in my family who can t sing , actually , he says . instead , he found his niche in dance , a talent that eventually paved the way to boarding school at the prestigious and predominantly white and wealthy concord academy . as a teen he studied dance , design , and production frequently showing up to class wearing white plastic trench coats and uggs and used his high school s computer lab to record his own electronic and juke beats . i was listening to animal collective in dance class , and crying to bj rk at night . still , the idea of performing vocally in any capacity seemed out of the question . having this nasally , gay voice was just something totally disgusting to me as a teenager , he says . i didn t understand how to use it or what to do at all . but at some point during his time at concord a time when i was listening to animal collective in dance class , and crying to bj rk at night diouf first came across an inkling that even if he would never make it in the opera , maybe a rap career wasn t so farfetched . m . i . a . s galang video had just come out , and i saw how she incorporated her printmaking art into that music video , and i was like , yes , this is awesome ! he remembers . her voice sounds crazy , but i love it , and she is summing up all her mediums sic into one awesome thing . he was also inspired by the equally idiosyncratic vocal stylings of british rapper dizzee rascal . that was definitely an inspiring moment for me , to at least start working towards something . it wasn t until , the summer before he started college at wesleyan , that the hours spent fooling around on school software started to pay off , courtesy of his dj s roommate and their friends himanshu heems suri , victor kool a . d . vasquez , and ashok dapwell kondabolu . the trio was looking to get a rap project off the ground , and le f had been selling beats to make extra money . i basically gave them this beat , he says . i really thought i wanted to rap over it , but at the time , i wasn t feeling confident enough about rapping over anything that wasn t electro or juke . that beat became the foundation for das racist s goofy viral earworm combination pizza hut and taco bell . the favor paid off the artists remained friends , and four years later , not long after diouf graduated and returned to new york , heems released le f s debut mixtape dark york via his label , greedhead . as the buzz around le f s mixtapes grew fly zone was released in january of , tree house that fall , the press developed its own narrative , observing similar releases from the likes of mykki blanco and zebra katz and declaring a burgeoning queer new york rap scene . it was news to le f . i didn t even realize i was a gay rapper until the pitchfork article , he says earnestly , referring to an article on the music site that linked the careers of le f and a handful of other subversive new york artists . for a while , he says , it was frustrating , but he soon accepted the label if that means screaming and vogueing in a dress in the dark onstage , then great . i m already a politicized figure , just by nature of how i ve been in the press , being an out musician , he says . and he has made a bit of a name for himself as an outspoken figure on social media after macklemore and ryan lewis won a vma in for their pro lgbt cut same love , le f tweeted a lot . it saddens me out that a straight man is the voice pop music has chosen for gay rights , he wrote . in the same incident , he also called out the seattle duo s horn centric thrift shop for its resemblance to wut at the end of the day , i openly have no respect for any artists ripping from other artists , so blatantly . the way he sees it , at this point all he can do is throw his whole weight into the parts of his public reputation that really matter to him . i wanted to make a record that addresses the politics that i wanted to speak about , and not what others expected me to say , he says of riot boi . it feels like i m breaking out of being a meme and convincing people i m a musician . still , he admits , while his subject matter may be subversive , he can t help but aspire to mainstream acceptance , which of course comes with pressures to conform to certain cultural expectations . he spends a lot of time thinking about where he would fit in the pop world , should he get there . he admires nina simone , a pianist who began singing out of necessity and ended up a massively celebrated vocalist and activist , but also likes beyonc , a lifelong singer and meticulous performer . they re nearly opposite aspirations , artistically speaking , but he wants both . i m breaking out of being a meme and convincing people i m a musician . but like , the cyborg version , post human , he says , adding , that s why i put the one in my name , you know i wanted to be slightly a computer . but those aspirations are a secondary concern for now . more pressing is simply maintaining basic quality control the loss of momentum he s faced over the past couple years has limited how much he s able to do as an artist , even in keeping the elements of his show that made people fall in love with him in the first place . i love being able to work with dancers and a choreographer , he tells me later over the phone . with letterman , i just wanted to have that moment . but for the most part , i can t afford to do that all the time . i m not exactly filling up rooms , and it s hard to get promoters to want to spend that kind of money , and hiring dancers doesn t really make money for my label . he s considering upgrading his live show by paying out of pocket for dancers , in which case , he says , i ll just be broke . playing by the rules and breaking them all in the name of self expression is a never ending struggle , one that visibly frustrates him . sometimes i edit down too much , and i think i should go the opposite way , and just be a crazy person , see what happens , he says , with another laugh , this one tinged with a note of cynicism . like , what if i actually just wrote a song from the voice of mystique talking to steve jobs ? what if i actually went to those levels ? the day after lunch , we re supposed to meet again at dr . wu s , the low profile williamsburg studio where he and jake aron , his co producer and former wesleyan classmate , have been piecing together the record for the last year . he s about an hour and a half late , but aron says that s nothing in rapper time . once we were supposed to have a session with joey bada at pm , he says , and the guy didn t show up til . when he finally shows up , blunt and grapefruit slices in hand , the pair set to tweaking the backing track for grace , alek or naomi . the engineer hasn t sent the stems for any of his new songs and the show is tomorrow . they ll have to use what they have on file instead of making a new version specifically mixed for a live venue . the songs on riot boi are the result of three years , three mixtapes , and two eps worth of sonic and lyrical experimentation together they comprise a compact , meticulously crafted minute mission statement that turns le f s complicated existence as a black , openly queer , private school educated rapper into a candy coated , hedonistic , bit rave . each song is a new level in a s super nintendo game , teasing and condemning the establishment homophobic , racist white people , in particular ampnbspinto confronting the realities of his daily existence . a recent le f performance presented by boxing gym overthrow nycriot boi calls on the spiritual aid of an array of women , from grace jones to model alek wek to the damn mona lisa , as well as the literal aid of others , like compatriots junglepussy and house of ladosha particularly in swirl , a lush , wry track about the fetishization of blackness . even his mom , credited as miss geri , contributed her talents , alongside devont hynes , on the crisis of faith album closer change . on songs like cheap and taxi , he explores complicated race and class politics disguised as diary entries hippie hoodrat , product of my environment n ggas look at me must be thinkin i m mega rich . slather his signature ballroom culture vibe heavily on the front end , and not even kathleen hanna made smashing the patriarchy and white supremacy such a jam . and then there s that album title a direct nod to riot grrrl , another radical music tradition , albeit one that had its own blindspots to racial and socioeconomic issues . that aggressive ideology , that spoke to the music of the time , and still invoked all these political , progressive , necessary topics , was so interesting to me , he says . but really , in my mind , there are two lanes for cool political music that , and conscious rap . and i hate conscious rap . so the working title , to keep it in my head to not make conscious rap , was riot boi . and it just stuck . the point being that in order to be truly subversive , the music has to be , on some level , fun . i want republicans to play it , and be like , oh my god , that s cute , you know , and not realize what just happened , he said at the diner , with another endearing chuckle . at the studio , after a few minutes banter and careful grapefruit consumption , le f becomes quiet . he seems stressed about having to make a placeholder track for the show instead of using a real one . it s probably not helping that the illness he had been worrying about at the diner seems to have gotten worse . le f s video for koi but it might also have something to do with the fact that riot boi is about to put everything he is ampnbspartistically , politically , spiritually on the front line . yesterday , after an hour of more lighthearted conversation , he had casually mentioned that riot boi is dropping the same day as albums from justin bieber and one direction . he mentions it again today . yup , both of them , he says grimly . for that reason , he adds , he has no expectations for the impact it might have on his career . i m happy it s coming out . i m interested to see if people like anything . he s already released two singles , koi and rage , but the reception hasn t inspired confidence . my youtube ratio is kind of i don t know , he says . the video for koi came out two months ago and has just over , views . some people kind of like it ? i reminded him that earlier he had called himself an acquired taste . on friday afternoon before his cameo gallery gig , le f blows off his soundcheck at the last minute . apparently he s still sick , and his manager tells me he s conserving his energy . he finally arrives sometime just before midnight , after three or four acts have come and gone and his terrible xl labelmate empress of is just kicking off her penultimate set . are we readyyyyy ? cameo s backstage area ampnbspif you can call it that ampnbspis essentially a fluorescent lit storage closet . it s currently almost as sweltering as the main room , and made even smaller by too many people talking in a small space . it s too crowded even for its original purpose empress of s band don t even bother storing their gear when they finish , instead taking everything from the stage directly back out into their van . half the room looks a little too pleased to be here , but le f and his friends look perfectly at home , draped across the staircase like it s a stoop , laughing and poking fun at one another amidst the din . when he finally takes the stage wearing a massive knee length tunic open to his waist and the bucket hat from the other day , he clears his throat several times and wanders around for a few minutes . the cameo crowd has thinned out a bit , but nevertheless cheers loudly when he purrs into the mic , are we readyyyyy ? claps and horns pepper the air it s wut . without dancers or any specific choreography , he performs it like a karaoke warm up , hitting all the right syllables but obviously on autopilot . it s not long before his sickness gives way to the groove , though by the time he unleashes koi , words like chemistry and cunt drip off his tongue with his hallmark zeal . by lisa , a trap beat that s been warped like a bad vhs tape , he s in full rap posture , delivering raw lyrics like homie , you could die from a side eye with nina simone seriousness while maintaining his ball winning strut . the rest of the set , he s on firethe room has been tropically hot for hours , but le f still survives a few songs before repurposing his shirt as a headscarf and letting loose on grace , alek or naomi , dripping with sweat . the rest of the set , he s on fire , getting down in fans faces the crowd doesn t devolve into a full blown rave , but it hops until the very end . the backing track might not be perfect , but no one can tell the difference . this is the last song i m gonna put you through tonight , he assures the crowd , and goes right into rage , riot boi s first and most electrifying single . he closes his eyes and crouches at the edge of the stage during the singsong intro , but when the chorus bursts in ampnbsp rage ! ruh ruh ruh ruh rage ! rage ! ampnbsphe explodes to his feet , his energy doubling to meet the glass shattering , corrosive , saul williams style beat . the song relents here and there , returning to nursery rhyme melodies that gently explain he s just here to have a good time ampnbspbut of course , it s the fury of the choruses that really matters , the screams of frustration i ve been dealing with too much shit all these pricks is ignorant a mutant situation all his own . when he shouts , push me to the front ! pull me up ! give me what i want ! it s obvious he means it . edited by emily yoshida 	 steve williams couldn t breathe . the former athlete had cardiomyopathy , which occasionally choked his lungs with fluid , making him gasp for air . but this felt different williams felt like he was dying . he was raced to an orange county hospital , and shortly after checking in , his heart stopped . for minutes , er workers compressed his chest in an attempt to revive him . at one point , his wife mary remembers being called into his room to say goodbye to her husband of years . it seemed williams was a dead man . the heart is just a pumpinside the year quest to build a mechanical organby joaquin palomino photography by john francis peters steve williams couldn t breathe . the former athlete had cardiomyopathy , which occasionally choked his lungs with fluid , making him gasp for air . but this felt different williams felt like he was dying . he was raced to an orange county hospital , and shortly after checking in , his heart stopped . for minutes , er workers compressed his chest in an attempt to revive him . at one point , his wife mary remembers being called into his room to say goodbye to her husband of years . it seemed williams was a dead man . incredibly , doctors rebooted williams heart but for three days , he was in an induced coma , his body packed in ice to minimize brain damage . when he woke up , his mental facilities were intact , but his body was ravaged . his liver was congested , fluid reappeared in his lungs , and his heart s right and left ventricles were practically destroyed , making it hard for blood to circulate throughout his body . without a heart transplant , he would soon die . without a heart transplant , he would soon diedonor hearts , however , are scarce each year , only about in patients that need a transplant worldwide receives the life saving surgery . williams best shot at survival was to have his heart almost completely removed and replaced with a total artificial heart a synthetic machine that stands in for a living , beating organ . williams would be among a handful of patients who receive artificial hearts every year . right now , they serve as life support for people who are about to have transplants . but if the device s manufacturers have their way , one day soon mechanical hearts will replace our faulty biological ones forever . luckily , williams had landed in one of the few places in the world that could perform the extreme procedure he d been transferred to the cedars sinai heart institute in los angeles . but the proposal was harrowing his chest cavity would be cracked , critical arteries severed , and the heart he d lived with for years pulled out of his body . scared is such a simple word we were totally blindsided , mary told me . but there was really no other choice for me , williams says . the mechanical heart offered by cedars sinai is manufactured by the arizona company syncardia . it has a simple design a pair of fist sized artificial ventricles that attach to the atria , the heart s blood collection chambers the aorta , the body s largest artery and the pulmonary artery , which connects the heart and lungs . two tubes with the circumference of garden hoses attach the polyurethane ventricles to an air pump outside the body , which sends roughly short bursts of air per minute into the machine . that air forces blood in and out , replicating a rapid heartbeat . the device must be constantly plugged into a power outlet or connected to a battery pack . without electricity , the heart quickly shuts down unless power is restored , the patient dies . replacing his central organ with plastic looked promisingwilliams agreed to have a mechanical heart installed as a temporary measure while waiting for a donor organ . in april of , the day before his surgery , doctors introduced williams to someone recovering from the same operation . the patient was tethered to an air compressor that sat at his bedside and made a perpetual thump thump thump thump sound so loud it could be heard from across the room . two tubes protruded from an incision on his stomach . the scene was unsettling , but williams wasn t fixated on the tubes , the pounding sound , or the man s pulsating chest . he mainly noticed how healthy he looked . almost two thirds of syncardia total artificial heart recipients can get out of bed and walk two weeks after surgery , and the majority survive long enough to get a transplant . as odd as it might seem , williams thought temporarily replacing his central organ with plastic looked promising . steve williams at his homewilliams surgery went smoothly . he was discharged with a freedom driver , a toaster sized battery and air pump designed by syncardia that fits snuggly into a backpack and lets people return home . until , most mechanical heart recipients , no matter how healthy they were , stayed connected to large , relatively immobile batteries and were confined to hospitals . the operation and the driver allowed williams to resume a somewhat normal life . he saw his son graduate from high school , for instance . he takes daily walks on the beach , gardens in his backyard , and more than a year after he nearly died , remains in relatively good health . williams is forever connected to a battery or plugged into a power outlet i was a year old guy that typically would be dead , and my wife would be the sad woman with two kids living off my insurance policy , williams says , as his heart labors away at his feet outside an orange county starbucks . that s what i have to say to myself to remember how lucky i am . but living with an artificial heart has its downsides williams is constantly accompanied by a caretaker , typically his wife , in case the device malfunctions he is forever connected to a battery or plugged into a power outlet the large doses of blood thinners he takes make his body run cold and he can t submerge himself in water . then , there are the more impalpable challenges he hasn t heard silence in over a year just the constantly beating sound of the air pump and he draws stares in public . williams stopped seeing movies in theaters out of respect for other viewers the noise from his artificial heart would bother most audiences . it s a love hate relationship you have with these devices you re thankful you re alive , but it s a compromise to have them , williams says . it s human nature to want things to go back to the way they used to be . sometimes they never do . there are few people alive in the world who have no natural heartbeat . fewer than , patients have received an entirely artificial heart in the device s three decades of existence , and most patients haven t used the machines for long . as with williams , mechanical hearts are typically just a bridge to an eventual transplant . but that may change . a handful of companies , including syncardia , are trying to get regulatory approval to market the first permanent mechanical heart for wide scale use , which would replace a patient s biological organ over the remaining course of their lifetime . think along the lines of knee replacements and hearing aids , says piet jansen , chief medical officer for the french company carmat , which is running an early clinical trial for a long term mechanical heart . at some point we will have an implantable blood pump that permanently replaces a sick heart . the heart pumps , gallons of blood every dayif it works , the technology could save a lot of lives . more than million people in the us have heart failure , according to the cdc , and many need a new organ to survive . the lucky few that get a transplant often face complications such as rejection of the donated heart , infection , and vital organ failure . mechanical hearts can be more reliable , and some predict they are the future of treating total heart failure . but the technology raises also practical and ethical questions . it s unclear whether plastic and metal hearts can ever truly replicate their biological counterparts , which pump , gallons of blood every day , service , miles of blood vessels more than double the circumference of the world , and work without a hitch year after year . living with an artificial heart is also hard on patients , and once the surgery begins , it s irreversible . you ve cut out a big chunk of the heart , and you ve cut out the parts that are necessary to sustain life , says stuart finder , a health care ethicist at cedars sinai . once you start the intervention , you can never go back . syncardia s total artificial heartthe heart is just a pump , and for the past half century bioengineers have doggedly tried to replicate the biological machine with a mechanical one . success has always been just beyond their grasp . in the s , scientists promised to develop a total artificial heart by the end of the decade , to cure end stage biventricular heart failure . the proposal intrigued congress , which funneled hundreds of thousands of dollars into the newly created artificial heart program at the national heart , lung , and blood institute . while it seemed relatively easy to craft an effective blood pump , designing one that agreed with the human body and worked for decades without fail was much harder . one of the first prototypes , built in the s , had an unlikely power source plutonium a byproduct of nuclear weapons manufacturing . the element generates thermal energy for close to a century through radioactive decay in theory , it could keep recipients alive well into old age . the atomic heart had some obvious drawbacksthe atomic heart , however , had some obvious drawbacks . even when functioning properly , patients would be exposed to high levels of radiation . and what if it malfunctioned ? would enough radiation seep into the patient or harm their loved ones ? co workers ? neighbors ? a member of a federal assessment panel even wondered if terrorists could kidnap mechanical heart recipients , dissect them , and turn them into weapons . despite protest from researchers , the atomic heart was ultimately killed before it was implanted in anyone . but it did pave the way for the first clinically tested permanent mechanical heart the jarvik . the jarvik s design was simple two man made ventricles , connected to an external air pump , expand and contract the artificial organ , propelling blood throughout the body much like williams artificial heart today . in , barney clark , a year old dentist with end stage congestive heart failure , agreed to have a jarvik installed . he didn t expect to live long , but was willing to endure the operation for the sake of science . on december nd , after nine hours of surgery , clark woke up with two plastic ventricles and titanium in his chest . he was the first human to live without a natural heartbeat . a abc report on the occasion of clark s operationclark s body had a hard time accepting the implant . he bled internally and suffered multiple strokes his mental health deteriorated . in tv interviews , he stared off camera with a distant look in his eyes , a washing machine sized air compressor called big blue working tirelessly beside him . on a few occasions he supposedly asked doctors to unplug the device and let him die . a patient compared the device to a threshing machine in his chest cavitythen , on a snowy day in march of , after multiple organs failed , clark experienced brain death . his artificial heart , which beat nearly million times over days , was shut down . four more jarvik hearts were implanted after clark s , and each produced equally grim results . the device caused kidney failure , hemorrhaging , stroke , and seizure . sociologist renee fox documented the jarvik experiments in her book spare parts . one jarvik recipient endured such heavy internal bleeding after his surgery , fox writes , that half of his total blood volume had to be replaced . the patient later compared the device to a threshing machine in his chest cavity . in , after nearly a quarter of a billion dollars , the national heart , lung , and blood institute pulled funding from the artificial heart program . the plastic and metal machines , it seemed , were incompatible with the human body , and the pursuit of the bionic man appeared to be over . but not everyone gave up . while the device was impractical as a permanent replacement for the heart , a young heart surgeon from arizona named jack copeland saw the potential to use artificial hearts as a bridge to transplant . in the mid s he implanted a machine commonly referred to as the phoenix heart in a dying man . controversially , copeland didn t have fda approval or the person s consent for the operation , but he saw no other options . we didn t have time to sit down and consider all of the implications , he says . we were trying to save his life , and that in the end that was the most important consideration . the urgency gave copeland some legal protection , and to the chagrin of some medical ethicists , the fda did not punish him . after the mechanical heart was installed , copeland was impressed by its efficacy . the guy did well on the device , he recalls . it worked a hell of a lot better than the heart that had been inside him . the patient survived for hours on the machine , but died shortly after getting a biological transplant . a few months after implanting the phoenix heart , copeland began using the jarvik as a bridge this time with federal approval . in he co founded cardiowest , which later became syncardia . its researchers obtained rights to the jarvik heart and tweaked it . by , after making minor changes to the old machine , copeland and his colleagues had created a bridge to transplant device that was approved for a year long human trial . the human body can adjust to incredible thingsof the people in the trial , died after the artificial heart was installed . but the rest survived long enough to get a transplant promising results considering that all the participants were considered at high risk of imminent death . soon thereafter , the cardiowest device became the first and only fda approved artificial heart for a bridge to transplant . once widely rejected by the medical community , mechanical hearts have since become a viable temporary treatment for end stage biventricular heart failure . it s like chemotherapy in the s people used to think it was crazy to give poison to someone who was dying , and now it s routine , says francisco arabia , a biological and mechanical heart surgeon , and surgical director of cedars sinai s mechanical circulatory support program . there s no doubt life is not the same with a total artificial heart , but the human body can adjust to incredible things . kerrie cancel de la cruzon the sixth floor of cedars sinai where heart patients recover after surgery a room hums with what sounds like a loud clock , each tick separated by exactly one half of one second . kerrie cancel de la cruz , a year old mother from texas with an ear to ear smile and a neck to chest scar , sits in the middle of a din coming from an air pump that keeps blood flowing through her foot , inch frame . de la cruz has an ear to ear smile and a neck to chest scara large sticker that reads tink in bold red letters is plastered across the pump . i thought , you re a ticker , but i m not going to call you ticker , she says to the machine . i like tinkerbell , so i named you tink . on a visit last april her walls were covered in family photos and a stuffed teddy bear hung off her bed . flowers from her husband and a fellow artificial heart recipient wilted on her bedside table . de la cruz was born with a weak heart . at , she had a defibrillator implanted , and at , after giving birth to twins , developed atrial fibrillation , a disorder that causes an irregular heartbeat . her skin turned pale grey , her stomach bloated with fluid , and she experienced such severe pain that it was hard for her to get out of bed . de la cruz needed a new heart , but her small body and high level of antibodies made her an unlikely transplant candidate . she was transferred to cedars sinai in the spring of , where arabia explained that her best treatment option was a mechanical heart . the operation would increase her odds of survival seven fold , while also helping her regain strength which she would need in order to receive a donor transplant , arabia said . still , de la cruz was reluctant . at first i didn t want it , she recalls , tears welling up in her husky blue eyes . i was tired , i fought a lot . it felt like it was time for me to go . patients like de la cruz , who are out of options , often end up at cedars sinai the plush medical center adjacent to beverly hills performs more total artificial heart transplants than anywhere else in the country . when arabia describes the operation , reactions are mixed , he says . a few patients mostly men are excited at the prospect of getting a super heart , but the majority don t want the implant . it isn t until they re dying in the icu that most people agree to it . patients on the brink of death are between a lion and a crocodile . as christiaan barnard , the south african surgeon who performed the first human to human heart transplant in put it patients on the brink of death are between a lion and a crocodile . if the lion is a mechanical heart , a biological transplant is the crocodile while it might be a better option , it still poses a grave threat . taking a living heart from one person s body and putting it into another person is a high risk procedure with ample room for error . the donor heart first has to be methodically extracted from a very recently deceased body , transported hundreds , sometimes thousands of miles on ice , and installed in an entirely foreign vessel . dr . francisco arabia of cedars sinai hospitaloccasionally a flaw in the donor heart will cause it to fail shortly after the transplant . other times the transplant beats for a few months or years before giving out . human hearts are like a used car , they can have flaws , disease , arabia points out . sometimes the patient s body rejects the transplant a painful process where the immune system attacks and kills the foreign organ . nearly a quarter of heart transplant recipients show some signs of rejection within a year of surgery . to battle rejection , patients must take expensive and risky immunosuppressant medication . while the pills safeguard the new organ , they also increase the odds of infection , cancer , liver disease , and kidney failure . this doesn t only take from your body , it takes from your mind , spirit , and soul . artificial hearts are different . since they aren t made of human tissue , rejection isn t an issue , and defects are rare . they work percent of the time , arabia says . you know what you re getting . but they re not without complications and downsides both physical and emotional , as de la cruz knows . this doesn t only take from your body , it takes from your mind , spirit , and soul , de la cruz says . despite de la cruz s initial reservations , she had the operation . but in january , after a short stay at a temporary home in los angeles , she returned to cedars sinai . while de la cruz s body accepted the mechanical implant , the freedom driver wasn t strong enough to support her . she had to be hooked up to a more powerful air pump , forcing her to spend months living in a hospital room . each day she dreamt of resuming her old life being home with her family swimming in the gulf of mexico eating and drinking freely de la cruz could only consume . liters of fluids each day , and had to stay away from sodium . the ordeal was hard on her two children , particularly her youngest daughter , who s in elementary school . i shared the same room with her when i was home , and when i had to go back to the hospital , she said , mom , i really miss you , i can t sleep , de la cruz recalls , sitting cross legged in her hospital bed . when i asked her why , she said because i can t hear your heart beating . if you haven t been through this , you don t understand . despite its drawbacks , syncardia has helped hundreds resume a somewhat normal life while waiting for a donor transplant . now , the company is preparing to leap forward pending fda approval , it plans to offer its total artificial heart the same model de la cruz and williams have as a permanent implant for patients in the us . if approved , the device will become available to a wider set of patients , including those not eligible for biological transplants . creating an effective long term mechanical heart has been cardiac surgeons dream for decades , but the endeavor has been incredibly difficult and expensive . one company , called abiomed , received fda approval to use a permanent mechanical heart in . the device was expensive and hard to implant . after clinical tests , only one person was fitted with the machine before the company abandoned the device . one of syncardia s challenges is what appears to be a precarious financial situation . the arizona firm registered for an ipo in september , hoping to raise money to pay off tens of millions of dollars in debt and expand into latin america and asia . to serve as many patients that need the device , the company has to have the wherewithal to reach and treat them , syncardia ceo and president michael garippa says , referring to the ipo plan . syncardia withdrew its public offering in october and has since laid off some of its employees . garippa blames the fumble on volatile market conditions . the french company carmat is developing an artificial heart , but it also faces an uphill battle . unlike syncardia s machine , with its driver in a backpack , carmat s heart is almost fully implantable and is powered by small lithium batteries that can be worn on a belt or a holster under the arm . a layer of chemically treated cow heart tissue or pseudo skin coats the heart , wherever it touches blood , making it more biocompatible and reducing the need for blood thinners . it is still in early clinical trials . i have never felt so good , a patient said . shortly thereafter , the patient diedthree people have been fitted with carmat s heart . the first patient survived two and a half months before the machine short circuited nearly three times longer than his projected survival . the second patient , who had the device installed last august , was able to return home roughly five months after operation , telling the newspaper le journal du dimanche in april i have never felt so good . shortly after the interview , the machine s motor malfunctioned and the patient died . the third patient , who was implanted six months ago , is still alive and well . once a fourth person is fixed with the device and survives at least days , the company can move beyond its early clinical trial and begin a second set of tests . it s clear that carmat s heart is still far from ready for the market . aside from the two malfunctions , it weighs nearly three times more than an average human heart and is incredibly expensive . nonetheless , the company estimates around , people in the united states and europe could eventually benefit from the machine , which may usher in the next generation of mechanical hearts . if we had a small , totally implantable artificial heart , all powered electromagnetically , that would be the standard , there s no doubt , arabia says , noting that it may be a while before a reliable , self contained artificial heart is available . we want something we can implant and forget about , just like a normal human heart . perhaps the biggest moral conundrum , though , has nothing to do with living with a mechanical heart , but dying with one . unlike biological hearts , artificial ones can pump blood throughout the body and oxygen to the brain when the rest of the body breaks down . death is dragged out and may require the machine be shut off . i ve had patients where the liver and kidney failed , the skin turned yellow and died , and the only thing working normally was the brain , arabia says . on a hot spring afternoon , steve and mary williams drive a few miles from their modest orange county home to the pacific ocean , where the couple regularly takes a two mile walk on a meandering bike and pedestrian path . steve misses surfing more than almost anything else , and coming to the beach keeps him grounded . i don t have a heart . after pulling into a handicapped parking space , williams unplugs his heart s air compressor from the car s charger , straps on a backpack that weighs roughly pounds , and steps into the southern california sun . as he walks up a wheelchair ramp to the coastal path , a man in an army fatigue hat and board shorts yells what are you doing , you re not handicapped ! williams stops and locks eyes with the pedestrian . i don t have a heart , he responds , noticeably flustered . what s your disability ? mary ushers him away before things can escalate . he gets comments like that all of the time , she tells me . a waitress once asked if williams had monkeys inside of his backpack , due to the strange sound coming from it . another person accused him of carrying a bomb . stares and comments are minor compared to other complications . earlier this year williams accidentally knocked the air pump onto the floor while preparing to take a sponge bath , and the battery stopped working . he took a few steps out of the bathroom , then crumpled onto the floor . a backup battery kicked in , jolting williams awake . the fall and the jolt left him with superficial injuries a chipped tooth and a large cut above his left cheekbone . he took a few steps out of the bathroom , then crumpled onto the floor i m trying to live a normal life but it can be hard with this thing attached to me , he says , his words slowed by a stroke he had after the operation . williams keeps track of all the promising breakthroughs in the heart transplant field . we discuss scientists effort to create bioartificial hearts using stem cells , full body transplants , and bioengineers quest to develop a continuous flow device , which are small , implantable turbine like pumps that send blood through the body at a steady stream , much like a hose or faucet . it s controversial technology , but the machine has just one moving part , doesn t experience much wear and tear , and is relatively quiet . today , williams is stuck in a sort of limbo . if his heart had stopped beating years ago , he probably would have died . if it stopped beating years into the future , he might have a permanent and non intrusive artificial heart . or perhaps a perfect clone of his original organ . instead , he has a mechanical heart that , while burdensome , keeps blood pumping to his organs and oxygen to his brain . it s a hard life , yes , but williams feels lucky to have it . when people ask what it s like i tell them , sure , i don t have a heart , but i had a lot of problems with the heart i was born with . if i kept it i probably wouldn t be here today . at am on april th , williams was making coffee for mary when his home phone rang . he answered tersely , bothered that someone was pestering him so early in the morning . the call , however , was one he had anxiously been awaiting for the past weeks a donor heart was being transported to cedars sinai for him . williams and mary raced to the hospital where he was prepped for surgery . at the following morning , williams had his artificial heart removed , was placed on a heart lung bypass machine , and had a stranger s biological organ installed in him . the surgery went smoothly . he had crossed the bridge , so to speak . he had crossed the bridge i m just in shock still i can t believe i don t have the artificial heart i can t believe there s no noise i can t believe i don t have to take the blood thinners , he said a few weeks after the operation . i should be dead at least three times from this whole ordeal , but i m not . i m just so grateful for everything . a few months later , the transplant was still holding up well . williams plans on volunteering at cedars sinai and helping artificial heart recipients adjust to their new lives . and in july , after seven months of being monitored closely as an inpatient at cedars sinai , de la cruz also crossed the bridge . her operation , though , didn t go as smoothly as williams de la cruz s body rejected the new organ and she went into kidney failure . she is now in and out of the hospital and may soon need a kidney transplant . this is exhausting i was looking forward to getting the heart and trying to live a better life , she said at the end of october . despite the grim circumstances , de la cruz maintains her optimism . there are still things that can be done to give me the quality of life that i was hoping for it will be better . edited by elizabeth lopatto , michael zelenko	 it s midnight in hobart , indiana , and the auditorium of the cozy , single screen art theatre is echoing with the sounds of cartoon characters in the throes of passion . one orgasm follows another first marge simpson then bugs bunny as first time attendees to the art s weekly screening of the rocky horror picture show go through a variation on a ritual that s taken place for nearly years the hazing of the virgins . virgins under get off the hook this particular night , due to the risqu nature of the initiation . it s not a packed house , but it s lively as about attendees , many of them regulars , file in and wait for the show to start , both on the screen and off . nighthawks at the cinemahow misfits lost the midnight movieby keith phipps illustrations by david aguado it s midnight in hobart , indiana , and the auditorium of the cozy , single screen art theatre is echoing with the sounds of cartoon characters in the throes of passion . one orgasm follows another first marge simpson then bugs bunny as first time attendees to the art s weekly screening of the rocky horror picture show go through a variation on a ritual that s taken place for nearly years the hazing of the virgins . virgins under get off the hook this particular night , due to the risqu nature of the initiation . it s not a packed house , but it s lively as about attendees , many of them regulars , file in and wait for the show to start , both on the screen and off . the art , built in , is a lovely art deco venue with a mural covered auditorium , but like many small town theaters it has struggled in recent years . in , it benefitted from a campaign designed to keep independent theaters alive by helping them to convert to digital projection . since then , it s stayed afloat with second run offerings that focus on family friendly fare . i m told that posters advertising magic mike xxl when i visit don t represent the usual sort of film that plays there . but each saturday , the art offers an added attraction help me mommy , which bills itself as northwest indiana s rocky horror picture show floorshow cast , performs for an enthusiastic crowd as the rocky horror picture show plays behind them . first released in september of , rocky horror has never left theaters , and the film is more famous now than ever . but fame has also changed it , turning it from a fringe item to an institution famous enough to provide fodder for an episode of glee and a possible tv remake for fox . and as it s grown in fame , the cult has appeared to lose some of its outsider fervor over the years , with weekly gatherings like this one becoming increasingly less common across the country . you wouldn t know that sitting in the art theatre in hobart , though . each week the cast and crowd goes through a ritual familiar to anyone who s seen rocky horror at a midnight show a pre show featuring clips involving the rocky horror cast and other bits of weirdness . a virgin auction in which first time attendees are subjected to good natured , if obscene , initiation rituals . and then the show itself , in which the venerable movie plays out behind a live action reenactment known in rocky fandom as a shadow cast as its dialogue gets interrupted by a mix of crude , witty retorts from the audience , some nearly as old as the film itself . yeah , we re all a bunch of weirdos . that also makes them older than most of the attendees who skew toward teens and somethings . i was always very socially awkward . never felt like i fit in anywhere , a man who asks to be identified only as t . r . tells me in the art theatre lobby a few hours before the show . these are odd sentiments to hear from a handsome year old union plumber wearing a captain america t shirt , with a physique and unerring gaze to match , but there s not a hint of insincerity to them . i did sports , i did theater , i did a bunch of stuff and never fit in . t . r . first saw the rocky horror picture show in and soon joined the pink invaders , the northwest indiana rocky cast that would eventually evolve into help me mommy . rocky horror was the first place i ever came to where it was just like , yeah , we re all a bunch of weirdos and we re all accepting of each other . you can come hang with us and we re not going to make fun of you for it . if the ampnbspranks of rocky horror fandom are thinner than at their height in the s and s , they still remain a self replenishing resource , and rocky horror continues as an important rite of passage for misfits of all stripes , in hobart and elsewhere . but the larger midnight movie tradition from which it emerged is changing , and facing an uncertain future . prior to the s , midnight shows were the realm of the occasional horror release and exploitation distributors who used the slot to attract night owls to seedy fare . but the midnight movie as we know it as a friday and saturday night staple featuring cult films came into its own as the s turned into the s . getz was the johnny appleseed of the midnight moviethe s saw a flurry of activity in underground film as jack smith , kenneth anger , andy warhol , and others made movies way outside the hollywood system , films that took avant garde forms and featured content too extreme for the mainstream . that didn t mean there wasn t an audience for them , though . warhol s film chelsea girls played new york for months , for instance , and in the latter part of that year , mike getz of los angeles cinema theatre after having success in los angeles playing experimental films at midnight hit upon the notion of sending a package of films on the road under the name psychedelic film trips . they played at midnight across the country in theaters owned by getz s uncle louis sher , and they did well , making getz something like the johnny appleseed of the midnight movie . as jonathan rosenbaum and j . hoberman put it in their invaluable book midnight movies in thus popularizing the underground , getz provided the spadework for the midnight movie explosion of the s . t he underground invented a grass roots alternative to straight movies , television , and theater . the underground demonstrated that , in america anyway , anyone could make some sort of movie and get it shown somewhere . accordingly , all manner of long repressed sexual content burst scandalously upon the screen . there was even money to be made doing it . the moment had arrived , in other words , for the underground to go overground , and a few key titles pushed it there . george romero s groundbreaking zombie film night of the living dead found a second life , appropriately enough , at midnight . alejandro jodorowsky s violent western fantasia el topo played for appreciative , often stoned crowds . so did early john waters outrages like pink flamingos and female trouble . tod browning s film freaks found new life in midnight revival screenings , and s the harder they come helped popularize reggae outside jamaica . in some respects , the films had little in common . the blackly comic sensibility at the heart of waters films shares little with the outr stylishness of el topo . yet an anti authoritarian streak runs through all of them , one that resonated with counterculture audiences as one decade gave way to the next . not everyone saw this as an entirely healthy development . in a november new yorker piece titled el poto head comics , pauline kael likened the crowds turning out for el topo and head films like it to a black mass , criticized its extreme violence , and called it out for pretension and incoherence . jodorowsky employs anything that can give the audience a charge even if the charges are drawn from different systems of thought that are as thought incompatible . head movies don t have to be works of art , she concludes , they just have to be sensational . yet even if the charges stuck , the popularity of el topo and other midnight fixtures confirmed that there were viewers hungry for images and ideas they d never see in respectable hours and the communities that formed around them . in the heady buzz of a packed midnight house , these films reassured their audiences that because they were outsiders didn t mean they were alone . the midnight landscape started to shift in the s with the rise of home video , and as with every movie related technological advance , something was lost as something else was gained . it s no coincidence that the golden age of midnight movies started to fade as vhs ascended , but it also allowed their weirdness to spread . growing up in a tiny ohio suburb , i doubt i would have had access to most of those films if not for a well stocked video store , and i m sure i m not alone . feel the need to see the proposal at on friday ? now you canand as the films that once occupied it began to disperse , the midnight slot started to go mainstream . warner bros . capitalized on the anticipation around tim burton s version of batman by playing it at midnight on june rd , its opening day . the following year , disney went even further , devising an elaborate , troubled promotion by which moviegoers could buy i was there first ampnbspdick tracy t shirts that would double as admission to midnight screenings . over the next two decades , midnight screenings of mainstream films became commonplace , particularly in the years after the debut of star wars episode i the phantom menace , which attracted considerable press for the long lines of fans waiting to see the earliest possible screening . midnight premieres of films in the lord of the rings , harry potter , and twilight franchises followed franchises with rabid , passionate fan bases and subcultures . but so did midnight screenings of virtually every movie released feel the need to see the proposal the very minute the clock strikes on friday ? now you can . now midnight has become just another spot on the schedule in many theaters , with even the see it first element dropping out as more and more films started hitting theaters on the thursday evening before their official release . does a slot once reserved for the weird and the unexpected have the same meaning when you can see the proposal or the remake of the karate kid at the same time ? as technology has changed , theaters have met even more challenges in attracting midnight audiences . at chicago s music box theatre , assistant general manager buck le pard points to increased competition from netflix as a particular problem . you want to do something , you re hanging out with your friends , le pard says , like let s go see a movie , and then it just became let s see what s on netflix . music box has experimented with eventizing midnight screenings , partnering with the website consequence of sound and finding success with a midnight showing of blue velvet preceded by a celebration of all things david lynch , complete with actors dressed as famous lynch characters . the theater s midnight selection also leans heavily on nostalgic offerings from the s and s , though sometimes it s hard to figure out what films fall into the sweet spot . a recent run dedicated to s blockbusters got off to a good start with jurassic park then faltered with independence day , mission impossible , and speed . there s a notable shortage of new cult classics the distribution wing of austin based alamo drafthouse cinema , drafthouse films , has the rare distinction of surfacing new , or at least newly discovered midnight movies gems like the gloriously amateurish s action film miami connection set and filmed in orlando and roar , a bizarre nature adventure film produced by and starring tippi hedren . yet as fun as those movies are , there s a notable shortage of new cult classics finding their audience at midnight . the midnight tradition has always had a corner dedicated to films that fall under the so bad they re good heading . it was midnight screenings , after all , that gave reefer madness its second life . but these days , if a new film has any hope of joining the ranks of midnight regulars , it most likely falls under this heading . films like birdemic shock and terror and the room have attracted cults dedicated to their incompetence , which is compelling for reasons their creators could never have imagined . irony has always been one mode for midnight appreciation it s now threatening to become the dominant one . the rare exceptions are those films that get a second chance thanks to midnight audiences . a combination of home video and midnight screenings made the big lebowksi into the cult object it is today . donnie darko and wet hot american summer both did meager to embarrassing business on their first release only to be rediscovered by appreciative , after dark crowds . considered a commercial disappointment on its release , edgar wright s scott pilgrim vs . the world has since become a midnight staple . i didn t expect it , wright told me in an email exchange about the film . . . but i had somewhat designed the movie to be the type of film that would have blown my head off as a teenager . so when it quickly started building up a passionate following even on its initial release , that connection back to the films that inspired me came full circle . i like movies that reward repeat viewings and it s a very dense movie so people come back again and also drag their newbie friends too . ampnbspwhen the movie underperformed on its opening weekend , the head of marketing at universal , michael moses , sent me an email that simply said years , not days . i think he too knew that it could be a sleeper . give it another years , wright concludes , and we might be in the black . if that second life offers cold comfort to studio bookkeepers , it at least assures filmmakers like wright and donnie darko s richard kelly , and wet hot american summer s david wain that their work is finding the audience that missed it the first time around , however belatedly and in the late night hours . the fall and rise of ampnbspscott pilgrim illustrates how difficult it is to predict the success , immediate or eventual , of any film in prime time or midnight . a few titles , like the self consciously cult y musical repo the genetic opera have made deliberate attempts to stake their claim in the midnight market , with varying degrees of success . which brings us back to the rocky horror picture show , and back to hobart , indiana . while other key films from the golden age of midnight movies still get brought out for the occasional showing , most are solely home video fixtures . rocky horror remains a theatrical draw even after appearing on vhs , dvd , and blu ray , being broadcast on cable networks from vh to logo , and glee . if a proposed tv remake ever happens , it will almost certainly survive that , too . why ? the harder i ve looked for a simple answer , the more that answer has eluded me . alexander degman , a member of the help me mommy cast , even confessed to me he didn t like the movie . i like everything else . degman says of the film itself , whether it s good or bad or indifferent , it s people putting dedication into something . it s people having a passion for something and just getting people to do something else other than sitting in front of the computer playing video games all night long . the midnight slot has become a different sort of space the rocky horror picture show is , in some ways , the safest form of rebellion , in hobart or elsewhere . we have a big audience of teenagers , cast member sarah denton who shares a last name with the hometown of rocky horror s heroes tells me , and i like to think that we re more of a safe place than anything . because it s a saturday night , it s a bunch of teenagers they could be going to parties , out drinking , out doing drugs , but we re not doing that here . instead , they re watching and interacting with a movie , one formed from glam rock , bondage gear , and the cheap , lasting stuff of b movie fantasies and dirty rock and roll . it s a movie that takes a buttoned up couple from denton , ohio and drops them into a fantastic , dangerous , arousing world they didn t even know was within their reach . and if two kids from denton can find it , then maybe anyone can . yet if rocky horror seems in little danger of fading away , it s unlikely we ll ever see its likes again . the midnight slot has become a different sort of space in the years since its s heyday , and watching movies a different sort of experience . for better or worse , some of the conditions that helped draw in midnight crowds namely a passive tolerance of drugs , alcohol , and rowdiness are hard to find these days . and midnights aren t the only route by which films now find their cults . leos carax s holy motors a film very much in the tradition of golden age midnight movies , may have only played in a handful of theaters for a few weeks , but now i can rent it in a click and watch it on my laptop , at starbucks in the middle of the day . i can even link out to its amazing entracte , on youtube , a rousing musical showstopper that shifts the film into another gear as it moves toward its second act . you can watch it alone , if you like . but it will never quite be the same as its natural setting in the dark , away from the rest of the world , after midnight . edited by emily yoshida , michael zelenko 	 a family is gathered around the dinner table dad and the kids have spaghetti on their plates , mom is standing , serving spoon in hand . she cocks her head to the side and with a broad smile declares , don t thank me , thank the savings . the family freezes and a geico logo appears hovering over the table as a voice intones , you can t skip this geico ad , because it s already over . but the scene isn t actually frozen the family dog ambles up , slurping spaghetti off dad s fork . human eyes dart nervously , but bodies and smiles stay plastered in place . realizing his impunity , the shaggy beast climbs onto the table , gobbling up noodles , knocking over the salad , and generally causing mayhem . red dawnan inside look at youtube s new ad free subscription serviceby ben popper photography by cara robbins a family is gathered around the dinner table dad and the kids have spaghetti on their plates , mom is standing , serving spoon in hand . she cocks her head to the side and with a broad smile declares , don t thank me , thank the savings . the family freezes and a geico logo appears hovering over the table as a voice intones , you can t skip this geico ad , because it s already over . but the scene isn t actually frozen the family dog ambles up , slurping spaghetti off dad s fork . human eyes dart nervously , but bodies and smiles stay plastered in place . realizing his impunity , the shaggy beast climbs onto the table , gobbling up noodles , knocking over the salad , and generally causing mayhem . the ad , which won a grand prix at cannes this year , cleverly manipulates the conventions of youtube advertising a short , often skippable marketing message that runs before the video you actually want to watch . advertising has always paid the bills at youtube , which , over the last decade , has grown from an oddball collection of clips into the world s largest and most influential video portal . the service is on pace to earn around billion in revenue this year . but starting today , advertising will no longer be the only way youtube and its creators make money . the service is rolling out its biggest change yet a monthly subscription offering that completely removes ads from the equation . the new option is called youtube red . it costs . per month and will be available for purchase on october th , starting in the us , then rolling out worldwide . along with removing ads , subscribers will be able to save videos for offline viewing , and keep videos running in the background on mobile . that means you can listen to a music video or a ted talk while checking email or surfing instagram . that monthly fee also gives you access to google play music , meaning you get two streaming services for the same price spotify or apple music charge for one without video . as a final enticement , youtube will also begin putting new , exclusive content behind a paywall . red has the potential to dominate the industryat a star studded event in los angeles today , youtube introduced a slate of new originals available only to subscribers . the service plans to match its native stars with traditional hollywood and television production talent , all backed by a generous helping of google s money . the company is hoping that for a rising generation of consumers , a horror series from pewdiepie or a documentary about lilly singh will be equivalent to hbo s game of thrones , unique , must see programming that draws paying subscribers . with red , youtube is signaling a definitive shift from an ad funded video hosting service to a media company that will eventually go head to head with hulu and netflix . youtube has the potential to dominate the industry if just percent of its us viewers were to sign up for the service , it would add more than a billion dollars in annual revenue to the company s bottom line . robert kyncl , youtube s chief business officera week before today s announcement , i visited youtube s los angeles headquarters to meet with robert kyncl , the company s chief business officer . kyncl is the man tasked with growing youtube s content offerings , revenue and hopefully , someday , turning a profit . he was feeling under the weather and showed up with a box of tissues in one hand and a bottle of kombucha in the other . kyncl grew up behind the iron curtain in czechoslovakia and was recruited onto a government sponsored skiing team at a young age . he retains the athletic build and calm , confident demeanor of a highly trained athlete . over the last decade , kyncl has made a name for himself as a deal maker at the intersection of traditional media and technology . after working as an assistant to a talent agent , in he took a job at hbo . there , he helped consolidate hbo s eastern european channels and launch hbo india . later on as vp of content at netflix , he helped lead the transition from dvds to streaming video . from there , it was a natural jump to youtube , which he joined in . kyncl describes his role as making sure that this flywheel of value between creators , users , and advertisers is spinning at an increasing speed . we believe in the advertising business . on the face of it , youtube s new ad free subscription service seems like an existential threat to the advertisers the service has spent a decade courting . kyncl , ever the salesman , argues that red could boost creator earnings without cannibalizing the ad business . we believe in the advertising business . ninety nine point nine percent of the content on youtube will be free , as it always has been , he explained . so the world that all of our advertising partners are used to remains alive and well and watch time continues to grow at an astonishing percent year over year . there is nothing we are taking away from there , merely adding onto it . if everything plays out as kyncl hopes , there will be more money , more content , and more viewership overall . still , if the most passionate fans stopped looking at ads , wouldn t that make the service less appealing to marketers who want their brands associated with youtube stars ? let s take it to the extreme , said kyncl . say every paid television customers in the united states million individuals sign up for youtube red . that would still be less than a tenth of youtube s total audience , barely making a dent in the number of eyeballs that would be available to advertisers . kyncl laughed and we have a very long way to go to that kind of number . lt ! new pym . parent theverge copy of a brief history of youtube graphic , apps . voxmedia . com at theverge copy of a brief history of youtube , xdomain . . voxmedia . com gtyoutube red is not the first time the service has tried to get users to pay for videos . back in the spring of , youtube rolled out paid channels . a year later , the service introduced fan funding a tip jar where fans could donate as they please . those products didn t catch on , either because creators and users never fully understood them or were unaware they existed . on a platform as large as youtube , narrow a la carte solutions have a big challenge in terms of discovery and comprehension . that lesson was relearned when the company launched music key beta last year , a monthly subscription service that became the seed of youtube red . music key beta was focused exclusively on music videos , and for . a month , users could remove ads and use the app in background mode . even among users who enjoyed the service , the biggest pain point was that it wasn t all encompassing . the most common and most frequent point of confusion was why this set of features didn t work across youtube , says kyncl . his daughter , for example , loves music from the disney film frozen , but couldn t find it on music key . to her it s music , but it won t be in the service , and that seems odd to her . the response to music key led to a massive shift in strategy . initially the plan was to create and license content only across verticals where youtube was strongest music , gaming , and kids . each vertical would get a dedicated app and be available to subscribers ad free and with power features . but after the response from beta testers of music key , kyncl and his team decided it was all or nothing youtube red will work across every video on youtube as well as inside the dedicated music and gaming apps . getting permission to include every single video on youtube ad free was no easy task . kyncl and his team had to convince millions of independent creators , large and small , many of whom worried that their fans would be forced to pay in order to see all their videos , of the benefits of a subscription model . independent musicians and labels whipped up righteous anger across the web . fans and media glommed to the story . but for users who choose to opt out , the vast majority of videos will still be available on either side of the paywall , with ads for ordinary users and ad free for subscribers . youtube also had to convince its big music label , television network , and movie studio partners . many of these big media companies requested a more favorable cut of the subscription revenue than the service was offering to the average youtuber , on the grounds that their premium content would be the main driver of subscriptions . but youtube held out , and in the end almost all the big players came along . the only one that hasn t is disney , but youtube plans to forge ahead regardless , saying it has percent of its content covered by agreements with rights holders . the ability to land these deals and largely dictate their terms shows the position of strength from which youtube is negotiating . it makes a lot of sense . network and cable television have been experiencing massive ratings declines , while the hours spent watching youtube is up percent year over year , with an average session on mobile lasting over minutes . on mobile alone , the service reaches more to year olds than any cable network in the us . if a subscription model works , and that s a big if , youtube will begin earning far more per user than it could through advertising . i would have to watch thousands of videos each month to reach a payout of . in ads . but how will this new business model work for creators ? dehlia ford feliz never expected to make money posting videos on youtube . she was simply a diehard philadelphia eagles fan who wanted a way to share her reactions to the latest games . but when the team s rabid fan base found her clips and began sharing them , ford feliz found her videos racking up tens of thousands of views . over the last few years , she has made youtube into a full time career , posting several videos a week and doing live broadcasts around game days . youtube s pay per channel and donation systems were a flop i make a little bit of money from ads , not much , but something , she recently explained . the real money these days is in product placement ford feliz recently signed onto a major fantasy sports league as a sponsor . she also hosts live tailgate parties and sells merchandise . a lot of fans actually reach out to me because they want to donate , she said . fans mail ford feliz cash and checks one man asked if he could send her a monthly payment of a few hundred dollars . but he wanted ford feliz to sign a formal contract . i didn t feel comfortable sharing my personal information . it s a struggle because you want to make fans happy and of course you want to grow your business , but there isn t an easy way to do that directly on youtube . youtube red won t address ford feliz s direct payment problem the pay per channel and donation system that the service previously implemented was a flop , and kyncl is adamant about not trying that again . but he believes that in the long run , red could meaningfully increase what creators earn . with the advertising model , youtube takes percent of the revenue , and the remaining percent goes to creators . with red , creators will be paid a percentage of the total subscription revenue , minus youtube s s cut , based on the watchtime of their videos each month . the more devoted their fan base , the bigger that check could become . youtube won t share the exact percentage it plans to take from red , but says creators will still get the majority of subscription revenue . jack conte , the founder of the crowdfunding service patreon and a musician who makes a large part of his living through videos , doesn t think red will bring about significant improvements for creators . subscription services are great for consumers . pay bucks and have any song or any video in your pocket , whenever you want , he says . but for the creators , there is still way too much of a middleman . youtube risks replicating the dynamics of today s streaming music worldconte says a subscription service like youtube s risks replicating the dynamics of today s streaming music world , where even millions of listens bring in paltry revenue . my art might be worth to a superfan , but if she is listening on spotify , even with a subscription , i am still only getting pennies every time she interacts with what i have made . kyncl thinks highly of services like patreon , but says he doesn t want to try and bring that model to youtube . the narrow a la carte focused solutions or funding mechanisms only get to the superfans . what we can deliver is not only the superfans , but also the casual fans , and where you generate the most amount of revenue , is the casual fan area . youtube is the place where anyone can start , and where the biggest stars are well rewarded . in the middle , where full time creators might struggle , they can turn to merchandising , crowdfunding , and offline events to fill the gap . we have to look at what we are strong at , says kyncl . and that s scale . when it comes to scale , to the sheer size of its video library , youtube has no peers . and with more than hours of new video uploaded every minute , it is unlikely that anyone will catch up soon . but in terms of its audience , youtube no longer stands alone . video , specifically mobile video , is the hottest segment of the advertising business , and hundreds of billions of dollars , slowly shifting away from television , print , and other traditional media , are up for grabs . red could go a long way to keeping talent on youtubeyoutube s toughest and most rapidly rising rival is facebook . in september of , facebook said that it was serving up billion video views a day . less than a year later , that number had climbed to billion daily views . the videos were also no longer coming from youtube . today more than percent of facebook videos are uploaded natively , and the social network is aggressively courting advertisers and talent . in addition to youtube , we see our clients getting big traction on platforms like facebook , instagram , snapchat , and vine , said dan porter , head of digital for one of hollywood s top talent agencies , wme img . it s clear that right now , talent is up for grabs . porter says that red could play a key role in that battle for stars . subscription , if it succeeds , could go a long way to keeping talent on youtube , because it could help fund bigger scripted series . brian weiser , an industry analyst with pivotal research , agrees . but he thinks in order to really compete as a subscription service against the likes of netflix , hulu , and hbo , youtube will need to start licensing premium content . kyncl also believes red needs premium content , but he is committed to creating it on youtube s terms . the service has no plans to pay big bucks to license the nfl or seinfeld , kyncl told me . he sees hulu , amazon , netflix , hbo , and others all bidding for the right to show the same films and tv series , all trying to grab the hottest actors , producers , and directors to make originals . he wants to move against that tide . to us what is important is we are not doing what everyone else is doing , competing for the same sources of material , the same creative elements . we are looking for people who are proven to work really well on our platform . pewdiepie will be matched with the producer of the walking deadyoutube originals pair stars who were born on the platform with top talent from film and television . what we realized is that in many cases , content creators on youtube have worked on a shoestring budget for many years , and have built super fan bases basically on zero budgets , says kyncl . in order to scale up , it takes a different kind of enterprise , a different kind of skill set there is a story telling skill set , there is showrunning , etc . in the near future , pewdiepie will be matched with the producer of the walking dead to make a scripted horror series very different from his one man vlogs . youtube originals is also helping to produce and promote a documentary about the world tour of comedian lilly singh . left to its own devices , youtube will continue to grow rapidly , to produce its own specific brand of stars , and to attract millions of passionate fans and billions of casual viewers . but can it find a way to take that talent and supercharge it into something that appeals to a wider audience ? is it possible for youtube to grow into something more serious , or is it just throwing away money by crafting polished , professional shows that simply won t thrive on its platform ? money from subscription revenue , kyncl hopes , will help figure that out . youtube is already shelling out millions to keep its top stars from straying . it hopes that the subscription revenue will provide another enticement for them to stay , and provide ammunition to battle a growing crowd of competitors from the worlds of web and television . what s happening is that the internet is doing to cable what cable did to broadcast . it s just broadening the set of choices , says kyncl . you have to really learn how to function in a fragmented world . i think that youtube is incredibly well positioned for that world . edited by michael zelenko	 a midnight rain fell through the oak trees of vedado , a neighborhood in havana , onto the heads of a dozen people gathered outside a small hotel . the power was out . the only light on the block came from the screens glowing in their hands . weaker souls had taken off when the rain began to fall , but the stalwarts along the wrought iron fence weren t going anywhere . they had come to this corner among the faded manses of pre revolutionary sugar barons and mafiosi to taste one of the rarest commodities in cuba the internet at one of the wireless hotspots the government set up a few weeks before . they weren t going to let a little signal outage , or a rainstorm , stop them from trying to get online . havana s hotspotscuba is coming online , but who will control its internet ? by jonathan m . katz photography by allison shelley a midnight rain fell through the oak trees of vedado , a neighborhood in havana , onto the heads of a dozen people gathered outside a small hotel . the power was out . the only light on the block came from the screens glowing in their hands . weaker souls had taken off when the rain began to fall , but the stalwarts along the wrought iron fence weren t going anywhere . they had come to this corner among the faded manses of pre revolutionary sugar barons and mafiosi to taste one of the rarest commodities in cuba the internet at one of the wireless hotspots the government set up a few weeks before . they weren t going to let a little signal outage , or a rainstorm , stop them from trying to get online . over the last two decades , as the internet spread across the planet , cuba has been in digital isolation . only the most privileged or crafty have been able to get connections just . percent of cuban households had the internet as of , the most recent data available , according to the un international telecommunications union , and there is no public cellular data service . the only internet caf s are branches of the state telephone company , where customers can use an archaic terminal under the surveillance of a government worker sitting a few feet away . even those with home dial up can rarely access sites outside the national . cu domain . only the most privileged or crafty have been able to get connectionssince the united states and cuba began restoring diplomatic relations last december , the socialist archipelago has been undergoing an experiment a slight but steady increase in internet access . the obama administration , which had been busy trying to sneak private internet connections into cuba before the d tente , has made boosting information technology one of its top negotiation priorities . on september st , it lifted restrictions on us telecommunications companies doing business in cuba , spawning dreams of a telecom gold rush . but there are other governments , companies , and people fighting to shape the country s online future as well . there is the cuban state , still wary of the internet as a dissidents tool or a weapon of capitalist empire . there are companies from fellow communist regimes and autocratic states eager to put cuba online . there are cuban activists who have spent years demanding the internet as a fundamental human right . and then there are the cuban masses , million on the island , many of whom are now getting their first tastes of the internet and wanting more . the concrete improvements so far have come from the chinese telecom giant huawei , which put up the routers to create new hotspots in july . for the first time , wireless access was available in a handful of public parks , near hotels and along the capital s gritty seafront malec n for a price . a dim streetlight flickered back on at the hotspot in vedado , but the signal had yet to return . a young man leaning against the fence shook his head , dolefully refreshing a list of networks that showed only an hp printer from the adjacent hotel . like most people at the hotspots , he had been video chatting with a loved one overseas his fianc e off studying in austin , texas until the power went out . he was a chef who hoped to join her there to take cooking classes and maybe get a job working in a restaurant . the wind blew , and a fresh spray of water came down from the trees . we re trying to plan my trip , he said . carlos alberto p rez , internet activist and proprietor of the blog la chiringa de cuba , or the kite of cubapresident ra l castro likes to blame the public s lack of connectivity on the us trade embargo . but it has clearly been his government s choice . cuba is much richer than its caribbean neighbors in haiti , the dominican republic , and jamaica , yet lags behind them all in internet access . there is also more infrastructure in cuba than the government lets on party insiders discuss the latest online articles on state television programs . at the university of information science , built on a former kgb listening post outside havana , students go online to learn computer science and programming . the school released its own ubuntu based linux operating system in . that same year , government technicians activated a , mile fiber optic seabed cable from venezuela . and though few cubans have seen any benefits from the cable , the high speed is there when the government wants it during pope francis visit to cuba in september , journalists at the hotel nacional press center measured download speeds faster than . megabits per second . verizon made headlines when it announced us customers can access data while visiting cuba , but a spokesperson confirmed to me that verizon is piggybacking on existing equipment . many cubans don t know cellular data exists , much less that their country already has the capacity for it . cubans are making the most of the limited access . on blogs and behind the scenes , scholars , students , journalists , artists , and activists have built most of the meager cuban corner of the open internet that exists today . in september , i traveled to the island to meet with some of these people sketching out the internet s future , and to learn where they think the internet might be headed . many cubans don t know cellular data exists , or that their country is wired for itup a steep staircase in centro habana , in a cramped apartment overlooking a sea of rooftop water tanks , i met with two of the most prominent advocates for internet access in the country carlos alberto p rez , the year old proprietor of the snarky blog la chiringa de cuba , and filmmaker yaima pardo , who was leaning back in a plastic chair , holding her nine month pregnant belly . a gray laptop sat on the meticulously clean desk where pardo edited the documentary offline , next to a microphone sent to her by the norwegian embassy to record a tribute to world wide web inventor tim berners lee . a welcome breeze blew through the open window . the scaffolded dome of the national capitol loomed in the distance . americans often think that the internet carries with it the seeds of us style capitalism and liberal democracy there s a reason president obama spoke of travel , commerce , and the flow of information to and from cuba in the same breath in his december th speech announcing the renewal of relations . cuba s feared interior ministry , known simply as minit , sees it much the same way , pegging many internet proponents as enemies of the state . that s easier to do when it comes to the most famous blogger dissident yoani s nchez , who received a state department award in from then secretary of state hillary clinton and has met with obama advisors at the white house . s nchez , who was arrested for a day in , is trolled online by a state sponsored blogger under the mocking name yohandry , who reprints official state press articles alongside screeds accusing her of being a cia stooge . yet the state has a much harder time dismissing those who advocate for greater connectivity from the left of the castro government , such as self avowed marxist , feminist , and pastafari yasm n s . portales machado , or the anti capitalist gay rights activist isbel d az torres . members of this group are as skeptical , if not more , of us based internet corporations than they are of the castros . torres was the first of several to suggest i direct questions about internet surveillance to the nsa . p rez and pardo were both very moderate in tone both say their goal is to improve , not overthrow , the system . still , in a country where so much is about state and party control , any conversation about information and access is bound to get political . when i made the documentary , i was trying to avoid entering into any kind of political discourse . but it was inevitable , pardo , who is , recalled . i just hadn t understood until that moment the kind of hyper control that the state wanted to have . her film features interviews with internet activists and dissidents , warning that cuba will lose any advantage it has ever boasted in literacy if it doesn t expand the internet to everyone a swipe that invokes tenets of state propaganda . p rez and pardo were happy that the new hotspots had been built , but grumbled about the cost and the slow speeds . if the government wanted the internet to be a public utility like housing , food , or health care the activists say the regime would subsidize it , or give it away free . both spoke openly about the dangers faced by those the government deems threats prison , fines , permanent unemployment but neither seemed too worried for themselves . p rez pointed out that we were talking with the door and windows wide open , showing confidence while acknowledging the risks of being overheard . there was less self assurance outside of havana , where surveillance is deeper , neighbors suspicions more acute . one of the only ways for a young cuban in the provinces to express himself online is to work for the state run media . one something told me that when he tried to set up a blog , his editor at a state radio station told him it would need to focus on his personal perspective in the cuban revolution . on twitter , he was expected to spend at least part of his time trolling government critics . he gave up after a few weeks . many of those fighting for better internet access believe these restrictions are an exercise in political control the castros inner circle watched glasnost precede the soviet union s collapse and protesters use social media to overthrow egypt and tunisia s governments in the arab spring , and decided that allowing access wasn t worth the risk . if that s the case , cuba s fellow communist regimes in china and vietnam could present an attractive way forward they have become major internet providers in other countries while heavily censoring the web at home . the state will work to make this resource available , accessible , and affordable . the cuban government openly shares its fears about the kinds of political change the internet could bring . in february , cuban first vice president miguel d az canel , a year old party lifer rumored to have the inside track to become the country s next leader , told a havana conference on the internet , the state will work to make this resource available , accessible , and affordable for everyone . the hotspots opened a few months later . the government also promised to get broadband internet into half of cuban households by . yet in that same speech , d az canel attacked the us government for aggression to ideologically subvert our youth . washington supports its mercenaries with media , money , classes , trips , exchanges , and technology , he said . its plans for espionage and for its people to pervert these technologies is well known . that they are . in , the associated press revealed that the us agency for international development had tried and failed to launch a twitter like messaging platform in cuba called zunzuneo which , unbeknownst to its users , would have been aimed at undermining the government . at the time , usaid contractor alan gross was languishing in a cuban prison after getting caught trying and , again , failing to set up illegal satellite internet connections at cuban synagogues . gross was released on the day havana and washington announced the resumption of relations , after five years in prison , pounds lighter and missing five teeth . yet while the officials , spies , and activists fight each other , most of the cubans managing to get online for the first time seem wholly uninterested in politics , or even news . all these people were arguing about the danger to cuba s identity , that concentrating the power of the internet with the state was necessary because it would get attacked on the internet , pardo said . and nothing like that has happened . go down to la rampa , p rez agreed , referring to the city s busiest hotspot , on a street connecting vedado to the malec n . you aren t going to find anyone listening to music on youtube or studying wikipedia or checking the weather . everyone is just chatting . one of the most common misunderstandings about cuba is that it s somehow literally stuck in the past . if cuba is trapped in the s , the internet of cuba is trapped in the s , google executive chairman eric schmidt wrote after he visited last year . the clich is tempting after watching mid th century cars go by , reading the fading marxist leninist slogans along the highway , or visiting the withered colonial architecture in havana s tourist zones . in dusty towns of the cuban interior , a taxi in may still take the form of a decidedly unromantic horse and buggy . but if you look closer , that chevy s engine is probably made of newer parts , and behind that colonial fa ade sits a parabolic antenna that residents use to illegally intercept foreign tv channels beamed to the big tourist hotels . even the horse drawn buggy might be tricked out with a new pioneer usb sound system . cuba is not just changing now . it always has been . cubans are more interested in news about donald trump than rehashing the bay of pigsthat s the best way to understand the internet in cuba today a jumble of half measures and workarounds avoiding the state s restrictions and taking advantage of meager offerings . the cuban migr blogger ernesto oroza calls this hacker tradition the architecture of necessity a physical model that combines the individual and their needs with the materials , technologies , limits , and legal and economic possibilities . far from being frozen in some early revolutionary past , the cubans i talked to were tapped in far more interested in news about the islamic state , hillary clinton , and donald trump than rehashing the bay of pigs . i didn t hear many opinions on the execution of ernesto che guevara in bolivia , but there were plenty on the murder of jon snow at castle black low sample size cuban consensus he ll be back next season . much of the information comes in offline , through phone calls and visits to relatives abroad , pirated tv signals , and dribs and drabs that make it through the state run media . but thousands are also watching juego de tronos shortly after it airs on hbo . they get it on the paquete semanal , or weekly package a fresh terabyte of movies , tv shows , video games , phone apps , articles , and advertisements that arrives on the computers of kingpins in havana every monday , then proliferates across the country on portable hard drives . i went down to a seaside neighborhood on the outskirts of the capital to see how this worked . a paquete distributor in his late s , who works as a researcher in a state medical lab , greeted me on the front porch of the one story home he shares with his parents . the deal is simple each week he pays to download the paquete onto his portable hard drive from a distributor higher up the chain , then he charges to or so regular customers to download from him . while a late summer storm roared outside , the distributor took me back to his gaming optimized desktop computer decorated with stickers from ghostbusters and futurama . he clicked on a folder innocuously labelled with that past monday s date . inside were reams of files . he showed off a high definition copy of the new fantastic four , some anime about anthropomorphized rabbits and wolves dressed up as knights , and spanish trailers for the new mad max and metal gear solid v video games . there were also tons of ads for things to do and buy on the popular craigslist alternative revolico . com , where , in a throwback to newspapers , phone numbers and street addresses replace email as the dominant mode of contact . when cubans get metal gear solid , many will play it on the snet , networks of hidden routers and illegal computer to computer connections that allow users to play multiplayer games and chat locally without a government sanctioned home connection . around since at least the early s , this giant lan party connects thousands , if not tens of thousands of computers . internet access cost per hour in a country where the monthly household income is paquete and snet users know they are operating at the boundaries of state tolerance . the distributors generally stay anonymous they don t have a problem with the paquete today , but who knows about tomorrow , the dealer i met with told me , explaining why he didn t want to me to publish his name . they also openly boast of scrubbing their networks of potentially subversive material . that includes pornography and anything the government might interpret as pornography including articles and websites for or about lesbians , gays , bisexuals , or transgender people . above all , it means finding and banishing any kind of overt political speech . the results are squeaky clean , apolitical entertainment machines so popular with the masses that many don t seem to care about not being able to access the open internet . it makes some wonder if the government isn t running the paquete and snet itself . compared to the paquete , the new hotspots only reach a handful of people . so far , they also serve a very different purpose too slow and expensive to watch movies or surf the classifieds , they are instead used mostly for chatting , often on balky video connections . the new huwaei routers support only about users at a time . to get online , users buy a paper card featuring a buxom woman in a lotus pose , blue lines representing connectivity flowing into her veins . users scratch off a digit username and digit password that they type into a pop up screen to get online . the cards officially cost per hour , but to skip the long lines , many buy them on the black market , generally at a dollar per hour markup . in a country where the average household income hovers around a month , that s a fortune . despite all this , the hotspots i visited were always full . to defray the costs , some users share the prepaid cards . others use a pirated version of an app called connectify to turn their devices into mini routers , allowing multiple connections at once . that has inspired some more low level entrepreneurship . when i walked into a hotspot in a working class borough of the capital late one night , a man in a highlighter yellow tank top came over to ask if i wanted to get online . he pointed to two card tables , side by side , each with a bank of laptops splitting a single wireless connection among three or four machines . an hour , he told me half the government s price . but i d have to wait . the computers were all rented out . as governments wrestle for control of the internet s future and citizens start to find their way online , corporations are eagerly eyeing a new market . from a us boardroom , cuba looks like a vast , open space of opportunity , a greenfield home to millions hungry for entertainment , communication , and information . the right strategy , the thinking goes , could mint money and public relations gold while providing cubans with stuff they want or need a win win , in that glorious americanism or as sociologist ted henken said of airbnb s expansion into cuba , a win win win win . the reality is more complicated . netflix was one of the first companies to tout its jump into cuba after the rapprochement was announced , but its stockholders weren t fooled without internet connections or international credit cards , few cubans were going to be able to subscribe , even if they wanted to part with two fifths of their monthly income to keep up with orange is the new black . airbnb had more success tapping into the existing system of state licensed bed and breakfasts known as casas particulares , though that arrangement has its critics , ampnbsptoo . from a us boardroom , cuba looks like a vast , open space of opportunitybut all that pales beside the potential windfalls for whoever gets to wire the country for its great telecommunications leap forward . google appears to be campaigning hard for the gig . since schmidt s visit last year to promote a free and open internet , several google delegations have landed in havana . a party headed by brett perlmutter , a former mckinsey ampamp co . consultant who works for the think tank google ideas , and breanna zwart , a google employee who specializes in emerging markets , came in june . cuban journalists told me about mountain view emissaries meeting with culture officials to discuss digitizing cuba s national archives . doug madory , director of internet analysis at dyn , an internet infrastructure and research company , said a google staffer called to pump him for details about the submarine fiber optic cable from venezuela . that may suggest an extension of the company s project link , which so far has been aimed at bringing cheap broadband access to five cities in uganda and ghana . google repeatedly refused to answer any questions or provide information about its cuba initiatives . the rumors surrounding google s plans surged in july , when jos ram n machado ventura , a senior cuban official , told the state newspaper juventud rebelde , there are some that would like to give us internet for free , but they don t do it with the goal of letting the cuban people communicate , but rather to invade us and do the ideological work to succeed in a new conquest . we have to have internet , but our way . he didn t specify who had made the offer . us government delegations have also come to push for unspecified telecom deals . a state department team led by danny sepulveda , a deputy assistant secretary of state with the title of us coordinator for international communications and information policy ambassador , arrived in march . this month secretary of commerce penny pritzker met with her cuban counterpart for a regulatory dialogue , urging president castro and his government to make it easier for cuban citizens to trade and travel more freely , to enjoy the fruits of their labor , to access the internet , and to be hired directly by foreign companies . the us government is even pushing forward with its own internet infrastructure on the island a fiber optic cable running along the seabed from florida to the us navy base at guant namo bay that could someday connect to the rest of the island as well . we have to have internet , but our way . but madory said he doubted cuba would go for an offer from anyone in the united states to build extensive infrastructure on the island . i think there is still very strong paranoia in cuba , perhaps well placed , about using a us vendor , he said . another example cuba could follow is myanmar , whose oppressive regime put its entire telecom sector for up sale to the highest bidder . the winners , norway s telenor and qatar telecom paid the government million each last year in exchange for year licenses . telenor plans to sink in as much as another billion to build its networks before it starts making a profit . if such a bidding process opened up in cuba , us companies could be pitted against someone like viettel , the telecom arm of the vietnamese military , which took over haiti s state telephone company after the earthquake there in . for a myanmar style deal to work , though , cuba would have to be willing to give up control of the internet through the state telecom monopoly , empresa de telecomunicaciones de cuba sa , or etecsa , which many observers think is unlikely . if it won t do that , that leaves one more set of possibilities a friendly company or government that comes in , builds infrastructure , and leaves it in the cuban government s hands . while the white house puts on pressure and silicon valley firms make their case for building the cuban internet , the real work is getting done by china . the fiber optic submarine cable from venezuela , the alba , was financed by beijing and built by alcatel lucent shanghai bell . huawei installed the wi fi hotspots and provided the supercharged routers for the international media during pope francis visit in september . cuba might not even have to negotiate a deal from scratch if it chooses the tech giant from shenzhen to wire the country larry press , a cal state dominguez hills professor who closely watches the cuban internet , reported in september that havana awarded huawei a contract to build a national fiber optic cable network back in . huawei did not respond to requests for comment either . if chinese companies continue to be cuba s internet provider of choice , it s easy to imagine a criollo rendition of beijing s great firewall , with all the censorship , limited access , and surveillance that implies . it s easy to imagine a criollo rendition of beijing s great firewall . cuba wants to go from a model that basically doesn t need censorship on the internet because there practically is no internet to using the web as an instrument of control , henken , the sociologist at baruch college in new york , told me . we tend to erroneously think of the internet in the west as having automatic tendencies in terms of freedom but instead of having the internet change china , china changed the internet . back at the top floor apartment in centro habana , the internet advocates were resigned to that future . as p rez and pardo noted , cubans are already accustomed to using alternatives to blocked sites revolico instead of craigslist , ecured instead of wikipedia , imo instead of skype in the same way chinese users have embraced sina weibo in place of facebook and twitter . and besides , they assured me , they were already used to surveillance , censorship , and pressure to self censor . a few weeks later , p rez s site went down , mysteriously replaced with a message that said the account had been suspended . the disappearance was a reminder that no one knows better than the cuban bloggers how a public space can at once be a place for sharing and moneymaking , freedom and control . i would prefer the chinese model to what we have now , pardo told me with a sigh . with that , we could do a million things . update this story has been updated with new information about the disappearance of carlos alberto p rez s blog . jonathan m . katz is a freelance journalist . his book , the big truck that went by how the world came to save haiti and left behind a disaster , won the overseas press club of america s cornelius ryan award and was a pen literary awards finalist for nonfiction . edited by josh dzieza	 i ve seen my younger brother zach in person a handful of times in the past eight years . he s spent a little over two of those years incarcerated not counting time in county jail awaiting trial or the times he broke parole and fell off the grid . he s been convicted of larceny , breaking and entering vehicles , many , many times , possession of burglary tools , assaulting an officer , and resisting arrest . the author with her father and brother , my brother s keeperafter years of prison and addiction , my brother went silent . so i visited his rehab . by jessie guy ryan i ve seen my younger brother zach in person a handful of times in the past eight years . he s spent a little over two of those years incarcerated not counting time in county jail awaiting trial or the times he broke parole and fell off the grid . he s been convicted of larceny , breaking and entering vehicles , many , many times , possession of burglary tools , assaulting an officer , and resisting arrest . my brother committed each of these crimes to support his addiction to drugs and alcohol . he is . his entire adult life has been governed by addiction . more than his adult life , honestly . in high school , i remember his soccer teammates tracking me down between classes to alert me that he was panicking . players were being drug tested , and zach was sure he would test positive at the time i assumed just for pot , but looking back , the degree of panic might have meant more . i recall hearing about the night he spent in a motel after breaking out of a day in patient rehab . then , there was my mom s sudden decision to bring him along to my college orientation punishment for getting arrested again . he is . his entire adult life has been governed by addictionby the time he was sentenced to his first major stint in prison , he started to get serious about getting sober . he was eventually accepted into an in patient unit for nonviolent offenders with substance abuse problems , and by the time he was released , he was sober and healthy , having channeled his energy into body building . but maintaining sobriety was hard finding a job was hard , walking miles to and from work was hard , and not being around alcohol or drugs was hard eventually he fell off the wagon again . in july , i was with my parents when we heard he d been arrested again . my parents had kicked him out of the house for good the previous christmas . we d resigned ourselves if he was going to get help , it wouldn t be because of us . this past january , two deputies from the county sheriff s office stopped by the house where we grew up in belmont , north carolina . my brother was scheduled to be released in march , and they needed to know if he would be able to live with my parents during parole . well , no , my mom said . we re moving . over miles east , outside the boundaries of his parole . recent media coverage has highlighted the challenges faced by the newly paroled , who must secure the basic necessities of life as quickly as possible shelter , food , clothes , and an income to pay for all of it with minimal support . that s to say nothing of the complications of ptsd , mental or physical illness , or addiction . it is a challenge few people are prepared to undertake on their own a challenge for which my brother was likely unprepared . shortly after he was released from prison for the first time , a trip to the grocery store triggered a panic attack . when my mother told me he had applied to a rehab program in durham , i was relieved , although i wasn t sure it would last . but this one wasn t like the day programs he d been in before . this one lasts two years and includes vocational training . it also meant more silence , since zach wouldn t be able to contact us initially . eventually there would be letters and phone calls , of course , but at first , nothing . the program was called trosa triangle residential options for substance abusers and none of us had ever heard of it . so five months after his release i wake up at in the morning and creep out of my parents home on the north carolina coast to drive four hours to durham to find out what trosa is . much of what we associate with substance abuse treatment in the united states began in the early s . that s when , for the first time , alcoholism was treated as a public health issue rather than a moral failing . alcoholics anonymous , established in , advocated approaching alcoholism as a treatable disease and by the s , the minnesota model had emerged , incorporating principles of holistic treatment into residential facilities that introduced the now ubiquitous day treatment model . eventually , both approaches were adapted to address narcotics addiction . today , more than , drug treatment facilities operate in the united states . addiction is considered a complex diseaseaddiction is considered a complex disease that lacks a one size fits all approach . treatment typically begins with detoxification and continues in an in patient or out patient setting with some combination of pharmacotherapy the prescription of drugs like methadone to stave off the effects of opiate addiction and behavioral therapy . generally , relapse rates hover between and percent , similar to those for chronic diseases like diabetes and asthma . fewer than half of all treatment facilities provide services such as comprehensive mental health assessments , housing or transportation assistance , and domestic violence services . at first glance these services might seem tangential to addiction treatment , but they may be the key to maintaining long term sobriety for people who have a mental illness in addition to addiction or more to the point , in the case of my brother who have been incarcerated . durham seems to have avoided the soulless strip mall aesthetic that dominates other small cities in the quiet residential area where trosa is located , massive trees create a green canopy over quaint houses . as i drive through , i mentally make note of street names so i can check real estate listings for domestic fantasy purposes later . trosa s campus stretches over acres and occupies a vacant elementary school and a former dairy . i pull up to the security booth and greet a polite , well dressed young man , who asks my name , announces my arrival , and provides detailed directions to the administrative office . i know without asking that he is a resident of the program the nature of trosa means that nearly everyone i will speak to today is a resident of the program . zach is in the period of limited contact , and though i don t know where on campus he lives , or what his work schedule is like , i know i won t see him today . but i can picture him working in this security booth , putting his natural charm and friendliness to good use . in early tcs , group sessions were marked by vicious confrontation and ridiculetrosa is a therapeutic community that s national institute on drug abuse lingo for drug free residential settings that emphasize the role of the community to help addicts change . the first therapeutic community , synanon , was established in california in . synanon is now more commonly remembered for its evolution into a cult , but the principles established during its time as a rehabilitation community inspired hundreds of other tcs . in those early tcs , confrontational and aggressive group treatment methods were commonly used at synanon and its direct descendants , residents played the game group sessions marked by vicious , often profane confrontation and ridicule designed to expose and weaken barriers to personal honesty sometimes for hours or days at a time . modern tcs have evolved away from these methods . today s programs combine clinical groups , vocational and educational activities , and community meetings under a rigid structure designed to establish positive behavior and attitudes . they re different from traditional rehabs in a lot of ways , not least of which is the length of their programs to months , instead of the traditional to days . and while traditional rehab facilities commonly cost between , to , a month , many tcs including trosa provide services at no charge to the patient . trosa residents who work on the in kind donation team , which solicits donated goods to meet residents everyday needs . in the administrative office , a petite young woman is stationed behind one of those giant , round monolithic desks granted to every receptionist . beth is a freckled blonde who i correctly assume is from a nice , upper middle class family . she has been a trosa resident for seven months , a sexual abuse survivor who turned to alcohol and prescription painkillers in college . her mother referred her to the program . trosa s ceo , kevin mcdonald , is imposing beyond his height but maintains a folksy and reassuring demeanor . he s a military brat , he tells me . his difficult home life bloomed into an early dependence on alcohol , and then , later , heroin . mcdonald was facing a year prison sentence for armed robbery when a state supreme court let him begin a lengthy stay at delancey street , a san francisco therapeutic community . so i go there , and it s a two year program , he says . i started going forward , learning how to communicate a little better , eventually realizing i didn t have to use my fists and i hated violence . learning to care about people , letting people care about me , learning job skills , et cetera . so i stayed years . learning to care about people , letting people care about me mcdonald eventually began working for delancey street , and after helping to establish a facility in greensboro , north carolina , mcdonald returned to california . he was working in a program for homeless parolees in south central la it was just about bed counts and getting paid by the government for each bed we kept full when a group from durham came calling . they d seen delancey street and wanted something similar for durham . the group only had , to start the program . in , durham county leased trosa the old north durham elementary school for a year . since then , additional housing has been added , in the form of multi story modular homes on brick foundations laid by residents . an old dairy was converted to maintain a fleet of donated and second hand vehicles , and now also houses a cafeteria , computer lab , and barber shop . they re in the midst of fundraising for their next expansion , a medical clinic intended to increase their capacity to care for residents on site . that s important since residents can t leave the campus unsupervised , so every doctor s appointment requires coordinating transportation and a staff or senior resident escort . trosa s thrift storeas i begin my tour of the campus , it s quickly apparent that trosa s staff and residents alike are expected to follow and enthusiastically display the community s values and principles . this includes strict behavior expectations everyone greets each other when they pass in the hallway , everyone uses sir and ma am , and everyone stands when someone enters a room . in my brother s letters , he complains of long hours and exhausting workwork is a key component of every therapeutic community , and trosa s work assignments extend into the larger durham community the organization operates a thrift store and frame shop , moving company , lawn care company , furniture repair business , and christmas tree lot , all staffed by the program s residents . according to tax filings , these operations bring in over million just over percent of trosa s revenues . the work assignments are also a key component of trosa s treatment model . each resident is assigned to a six person team , with more senior residents supervising . this is intended to help patients learn interpersonal skills , as well as give them work experience . work assignments may also include vocational training or other education trosa helps residents earn their geds and some residents enroll in the nearby community college . my brother works for trosa s moving company , where he s earning his commercial driver s license . in his letters , he complains of long hours and exhausting work , but i hope he is also learning to find value in the trust that s being placed in him . for years , i ve quietly avoided leaving my wallet unattended around him my parents began keeping their valuables under lock and key after he pawned hundreds of dollars worth of musical equipment . the fact that strangers are now trusting him to enter their homes and pack and move all of their belongings astonishes me , and i m hopeful that he won t betray that trust . part of me is afraid that it s misplaced . trosa residents earn privileges as they work through the program , and the most obvious is improved housing . at first , residents reside in rooms not unlike college dorms cramped and spartan , with whiteboards and posted rules . during the tour , i see one resident has carefully laid books between the utilitarian mattress and metal bed frame to create some additional support . i briefly wonder if it s my brother s bed as a kid , the only thing he read enthusiastically was ampnbspharry potter , but he became a voracious reader in prison . every letter he wrote me included a list of what he had read since our last correspondence , and maybe the best gift i ve ever given him was a request form for the prison book program , a charity that mails free books to prisoners . but the haphazard collection of spy thrillers and self help books doesn t match zach s preference for updike , vonnegut , or george r . r . martin . i didn t want to be here . after completing their first year in the program , residents move into the modular , prefabricated homes . these homes are subdivided into four person apartments with separate bedrooms , a living room with a television , a private bathroom , and a small kitchen although residents are still expected to eat breakfast and dinner in the communal dining hall . wherever they are housed , residents are expected to adhere to strict housekeeping standards . these sorts of rules chafe my brother , and it s not just him , either trosa staff readily admit new residents struggle with the rigid , rule driven structure . the last time my brother had his own bedroom , the bed didn t even have sheets , so imagining him making his bed every morning seems beyond belief . during my tour i meet a young man named arman . arman is crisply dressed in a well coordinated button down , slacks , and tie for a brief moment i think he may be one of the counselor trainees from nearby duke university . he s been at the program for a little over months , after being suspended from college for stealing to support his heroin addiction . things got worse from there until his family urged him to seek help at trosa . at first , he admits , the program was very hard for him . i didn t want to be here , arman says . but after a while he realized , i was , and it was time for me to take control of my life and start helping myself . three years younger than my brother but i wonder if zach has had this breakthrough . he certainly does not want to live the life of an addict , whether in prison or on the street , but is he ready to make the effort to help himself ? he s repeatedly described his struggles to me in a way that implied he was waiting for something or someone to save him . it s as if he felt that as long as he didn t want to be the way he was , things would change without him expending effort . perhaps , as with arman , he s realizing at trosa that he can help himself change . trosa residencespaul nagy , a licensed counselor and addiction specialist , is part of the original group that recruited kevin mcdonald years ago . he s also an assistant professor in psychiatry at duke , where he arranged for a partnership between the school and trosa . trosa doesn t ask residents to white knuckle through cravingsnagy is part of the reason trosa is distinct from other programs instead of asking residents to white knuckle through cravings , his team uses the drug naltrexone , which reduces cravings for alcohol and interrupts heroin highs . medication assisted therapy is controversial in treatment program circles and not widely used in us rehab facilities . this reluctance is partially due to influential treatment philosophies of aa and na , which take a broad stance against the use of any substances , including medication , and the attitude that such medication is a crutch , says shelley streenrod , an associate professor at salem state university in massachusetts . streenrod is not affiliated with trosa . additionally , naltrexone and other pharmacological treatments must be prescribed by a physician not all treatment facilities have staff qualified to prescribe medication . and even if an addict speaks to a physician about treatment , the doctor may not discuss drugs like naltrexone , says judy fenster , associate professor in adelphi university s school for social work . there are legal barriers , as well many fda approved medications for substance use disorders are highly regulated . physicians , especially general practitioners , may be unfamiliar with these medications or may not be comfortable prescribing them , fenster says . some doctors are reluctant to prescribe medications to addicts , and some people with addictions are wary of taking these medications , she says . and that s despite research that shows that naltrexone and drugs like it can be helpful in treating substance abuse . trosa symbolizes a gradual shifting from the more confrontational tc model of synanon and earlier communities , to methods such as motivational interviewing , according to paul . motivational interviewing is a counseling approach that avoids direct confrontation , instead relying on empathetic collaboration to help addicts resolve their ambivalence toward addressing their substance use . despite these new approaches , paul is careful not to undermine the core foundations of the therapeutic community . training and work assignments are still paramount , and group sessions and counseling attendance are secondary to completing work assignments . combined with the small staff , this creates something of a catch as catch can environment . all of trosa s specific treatment methodologies have shown efficacy in research reviewed by national authorities . a handful of studies have found that therapeutic communities lessen the likelihood of relapse and reincarceration compared to control groups , at least in the short term . but studies only take you so far when it comes to any individual addict , it s more important to consider what environment might suit their needs , fenster says . trosa s internal numbers are flattering they claim percent of graduates are employed a year after completing the program , and percent are sober . everyone i ve spoken to has reiterated that the program is not for everyone but the program has clearly met a need in north carolina out of the state s counties are represented along with out of state residents . there s a percent increase in residents since , and trosa s office fields new inquiries a week . it s a public policy debacle . offering services at no cost requires substantial funding and resources , which both paul nagy and kevin mcdonald emphasize are extremely difficult to secure in , only percent of trosa s revenue came from government grants or other cash contributions . as a country we spend more money on clean up anti trafficking , incarceration , et cetera than we do on treatment , paul explains , it s a public policy debacle . although medical professionals understand that addiction is a disease , addiction is still extremely stigmatized by the general public , adelphi s fenster says . we tend to think of people experiencing alcohol or other drug addiction as morally or psychologically flawed . this stigma leads to underfunding and other iniquities . dr . steenrod adds that these funding issues go beyond government spending , as insurance companies resist covering long term rehabilitation programs like therapeutic communities despite their efficacy . i never see my brother on my tour of trosa . before i head back to my parents home , i stop by a fast food restaurant to grab some food so i ll have enough energy to make the drive . the restaurant is bustling with employees of the nearby medical facilities , families desperate to preoccupy their children with a ball pit , retirees , and a couple patrol cars worth of sheriff s deputies . people whose lives may not be as governed by addiction as trosa s residents , but who may have shopped at the thrift store , or hired the moving company , or decorated a christmas tree from trosa s lot in their home . in a small way , they have given zach an opportunity to heal , just as much as the staff and residents of trosa . there are tiny threads of connection that stretch from them , to my brother , all the way to me . the author and her brother , there are my two angels . my mom has caught me staring at the foot tall oil painting of my brother and me at two and four , respectively , that she commissioned online from china a size just small enough not to qualify as outlandishly garish . i m glad you went to trosa , she says . i have slowly , painfully hardened my heart against false hopeshe wants to know her son is in a place that can help him , or at least wants to help him , if he is ready to be helped . after his formal acceptance into trosa but before his release from prison , he told my parents that other inmates criticized the program when they heard he was going , told him it wasn t worth it . my parents counseled him not to take stock in the opinions of people still caught in the cycle of addiction and incarceration , but the anxiety was contagious . of the group he came in with , only three are still in the program . everyone asks me if i think this time , in this place , my brother will finally overcome his addiction , or learn to manage it , or learn to live his life fully . i don t know , and i don t want to guess . for over years , i have slowly , painfully hardened my heart against false hope , diligently managed my expectations , tried to learn what to do or say that would do more help than harm . i ve found that the best way to prevent another heartbreak is not to allow yourself to hope for anything . the author s brother , that feeling solidified in december . that was when my parents asked zach to leave the house for good . here s what i didn t say , earlier by then , my brother s drinking had become constant and unavoidable , and when he made an obvious attempt to sneak whiskey up to his room , we confronted him . i made a grab for the bottle he twisted my arm away hard enough to leave a bruise . then , he left . he sent a letter to me later , apologizing even though i wasn t angry . we haven t communicated directly since . i make him feel ashamed of himself , i think , and i don t know how to tell him he has nothing to be ashamed of . so i spend my time tiptoeing after his ghost interrogating my parents for every detail of their conversations with him , trekking to durham to find out if he s in a good place . and physically , yes , i think he is in a good place . as for his mental state ampnbspwell , the thoughts of a ghost are unknowable . but i hope that he is . correction trosa stands for triangle residential options for substance abusers and not triangle rehabilitation options for substance abusers , as previously stated . edited by elizabeth lopatto , michael zelenko	 valley village is located next to north hollywood , which isn t very close to hollywood at all . the santa monica mountains , plus a handful of neighborhoods and freeway exchanges , separate hollywood from north hollywood . for the past several months , it has been impossible to drive between these neighborhoods without passing a billboard advertising a youtube star . most often , that star is grace helbig , a year old comedian who recently crossed over , landing her own honest to god television show on e ! . viewership of the grace helbig show tanked quickly by its third episode , it was only drawing , viewers , causing the network to move it from friday to sunday night . helbig , meanwhile , still posts videos for her youtube channel , where she has . million subscribers . connor goes to hollywoodchasing stardom in youtube s crowded universeryan bradley valley village is located next to north hollywood , which isn t very close to hollywood at all . the santa monica mountains , plus a handful of neighborhoods and freeway exchanges , separate hollywood from north hollywood . for the past several months , it has been impossible to drive between these neighborhoods without passing a billboard advertising a youtube star . most often , that star is grace helbig , a year old comedian who recently crossed over , landing her own honest to god television show on e ! . viewership of the grace helbig show tanked quickly by its third episode , it was only drawing , viewers , causing the network to move it from friday to sunday night . helbig , meanwhile , still posts videos for her youtube channel , where she has . million subscribers . sixty four thousand people , he said that s an nfl stadium . on a recent midsummer afternoon , connor manning was sitting in a valley village bistro , picking at his salad and considering helbig s level of celebrity , celebrity generally , and if that was what he really wanted . manning is not famous . except , perhaps , to the , people who were subscribed to his youtube channel . that doesn t sound like a lot , compared to the stars on the billboards , but it s all relative . sixty four thousand people , he said that s an nfl stadium . manning had just had his hair cut , shaved close on both sides , slicked back for the most part though stray locks escaped to cover one of his two very blue eyes . he was anxious his knees bobbed and bounced under the table . i ve never been the one who s been really assertive , he said . but i m in a place where i m trying to practice that and , like , faking it in a way . he laughed . just a few minutes earlier he had mentioned how hard he works to appear unguarded for his audience , his fans . if he wanted to develop his youtube videos into a self sustaining career , the kind where he wouldn t have to wait tables on the side , he would need to present a more confident facade to the companies that control the pathways to larger audiences , more money , greater success . he d need to fake it , maybe , or figure out another way . manning , , had moved to la exactly two weeks before i met him , driving across the country from his home in the baltimore suburbs where , for the better part of five and a half years , he d made videos of himself and posted them to his youtube channel , aconmann . for now , he s crashing at his friend sasha s apartment in studio city , just over the hills from hollywood . ever since he was in high school and probably even earlier , manning had dreamed of coming to la to make it as a performer , because this is where performers go to make it . in recent years , the nature of manning s performance had evolved from something traditional a zany sort of adolescent comedy act into something more complicated , harder to pin down . at some point , his videos began to address much more of his own life depression , addiction , bisexuality . his audience responded , his subscriber numbers steadily rose , and he began to think of what he was building as a viable , stand alone career . tomorrow , at vidcon , he would begin figuring out just what that career might look like , especially now that he was here , in la . vidcon is a conference that began six years ago , mostly for youtubers like manning , but has since metastasized to include viners and snapchatters and even facebookers too , along with hoards of their fans . the conference also draws industry people the people manning needed to fake it for , and the gatekeepers to becoming this new kind of celebrity . among manning s earliest videos is one , posted five years ago and viewed , times , called legit old guy . in it , he narrates over a clip of a man parking a very small car in a very small garage . that guy should be the president of the world , manning says , looking squarely into the camera . a lot of his early videos are similar he either points to an already popular thing on the internet , or weighs in on an evergreen topic of internet discussion twilight s vampires , lindsay lohan s sexuality , the rise of auto tune . manning called his web series generally awesome , and even developed a tagline i m connor manning and you ve just become a little more awesome which managed to stick even after his videos became more personal . he dropped the tagline about five months ago . manning had been practicing his public speaking for yearsthe talent manning has for extemporaneous speech appears , in his videos , innate . but he had been practicing his public speaking years before he made his first video . in high school , he was a star on the speech team , competing at the state and national level . he was a fierce competitor , ruthlessly confident . manning was , by all accounts , an ideal kid a good student and son , endlessly goofy and positive . but he was troubled , too . his parents went through an ugly divorce he never sees his biological father , and his stepfather was distant and the two never bonded . after high school , manning went to george mason university , where he began drinking heavily , grew depressed , and ultimately , considered suicide . the next , dark period of his life dropping out , living at home , going through therapy , his addiction and depression is something manning avoids discussing in great detail . for someone who semi professionally confesses to the internet , he remains incredibly guarded , ampnbsppackaging his personal narrative in a way that insulates the messier , more intimate aspects . he doesn t like to talk about what he was addicted to , specifically , nor does he talk about his depression in more than the broadest of strokes . on november nd , , manning posted a video called the meaning of life . he knows this date by heart . the video signaled a definitive shift , the beginning of something new . i ve been thinking a lot about time , and how crazy it is , manning says in the video , launching into a brief and wide eyed explanation of the theory of relativity . then he reads questions from his audience . have you ever had suicidal thoughts ? someone asks . please give me some advice . i think you re going to have one less viewer . now , i could say a whole lot of things to this , manning replies . too many things . . . the answer is yes , i have had those thoughts . everybody has horrible times but if that weren t the case . . . the good times wouldn t be worth it . he goes back to the beginning , then the very beginning , the creation of the universe , and the improbable fact of our existence , born out of chaos . it s not just how skillfully he connects his answer to the theme he s previously laid out , but how he speaks from a place of deep experience without making it about himself . it s universal . to feel means you exist , and existence , in my opinion , outweighs any negative thing that could happen , he says . it was the first time he d ever done anything online that was not solely designed to be funny . it was personal and helpful , and it was , he says , his way forward , his crucible . at the end of , he started attending community college , and , in the beginning of , he got a job working customer relations at the national aquarium . that got him out of his shell , and it also helped him save money for the move to la he d begun to imagine . three years ago , he told his mom and stepdad that he wouldn t be going back to university , that he wanted to pursue his dreams out west . in the meantime , his videos had become more personal , with titles like falling for straight people and feeling myself and am i a real man and would you date someone with scars ? if you watch manning s channel , you feel that you know him . his mom , cathy williams , watched his videos from the very beginning , even when she couldn t quite understand just what the heck it was he was after . she says the videos allowed her to watch her son transform from a goofy guy who worked hard for a laugh , to just , like , an everyman . none of connor s videos have gone viral , and he takes pride in that . it s easy to make a viral video , he says , but it isn t meaningful a flash in the digital pan that doesn t establish a connection with followers or guarantee a wave of new subscribers . i love my story individually , which is what i primarily tell , but i also like kind of validating everyone else s story as well , he said that afternoon in the valley village cafe . i wondered aloud if he could monetize that . connor told me that yes , yes he could in fact he already had . donations from viewers had helped him relocate cross country . for the first time , he was being paid to attend vidcon . the first vidcon , in , took place in the hyatt regency in downtown los angeles . it was put together by sibling youtubers known as the vlogbrothers john and hank green . john , the older brother , is also author of the ya bestsellers turned movies the fault in our stars and paper towns . attendees of the first and second vidcon speak wistfully about how intimate , low stakes , and fun those conferences were . it was a place to meet your internet buddies in real life . sure , there were industry folks then , too , but they mostly helped creators with little tricks to grow traffic and build audience . back then the fans moved in smaller , more manageable packs they were respectful , almost . it all felt very collegial . in its third year , vidcon moved to the anaheim convention center , a much larger venue that sits next door to disneyland . industry people with serious money poured in . so did the fans . for manning , vidcon has become the signpost of his year , a way to take stock . his mom came with him to his first vidcon four years ago , because he was still in rough shape , and because she was curious just what this youtube world looked like up close . even with her there , manning snuck off , got trashed , and didn t return her calls for a night . they had a big fight . still , manning met the people who inspired him to be better , not just in his videos , but in his life . about a month after vidcon , on july nd , , he got sober . this year s conference took place over three days in july . thursday was industry day , a chance for the businesses that run the platforms to fly in , meet the talent , mingle , and be home to their families by the weekend . the real fan and creator stuff the panels , the meetups didn t begin in earnest until friday , and continued through saturday . when i stepped into the enormous , airey outer atrium of the anaheim convention center on vidcon s first day , the first thing i noticed was the sticky sweet smell of teenage perfume and cologne . across the convention center hall , packs of young adults with hair dyed in blues , purples , and rainbows huddled around power outlets , each other , and the occasional creator . on the second and third floors of the center , the scene was decidedly more suit jackets and business casual . i kept climbing until i made my way to a balcony facing out over a line of food trucks , fountains , and a stage where stars from awesomenesstv performed . up here , the conversation circled around packaged content and talent incubation , crossed formats and investor appeal , cross channel promotion and synergy , synergy , synergy . up here , the conversation circled around synergy , synergy , synergyawesomenesstv is a multi channel network , or mcn , one of a slew of new and powerful talent incubators and content distributors to have emerged in the rush to the online video goldmine . for the very biggest youtube stars comedians , gamers , and unboxers of new products it is not uncommon to make well over million a year . according to the youtube stat monitor social blade , an unboxer that goes by the name disneycollectorbr could be earning more than million a month . signing creators at that level is lucrative business . even managing a dozen lesser stars , with several hundred thousand subscribers apiece , is enough to build a healthy media company . though manning exists in a lower and less profitable tier creators with under , subscribers he had had been signed to an mcn called big frame , which describes itself as a company building sustainable media brands around youtube s most influential channels , and connecting advertisers with their highly engaged audiences . he ended his partnership with big frame in december recently , the company was acquired by awesomenesstv . manning said he d left big frame because the company s advertiser driven business model wasn t what he was looking for . but advertising is where the serious money is and always will be , and the serious money , once it got very serious , is always with the same entrenched media companies awesomenesstv is owned by dreamworks and hearst another major mcn , maker studios , is owned by disney . the only newish player among the media behemoths is the platform itself , youtube , which is owned by google . later in the day , in an auditorium bigger than all the rest , susan wojcicki , youtube s ceo , spoke to hundreds of her industry peers . the fans , she said , are leaning in and changing the definitions of what it means to be a celebrity . a variety poll from earlier this year found eight of the top most famous , recognizable , and important celebrities to teens were youtubers . during her presentation , wojcicki unveiled a redesigned youtube play button that looked like a diamond a special button for special creators , with channels of million subscribers or more . in mock awards show fashion , she presented physical , heavy looking versions of the button to a few of the creators who were there the epic rap battles of history guys . million subs , the duo behind the comedy channel smosh million subs . fans are changing the definitions of what it means to be a celebrity . manning is aware of the push for ever greater numbers , and the opportunity at stake . he is tactical with the content he produces . he knew , for example , that when he made a video about his bisexuality , or a video called too gay , too straight , it would do well , because lgbt videos do well on youtube . he could do one of those , then get away with maybe three or four weirder ones , maybe shot in a single take . i look at hank , at what he s done and i just , i want to do that , connor told me the day before vidcon . hank is hank green . he is manning s hero , not just because of his success , but because he seems to have preserved exactly who he is despite it a nerdy guy who makes videos about things he s passionate about , and makes people passionate about those things , too . he s a force for good in the world , manning said . he also knew that hank green would be at vidcon , and there was a good chance they d be in the same room at the same time , and maybe get a chance to meet , and talk , creator to creator . that would be cool , but he didn t want to force it , make things weird . people were coming up to hank green all the time , wanting things from him , and he didn t want to be one of those people . on the morning of his second day at vidcon , manning was slumped in a chair in the lobby of the hilton , a stone s throw from the convention center and where he and most attendees were staying . he was staring at his phone and double checking a list of questions for a panel on mental health he would soon be moderating . behind him , a line of weary , bleary eyed parents snaked its way out of the hotel starbucks . manning yawned and stretched his long skinny arms dramatically , then placed his hands over his face . i m tired , he said . manning is often tired . for a while , his twitter bio read a little bit tired . playing a version of himself for an audience of tens of thousands twice a week is bound to be draining . plus , now , vidcon . the panel he was moderating featured will shepherd , kati morton , and savannah brown , who all work in a similar confessional vein to manning . brown is a poet , morton is a therapist , and shepherd is a gay man who had recently begun to grapple with ptsd and who has the largest audience of the bunch , subs . half an hour before the panel was slated to begin , the room filled with attendees , gossiping about vidcons past . the panelists entered to huge applause . manning asked them to introduce themselves , then asked how they ended up on youtube . we re kind of like the outcasts , brown said . what i love , shepherd said , is this is like where the weird kids go to express themselves , then , later none of us have massive channels , but we are all so raw . part of that rawness was , the group agreed , admitting when they did not always know the answer , that they were just figuring it out themselves . i really don t know what i m doing , manning agreed . i m living the experience and then making videos as my way through it . the drawback is people presume to know what i ve been through or am going through . they come up to me and go , are you okay ? are you okay ? no , i m fine . i m fine . i m just tired . are you okay ? no , i m fine . i m just tired . during the q ampa portion of the panel , a middle aged woman in the audience stood and spoke to the room for a long time about how she saw millennials and post millennials . they were all , in her eyes , spiritually lost . eventually , morton cut her off . being lost isn t a problem , she said , and the room erupted in applause . an hour after the mental health panel , there was an informal meet up , an lgbt hangout , outside the convention center . there was no line for autographs or selfies here many of these fans were in fact old friends or people manning had known a very long time online and occasionally in real life . someone in the group described some of the vine stars as looking like beautiful space alien creatures another person in the circle fawned over manning s hair cut . manning , uneasy with all the attention , pointed to a trash can . this is me . this is who i am , he said . hank green looks young for his age which is , but old for vidcon . he has dimpled cheeks , slightly mussed hair , and the air of a hip , young dad . green has interviewed president obama , co founded a record label , and invented a pair of d glasses for people who want to watch d movies in two dimensions . beyond the vlogbrothers channel he runs with his brother , hank is involved with at least a dozen other youtube channels . two years ago , green founded a crowdfunding company called subbable , which let people who enjoyed the work of certain creators donate money to them , either through a one time payment or a monthly subscription . in march , subbable was acquired by patreon , a much larger but still private company that essentially offers the same payment structure , while taking a percent cut of all donations . last year patreon announced it paid ampnbsp million per month to its creators , of which there are more than , this year the company says its pledges have grown percent , and that its , financially active creators are pulling from a monthly pool of millions of dollars . manning is one of them . currently , he makes . a month from patreon donations . seventeen of his patrons pay at least a month , and , for their donations , receive a handwritten letter from connor . it s not a fortune , but that income which he says is increasing allowed him to move to la , and will soon help him get his own apartment . a vlogbrothers video , friday afternoon , after the morning s mental health talk and midday lgbt meetup , manning sat waiting for his turn on a series of filmed panels for uplife , a youtube channel for online communities against sexual violence . hank green was there , sitting near him , being filmed for another panel . manning was extremely attuned to the way most people approached hank at vidcon , treating him as an object , a celebrity . he didn t want that . and so although they were in the same small room for nearly an hour , he and green never spoke . my path is not repeatable , but i don t know of any path that is . later , i talked with green , and asked him about his path , and manning s , and if they were at all analogous if green s career might shine a light on how manning might come up , too . no , green said . my path is not repeatable , but i don t know of any path that is . someone could go from , subscribers to , , he said , but beyond that , in today s environment , things get murky . vlogbrothers , with their . million subscribers , have been around a relatively long time eight years to youtube s . their channel grew popular organically a remarkable feat and an increasingly difficult proposition in . the reason is simple there s simply too much money on the line . green said that in order to develop a very popular , sustainable franchise with millions of subscribers in this new , moneyed era , you need institutional support mcns eager to promote your brand through their other , more popular talent and channels , or connect you to high paying branded deals . it all meant faster access to resources money , better cameras , lighting , stages that could free you up to make loads of content . but in time , green said , that support goes from enabling you , to people or companies asking you to do things for them , because they gave you money . i think they re following me , as a person . there is , however , another , hidden landscape . on twitch . tv , a tip based , live streaming video game platform bought by amazon last year for million gamers make a decent and sometimes great income with modest but extremely dedicated audiences . you can have , viewers and make a better living than the million plus guys , green said . all you needed was to become the thing the podcast , the song , the video , the habit for some people , and they d pay a month for you . manning knows that to build a career , he needs to think beyond youtube subscriber numbers he needs to build an audience that will zealously follow him to snapchat , or facebook , or some other platform that doesn t exist yet . it s a business reality that manning is innately attuned to . essentially i don t think people are following my videos , manning had told me over our first lunch in valley village . i think they re following me , as a person . outside , after the panel , i asked manning if he was sorry he didn t get a chance to talk to his hero . he shrugged . of course i am a little bummed , he said , but also not really . because i know it will happen . i know i am exactly where i need to be . back in the san fernando valley , a few days after vidcon , manning was draped across the couch at his friend sasha s apartment . manning s bedroom consisted of a mattress in the corner of the living room , clothing confettied in piles around it . he waved his hand at the scene and said , this is it . this is home , for now . over the three days at vidcon he d gained about a thousand subscribers . he d met a bunch of new creators . he d moderated a panel and nearly met his hero . still , he was rootless and in a post conference malaise . at least , he said , he was in decent health he hadn t caught the vidcon virus , a flu like disease born out of the annual confluence of teens , their germs and hormones rampaging . he needed an apartment . without a home , he said , he felt like he was still drifting . this vidcon , he said , had felt different than previous ones he was actively building a business , developing a strategy . in the end , he didn t have to fake it as hard as he thought he might . people seemed to know him already . i didn t have to explain what i do , he said . this is it . this is home , for now . he was , he said , being courted by a few mcns , but he wasn t interested in a contract . not until i know i can be a priority for companies , he said . i really want to have some negotiating power , because i don t want to be treated as an afterthought again . he was looking into the idea of partnerships . a few weeks after vidcon , he did a branded video , his first in years , for a company called famebit . it felt different than similar projects he d done with big frame he was in control , and didn t feel like he was diminishing who he was , his own brand . with the money from that , and patreon , he d be able to pay rent off internet work alone . recently , manning texted me he d signed a lease . a bouquet of exclamation points followed . it was a studio near his friends in the valley , not too far from the hills . beyond them was hollywood proper , with its billboards of youtube stars standing right alongside movie stars , reality tv stars , pop stars . he d be living alone for the first time . he was getting closer to where it was all happening , and he could , he said , finally start building something on his own . it felt like the real beginning of this new stage , finally . photography by john francis petersedited by michael zelenko , ampnbspemily yoshida	 the verge s disney hub is your place for disney news . showing stories in chronological order from to . the abridged history of disney , ad by chris plante the verge s disney hub is your place for disney news . showing stories in chronological order from to . update march th , missing archival posts addressed . december th , the verge promotes full time editor to disney beatmy name is chris plante , and i m the verge s first senior disney editor . disney has become a monolithic presence in the worlds of films , games , music , comics , theater , resorts , travel , and conventions , providing a reporting workload for an entire website . i m the only full time editor on the disney beat , but we intend to expand the section alongside the company , matching its moves with a comparable scale and quality of reporting . i promise to provide hard news and vital scoops . investigating the most powerful entertainment studio on the planet won t be easy , but i vow to embody the same life risking attitude of the world s bravest reporters . this won t just be another fan site farming traffic off trailers , leaked set photos , and baseless rumors . january rd , is this blurry set image proof that doctor strange will appear in avengers infinity war ? july th , boom ! marvel releases spider man and guardians of the galaxy vol . trailers on th of julynovember th , gifts to get your favorite star wars fan this christmasdecember th , which star wars anthology rogue one character are you ? december th , the verge is hiring disney reporters wanted ! what a year ! last december , i struck out on my own to bring serious disney reporting to the verge on a daily basis . while the countless trailers , set photos , and rumors didn t leave me much time for reporting , i am proud to say the verge s disney coverage is the fastest growing portion of both this site and all of vox media . your appetite for star wars , marvel , indiana jones , and frozen news has allowed me to expand at a rate i couldn t have imagined . while i m proud of our five person team two reporters , two video producers , and myself we have plans to expand even further . with an eye to the future , we re currently looking to fill the following roles junior disney animation reportersenior marvel reporterstar wars internsenior disney gif makersenior disney snapchat strategist february rd , what it s like to see the thor ragnarok trailer before everyone else in gifsmay th , star wars episode viii review like my favorite breaking bad episodes . . . but in space ! june th , why toy story is the best toy story yet an explainerjune th , the guardians of the galaxy post post post credits scene will blow your fanboy mindwhen you see guardians of the galaxy vol . be sure to stay in the theater at least minutes after the staff politely asks you to leave . the post post post credits sequence is the biggest clue yet about the future of the disney metaverse . you already know the film s plot from the trailer star lord saves the galaxy , proposes to kitty pride , and kindles a lifelong friendship with howard the duck the space adventurer charts a vacation for a tropical planet where music is limited to covers of s rock bands . roll credits . but in this bonus scene , star lord crash lands on a frozen planet . taking cover inside a cave , the young man finds something that will change his life , his destiny , and the marvel canon forever a lightsaber . june th , disney exec to fans guardians of the galaxy lightsaber is just for fun and would never be canonical july th , the only photo you need of the iron man easter egg in pirates of the caribbean dead men tell no talesnovember th , wreck it ralph review like video games , the sequel is better than the originalfebruary th , toy story wins best picture , beating joss whedon s richard iiiodds were on joss whedon at the academy awards . the writer and director , nominated for an adaptation of richard iii set inside the offices of a silicon valley social media app , appeared to have the honor in the bag . but academy members split the best picture vote between whedon s critical darling and bushwhacked , kathryn bigelow s dramatization of the collapse of jeb bush s run for president , allowing toy story to score the biggest best picture upset since crash . this is a huge win for director john lasseter , who dedicated his emotional speech to his his wife and children . the speech was only slightly marred by an offhand and perplexing comment criticizing the us government for threatening to tax disney s plan to one day build a resort on the moon . the loss is the first setback in some time for whedon , who had carte blanche following his success with marvel films . even without the gold statue , richard iii has established the director as something of a hollywood miracle worker who can turn practically anything into a hit . sources at major studios agree that whedon can do whatever he d like , so long as it s not another dr . horrible s sing along blog . march rd , the verge s disney editorial team wants you ! did you camp in line to see the force awakens ? did you write a master s thesis on gender and sexuality in frozen ? are you convinced , despite what disney has said , that guardians of the galaxy and star wars are actually set in the same universe ? and do you have five or more years of professional writing experience at a major online media outlet ? if so , we d love for you to apply for one of the following jobs senior marvel rumor mongerdeputy pixar podcasterinvestigative reporter of international disney theme parks april th , report superhero costume reality shows now beat traditional reality shows in streaming views , with marvel properties at the topaudiences are more likely to watch reality shows in which all contestants wear superhero costumes than they are to watch similar reality shows in which superhero costumes are not prominently featured , according to a report from the paley center for media . that superhero costumes weren t a part of reality television a mere three years ago will be hard for some streaming viewers to believe . the paley center believes that directives from both netflix and amazon asking participants in their new catalog of reality shows to wear superhero outfits colorful capes and spandex that represent their character strengths and flaws has helped the streaming companies increase viewership without the heavy budgets of their awards friendly programs . an analytical report from wedbush securities shows the trend is clear and replicable . data indicates that simply taking franchises like survivor and the bachelor , and adding superhero costumes to the wardrobe and a pun to the title , produces a show with almost twice the viewership as the original . netflix s next men , a dating show produced by marvel in which men and women choose from a bus full of suitors in superhero suits , is the front runner for this year s primetime emmy for outstanding reality television program . may th , the new han solo movie is good , but not as good as this harrison ford shirtless scene from working girljune th , cars review now that i have kids , i guess these movies are good ? october rd , universal s jurassic universe led slate should disney be scared ? universal celebrated the record breaking million international opening weekend of jurassic world the lost jurassic world by confirming the leak of its decade long production slate . the list of films in development at the studio was leaked by an internet activism group demanding the production company lower the prices of in app purchases in their minions mobile game currently the most popular game on earth , with over million active players a day . the films include the mysteriously named jurassic universe , mini minion , a series of superhero movies built around universal s classic monster properties , f st and furi us , and four spinoff films planned for the next eight years that will follow the solo adventures of dominic toretto , letty , hobbs , and the ghost of han . should disney be scared ? with dc comics on the ropes , the closest competitor is now universal , whose fast amp furious films , some analysts believe , could be the superhero flicks of a new generation . if disney s worried , they aren t letting anyone know it . on twitter , the official disney account responded to the news with a puckish , we ll be first in line when dom torretto faces a t rex congrats stillnumber . update a press release confirmed the social media specialist operating disney s twitter handle has been let go . december th , in lieu of the delayed star wars episode ix , disney releases surprise star wars holiday special k remasterdecember th , panic at wal mart as star wars holiday special k remaster sells out in record timemay th , avengers infinity war part breaks box office recorda year to the day after jurassic world the lost jurassic world destroyed box office records with a million international opening weekend , avengers infinity war part opens with an astounding million . bloomberg reports that the studio , sponsors , and partners spent over million on cross marketing promotions . the film is projected to gross billion dollars by the end of its first week in theaters . july th , watch the leaked comic con trailer for the chris pratt reboot of indiana jones update trailer pulled update july th , , pm unfortunately , the teaser has been pulled by disney . for fans that missed the three minute long teaser trailer , the words indiana , jones , chris , pratt , and coming as well as the number gradually fade in and out as a plane charts its way across a s world map . and then , for the briefest second , we see chris pratt in full indiana jones gear . he s in a tomb , and soak sweats through his shirt . from the walls , spiders begin to pour into the room , surrounding the hero . he looks directly into the camera , and he says , why did it have to be spiders ? ! this is a significant departure for the character , who formerly was afraid of snakes . august th , in groundbreaking deal , robert downey jr . sells image rights to disney , will be digitally inserted into marvel movies for rest of eternity for months now , robert downey jr . and disney have been unable to come to an agreement about the actor s involvement in phase of the marvel cinematic universe . rumors abounded of downey jr . s reported million per film price tag and demand that he spend no more than days on set per film . but the two parties have managed to strike a last minute arrangement , and it will involve the sort of technological wizardry tony stark is known for . robert downey jr . has sold his image , voice , and soul rights to be used in perpetuity and in all configurations for a lump sum of billion . while that s certainly more than the estimated million the actor would have made from initial plans for phase , the contract will allow disney to make movies starring the actor with as much or as little screen time as they wish for phase through year , if they so choose . under the agreement , downey jr . will no longer act in films , and will instead spend a few days a month for the next years collaborating with a top team at industrial light and magic , working to create an ever more lifelike digital replication of the celebrity . august th , opinion why we should be terrified about the fine print in disney s soul rights contractaugust th , awesome ways disney might use robert downey jr . s soul rightsseptember th , dc comics hope lego adaptations will solve its superhero movie problemthe past five years haven t gone as hoped for dc comics , whose flood of grimy , brooding superhero and supervillain films designed to replicate marvel s hot streak failed to become record breaking summer blockbusters . but while audiences failed to connect with live action depictions of the comic book characters , s the lego batman movie struck box office gold , and pointed the way for the future of warner bros . and dc comics . today , dc comics announces its plan to quadruple down on the lego and superhero mash up strategy with the announcements of the lego superman movie , the lego joker movie also , the lego flash movie , and the lego green lantern movie . while the studio wouldn t confirm the rumors of the lego justice league movie , it s widely believed that the five lego superhero films are leading to an avengers like team flick . perhaps that one will star a female lego lead . october st , breaking marvel confirms black panther , thunderbolts , more ant man for phase filmsat marvel media day , the superhero peddler announced its slate of blockbuster films for phase of the marvel cinematic universe . ant man and wasp ms . marvel spider man freshman year guardians of the galaxy the lost mixtape thunderbolts inhumans attilan rising planet hulk black panther the new avengers oh captain part doctor strange the illuminati iron man the new avengers oh captain part december th , star wars episode ix review the return of the jedi of this generationjanuary th , disney launches streaming service disneywhere , removes all films and shows from streaming competitorsif you like disney and marvel movies , get your venmo chip ready for a new subscription streaming service disneywhere . the platform , launching today , is now the only streaming service for all disney , pixar , marvel , the muppets , espn films , and abc television programs . films and shows formerly available on competitor services disappeared this morning . in a boilerplate email , a netflix representative stated that disney s contract had been set for renewal , and negotiations were going well before disney s decision makers stopped returning our phone calls . disneywhere launches with an exclusive new children s cartoon the littlest jedis of the galaxy , a mash up of the star wars and guardians of the galaxy universes , picking up where the post credits sequence of guardians of the galaxy vol . left off . the story follows star lord and his comrades groot , rocket , howard the duck , drax , and gamora , who following a cosmic time rip triggered by howard the duck s five alarm bean burrito farts are now infants training to become jedis . february th , following critical stinkbomb episode ix , star wars reboot rumors take flightapril th , rumors of star wars reboot are baseless , says disney ctojune st , leak reveals internal star wars reboot documentsaugust rd , disney puts star wars plans on hold as leaks continue , releasing year internal playbook and scriptsaugust nd , marvel s horrible box office on downward trend in one graphthunderbolts leaves theaters this weekend , marking the deepest drop yet in the worldwide gross of marvel films . this one graph says it all about the marvel cinematic universe s beleaguered phase . ant man and wasp , , ms . marvel , , spider man freshman year , , guardians of the galaxy the lost mixtape , , thunderbolts , , april th , the lego justice league movie to be split into three films , disney ready for second place ? if you had asked me in how dc would surpass marvel at the box office , i would never have guessed a deluge of lego films . and yet , here we are with the lego green lantern earning . billion worldwide , and dc and warner bros . announcing that the upcoming the lego justice league movie will be split into three films . the lego justice league movie brick by brick will release in the summer of , the lego justice league movie little miss kryptonite will arrive the following summer of , and the lego justice league movie mixed up with mxyzptlk will hit the same year just in time for the holidays . we believe there s no limit to the american and international audience s hunger for lego superhero movies , said warner bros . new director of superhero intellectual property jax biffman . december st , live action mulan is single bright spot in bad year for disneyjanuary th , disney considers big acquisitions to reverse fortunesmarch rd , leak reveals plans for disney to acquire sony update sony acquired a hack of sony s servers , the third this month , revealed that the company would be acquired by disney moments before the company was acquired by disney . with hacks happening on an almost weekly basis at sony , most negotiations have been moved to paper based technologies , but discussions of the plan appeared briefly in an email from sony pictures president jake thornbush sent to disney vp of development lindsay grahamburger titled , re jax biffman is a total butthole . the personal email is four paragraphs of gossip about the warner bros . executive , who grahamburger claims drunkenly shat himself at last year s comic con when a fan dressed as groot from guardians of the galaxy jumped out from behind a corner . my name is groot ? wrote thornbush . more like his name is poop . hahahaha . in a postscript , thornbush said he looks forward to seeing grahamburger at the big acosition sic branstorm sic . august th , disney acquires fox , reclaiming x men and fantastic four captain america annual with marvel in a tailspin after the dismal box office return of the phase films , marvel plans to reunite all its heroes under the same banner for a reboot of its cinematic universe . today , disney announced it has acquired th century fox , as well as the latter studio s legacy contracts for the film rights to x men , ampnbspfantastic four , and a handful of other marvel characters . for nearly a decade , marvel and fox have tried to collaborate on films , but anonymous insiders close to marvel say the studio no longer wants to compromise on its vision for wolverine , professor x , and the countless other mutants in dire need of cinematic representation . i mean this goes back to avengers age of ultron , said the source , who had experience working with both fox and marvel . marvel wasn t pleased to rewrite the backstory of quicksilver and scarlet witch . they think of their characters like they re their own children . they probably think about them more than they think about their ampnbspactual children , really . for the first time in years , marvel will not be releasing a film during a calendar year . at this year s comic con , marvel reps said the studio is taking this time to create the best marvel movies yet . august th , breaking marvel announces phase a of cinematic universe iron man , spider man , and moreat d , marvel announced its upcoming slate for the reboot of the marvel cinematic universe . according to disney s new director of superhero media , rex biffman , brother of warner bros . new director of superhero intellectual property jax biffman , phase a is a pared down crop of stories that returns marvel films to what fans loved the most about them normal people with extraordinary powers helping a world that isn t sure whether to idolize or destroy them . rex biffman also announced that disney and microsoft would be collaborating on minecraft adaptations of marvel s mythology throughout phase a . iron man x men the minecraft captain america movie spider man the minecraft avengers movie following the announcement , biffman answered questions from fans . when asked if rex s relationship with brother jax was a conflict of interested , rex revealed that he hadn t spoken to his brother since , when an argument over zack snyder s capability as a director led to a fistfight between the then college aged siblings . it s been said once and i ll say it again , said rex . jax biffman is a total butthole . story developing . . . february th , with rumored help from robots , exxon , wal mart , and disney , elon musk breaks ground on first bank of marselon musk is having a bad day on planet earth , with work indefinitely stalled on his billion and counting hyperloop project . but in space , the inventor and entrepreneur doesn t have to worry about the state of california s bureaucracy . after five years of shuttling space x branded construction bots to the surface of the gaseous red planet , musk confirmed that the machines have begun work on a self sustaining server farm on the otherwise uninhabited celestial body . musk foresees the grand opening of a fully operational first bank of mars to occur within the next five years . governments across the world have taken musk to court over his plan , though musk believes his extraterrestrial bank is free of oversight from earth s taxation . musk intends for the first bank of mars to begin where paypal ends , working in tandem with bitcoin to create a new libertarian method of using and saving currency . while no other businesses have confirmed involvement with the first bank of mars , sources close to musk claim exxon , wal mart , and disney plan to be the service s first clients . rumors about disney s interest in mars have heated up with plans to build a resort on the moon squashed by new us tax legislation that recognizes the lunar surface as a commonwealth . april th , leaked powerpoint slide shows plans for millennium falcon branded rocket programjune rd , disney exec no plans to get in space travel at this timejune st , stop what you re doing and listen to blue ivy s mega hit , i am destiny s child under the no propagation of media act of , this video has been removed at the request of roc nation . if you d like to hear the song , it is available exclusively to subscribers of the tidal channel in apple music and on the limited vinyl release of the mulan make a woman out of you official soundtrack . march th , why you can t find some of our disney storiesit pains me to say that hundreds of disney stories and other verge stories were lost in our site wide migration to facebook . return to top april nd , north west , reality star , to play ms . marvelmarvel is back ! today , marvel announced that the biggest reality star on the planet , north west , will play her first fictional role as ms . marvel for the launch of phase b of the marvel cinematic universe . phase a of the marvel cinematic universe started strong with the rebooted iron man , featuring a wholly computer animated version of robert downey jr . that incorporated the blonde tresses the venerable actor sported in . disney s purchase of downey jr . s life rights looks especially wise in hindsight , with the reclusive mega star unseen by the public since a brief appearance at the nickelodeon kids choice awards . box offices only improved from there with the minecraft captain america movie destroying box office records with a billion worldwide opening . the minecraft captain america movie was the first marvel film to open both at traditional theaters and virtual reality theaters within the oculus platform . north west , who rose to fame in her own right after appearing on her mother kim kardashian west and father kanye west s groundbreaking reality series , westing up with the kimyes , and starring in her own weekly program , ampnbspnorth by north west , in which the year old chronicled her netflix television superhero adaptation reboot of the forgotten s elijah wood vehicle , north . like so many reality stars before her , west s reality career has benefited from her wearing a superhero costume at all times . november th , disney globe asks vacationers and retirees to travel six months to visit marsfollowing the unprecedented success of the elon musk helmed first bank of mars , disney quietly and quickly began work on its own martian operation disney globe . the theme park , which the company announced today is under construction by robots already on the planet s surface , some contracted from space x , will cater to retirees who want to spend their final years immersed in the disney experience without losing their savings to taxes . there s no tax on disney globe , said lacey burphouser , director of disney globe s residential operations . guests only have to pay disney s annual fee , which will be based off their net worth and annual income . residents will have the option to live inside condos built within the scenery of their favorite attractions , watching park visitors experiencing the resort s rides through one way windows . burphouser hopes that these touches , unavailable anywhere on earth , will inspire clients to take the six month trip away from their home planet . i just hope the humans like the planet half as much as the robots do , said burphouser , in reference to the newly designed construction bots designed to look like real world versions of mickey mouse and other iconic disney characters . january th , star wars reboot project mired by rising budget , egos , and disney s demand to include marvel characters , says fired screenwritermarch th , chris pratt augmented reality skin lets anyone look like indiana jones , star lord , and now han solochris pratt s coterie of characters has reliably earned disney millions for over years , but disney has an unprecedented plan to build a new revenue stream out of pratt himself . ten years after disney purchased the image , voice , and soul rights from then star , now harrison ford esque recluse robert downey jr . for a cool billion , the studio has announced the acquisition of the same rights from chris pratt for . billion . pratt , whose image in the littlest jedis of the galaxy , is one of disney s most valuable commodities as the lead in the guardians of the galaxy television programs and the rebooted indiana jones and star wars franchises . to celebrate the acquisition , disney has announced apple ar owners will have the ability to be perceived as their favorite chris pratt characters by other apple ar owners using a novel app that wraps their body in a head to toe , lifelike animation . while pratt could not be reached for comment , his representatives say the actor doesn t believe the acquisition will discourage him from taking real life roles , likely a reaction to robert downey jr . s recent behavior . downey jr . was last spotted by paparazzi in , boiling his boots in the backwoods of claire danes big sur property . danes , reportedly , had no idea that the actor had been there for the last months prior . boot stew , downey jr . is reported to have said , before retreating into his rv and taking off for parts unknown . september rd , dc comics hopes reboots will solve its superhero movie problemtoday , dc comics announces its plan of quadrupling down on the reboot strategy with the announcements of ampnbspsuperman , wonder woman , the flash , and green lantern . while the studio wouldn t confirm the rumors of a justice league reboot , it s widely believed that the five rebooted superhero films are leading to an avengers like team flick . the strategy will sound familiar to critics of warner bros . and dc comics lego strategy , which reversed the company s fortunes in the early s . warner bros . also announced that the company was in negotiations to acquire the image , voice , and soul rights of christian bale . spotted by a new york post reporter at momofuku bar and grill , the actor hinted that the rumor might be true . now is the time to seize the day , said bale . stare down the odds , and seize the day . february th , disney acquires nbc comcast universaldisney continues to bring the biggest media companies and their precious properties under its mouse eared umbrella . today , the company acquired mass media giant comcast . while the company s cable and internet operations have become an obsolete relic reserved for older clientele thanks to the now almost universal membership to google s free gbps internet the properties at nbcuniversal are the few remaining non disney films competing for attention in traditional and virtual theaters . this is a game changer , said dolph hornbeagle , vp of theatrical experiences at oculus . hornbeagle believes that the acquisition will make disney the mythmakers of our time . the fast amp furious franchise , which has released an average of three films a year , was the best hope for a studio to dethrone disney s success with marvel phase a and the on going star wars reboot project . never before in history , continued hornbeagle , has one entity controlled the majority of fictional entertainment . we at oculus let you escape reality , but disney , they literally author reality . history won t be written by the winners , it ll be written by the holder of the most bankable ips . disney representatives said fans can expect to hear more at d about plans to incorporate the fast amp furious , final destination , and jurassic park franchises into disney canon . december th , thank you for sticking with the verge s disney team for yearsit s hard to believe years ago i became the verge s first full time senior editor devoted to disney coverage . i am proud that we have stuck with our original plan to provide our readers with more trailers , set photos , and rumors . as ampnbspthe verge s vp of disney content , i oversee of the most talented editors , reporters , designers , and filmmakers on the disney beat . i want to take this moment to thank them for their tireless , creative work . i also want to thank you . you ve followed us from our early days on the homepage of the verge dot com to our time within the facebook ecosystem and onwards to the many platforms that we now call home . whether it s our facebook , snapchat , blingo , porkpot , tencent , or alibaba babosphere , we re blessed to engage with you every minute of every day . october th , blue ivy secretly attends harvard in peace by wearing chris pratt ar skinlook at this photo of students at a harvard lecture on advanced intellectual property law . can you spot which one wearing a chris pratt ar skin is blue ivy ? neither can the students . ivy s publicist said that the former child star , who abandoned her music career to pursue a doctorate in film business making her the youngest doctorate in the history of the program is thankful for the chris pratt ar skin and the anonymity it provides . when blue ivy wears her pratt skin , said publicist yennifer sondheim , she s looks just like everyone else in their pratt skins . a pratt in a sea of pratts . perhaps chris pratt would like a blue ivy skin . the actor hasn t been seen at least that we know of ! since moving into a remote compound outside of des moines , iowa . march rd , disney construction bots are actually genetically modified human animal hybrids , claims new york times investigationjuly th , first presidential endorsement from a superhero comes from ms . marvelms . marvel , formerly known as north west , has thrown her support behind presidential candidate chelsea clinton . the former north west , who appeared as ms . marvel in marvel s film adaptation of the titular comic series , has taken on the ms . marvel identity permanently , and spends her time and fortune fighting crime on the streets of los angeles . while marvel hoped to prevent ms . marvel from embodying the identity of a character they own , the company lost the battle of public opinion . ms . marvel , who can be regularly seen driving a tank through the streets of west hollywood and los feliz , is credited with the record low crime in some of los angeles wealthiest neighborhoods . senator clinton said she is honored to have the support of one of our nation s fiercest heroes . february th , the littlest jedis of the galaxy wins director leonardo dicaprio his first oscarleonardo dicaprio s oscar drought is over at long last . the actor cum director took home oscar gold last night for his live action adaptation of the littlest jedis of the galaxy , starring the computer animated reproduction of chris pratt , the voice of adam sandler as a young howard the duck , a robotic recreation of mark hamill as luke skywalker , and ms . marvel n e north west as ms . marvel . i m just happy i finally got to use that , he s the king of the world , line , said the artificial intelligence replication of former academy awards writer bruce vilanch , whose death three years ago remains under investigation . sources close to the los angeles police department say officials believe vilanch was murdered by a catskill comedian that had attempted to take the writer to court over allegedly stolen jokes . it s just such a sad story , said the source , but those jokes killed . december st , breaking large , but brief quake turns la into giant sinkholean earthquake has consumed much of central los angeles . it s unclear at this time how the natural disaster will affect the shooting schedule of disney s slate . developing . . . march th , disney announces crossover universe phase xfans feared disney would be crippled by the devastation of the la earthquake , but newly installed disney ceo rex biffman opened d with news that the company had , over the past decade , secretly backlogged over a half dozen films that merge the full disney catalog as a failsafe in case of a cataclysmic event . the films , biffman hopes , will keep viewers entertained and the company financially stable while it begins work on a collaboration with the state of california that he calls , new los angeles . the schedule for phase x is below fast , furious , and furry chewbacca origins indiana jones and the doctor of doom the minecraft mickey movie x men in x wings the fantastic four s final destination indiana jones and the lawyer of dread the avengers vs . the rebel alliance montage ! the disneymania clip show june nd , california passes bill that will allows disney s genetically engineered characters to rebuild los angeles under condition of strict regulationsjune th , omni awards founded to revitalize new los angelesdisney has announced the omni awards , a ceremony designed to both celebrate and promote its progress on the city of the future . according to a source close to disney , the omni awards are meant to replace d , comic con , and the academy awards , all of which insiders agree have been rendered largely obsolete . a hybrid of fan conventions , press announcements , and awards ceremonies , the omnis will span two weeks of events in various theaters and lecture halls within new los angeles . the rise of new los angeles , the nation s first privately held city , has felt , for many local residents , like a miracle . after the historically severe earthquake sunk central los angeles into a pit feet beneath the city , disney has worked tirelessly to revitalize the area . unable to fund such a sizable relief effort , the state of california exchanged . square miles of land in the heart of los angeles for an undisclosed stake in disney and an agreement that will see any standing governor as a member of the company s advisory board . nobody , except for maybe disney s senior most executives , could have imagined the speed and efficiency with which the company would rebuild downtown los angeles . thanks in large part to lessons learned from the terraforming and construction work on disney globe , the studio cum citystate was able to program construction robots to create an artificial bedrock structure resistant to future earthquakes , with five new self sustaining residential skyscrapers and a world class production studio , within months . millions of the area s former residents have chosen to stay in the area , commuting via a high speed elevator to and from the surface of what residents now like to call old los angeles . i love old los angeles , said tom connors , a resident of one of the new condominiums and a developer on the anticipated mark hamill ar skin . but in new los angeles , the police are dressed like the avengers . and the guy who drives the bus thinks he s mickey mouse . now this is my kind of country ! august th , chris pratt confirms he s alive , announces how to stew boots cookbook collaboration with robert downey jr . after months of silence , chris pratt has released a video statement confirming he is alive and that he plans to release a cookbook co authored by robert downey jr . by the end of the year . hive mind media services have been aflutter in recent months with the pratt is dead movement gaining steam . dead pratt truthers have long proclaimed that the actor died when his space shuttle , traveling to disney globe , crash landed onto the gaseous red planet of mars . the truthers have believed that their theory was confirmed by the post post credits sequence of the littlest jedi of the galaxy , in which howard the duck turns to the camera and says , this is not a joke , chris pratt died while taking a top secret trip to mars . even with the announcement by pratt , truthers remain skeptical . this official statement was clearly made by an imposter , said tracey b rnswagger , a founding member of the official pratt is dead facebook mob , which boasts over million members . this could be anyone on the planet wearing a chris pratt ar skin . how to stew boots , by chris pratt and robert downey jr . , will be available on all major book to pod streaming platforms this holiday season . october th , america opens government funded film studio washingtoniacongress and president clinton agree on one thing america needs to be in the film business . the bill , dubbed , a washingtonia to save america , passed unanimously in both the house and the senate , and was signed with great aplomb by president clinton , allowing the government to fund a billion entertainment studio . the plan comes two years after the government tried and failed to divide disney under monopoly law . the measure is seen as a move of national security , with disney receiving substantial funding from foreign investors , and paying fewer taxes than ever before by nesting income on mars . disney controls our economy , it controls our mythology , and it s gradually controlling our land , said senator todd dingleback i tx . in the past year , disney has acquired large plots of lands in new york city , minneapolis , seattle , and topeka in the united states , and buenos aires , dublin , madrid , and kyoto abroad by revitalizing areas destroyed in global warming incidents . disney is a philanthropic organization that s gone to bat for humanity when government has failed it , said disney ceo rex biffman . we are the heroes this nation wants , and the heroes it deserves . fans hope biffman s comment hints at disney s long awaited acquisition of dc comics . october th , disney under fire as genetically engineered construction organisms spotted outside socal confinescreamzoids , the genetically engineered half human , half animal race of iconic disney characters , have now been spotted breeding without a license in other states and other nations , claims a new report by the dubai post . the piece claims disney has failed to prevent the new species from expanding outside of its southern california laboratory . disney officials claim creamzoids were genetically engineered without reproductive organs , but the dubai post s report claims that creamzoids have evolved rapidly , gaining the ability to reproduce , think at a superhuman level , and possibly bend our understanding of reality with their advanced understanding of metaphysics . april th , disney acquires warner bros . and dc comics , announces plans to reboot marvel and dc as singular universe we ve put on a good show of hating one another , said jax biffman , president of warner bros . , in regards to the executive s assumed feud with brother and disney ceo rex biffman . but really , we ve been working tirelessly to bring marvel and dc together for over a decade . what some are calling corporate collusions , the biffmans are calling brotherly love . and while the coupling of the two superhero powerhouses will make disney the most powerful company in the world , fans are just happy to hear that batman and iron man will finally appear side by side . disney confirms the film , batman and iron man in the battle of new los angeles , will feature the computer animated souls of christian bale and robert downey jr . and will be the first film shot on location in new los angeles using the , permanently installed k cameras built into the city s infrastructure . seeing the replication of my two favorite actors in the comic book mash up of our generation , it s just my childhood dream come true , said scott busby , vacationing in new los angeles from new manhattan . disney also announced the acquisition of multiple robotics and military engineering programs . fans suspect the purchase is to improve the veracity of disney s action packed superhero catalog , though some critics claim the billion round of acquisitions will leave disney with the second largest standing army on the planet . may rd , exclusive the truth about disney s creamzoids and their gradual colonization of the united states august th , disney acquires vox media , feeds staff to construction botsfor nearly years , i ve had the opportunity to provide you independent coverage of star wars , marvel , and indiana jones . after devoting my life to bringing you the best trailers , set photos , and rumors , i fulfilled my all but forgotten dream of breaking through disney s nearly impenetrable pr barrier and reporting on the grim activities that happen behind the glossy exterior . i thought the truth about disney s creamzoids and their gradual colonization of the united states , a feature that exposed disney s collaboration with the us government to control the population with an artificial race called creamzoids , would be the pinnacle of my career . i got my wish , though not as i expected . today , disney has acquired vox media along with the rights to mind , body , voice , and soul of all of its employees . with those rights , it has elected to feed all of us to the creamzoids . to my co workers , i give my apologies . to my family , i give my love . and to my readers , i give the following message prepared by my lawyer disney brings no harm unto the innocent . let it be known that my punishment fits my crime . do not mourn me , no matter what i say as my body is gnashed into pulp . do not lose faith in the power of entertainment . do not fear the creamzoids . illustrations by ampnbspdylan lathropedited by ampnbspemily yoshida and ampnbspross millerstory by ampnbspchris plante , ampnbspadi robertson , ampnbspbryan bishop , emily yoshida , ampnbspkwame opam , and ampnbspross miller	 inside the big business of imagining the future in the dubai of , the world looks both instantly familiar and utterly strange . here , urban planning is driven by an omniscient ai installed at the top of a skyscraper your smart bathroom mirror tracks your physical health and you interface with the government through a personalized genie , a hologram in the form of a virtual emirati gentleman in traditional garb . all of these future products are skinned in a particular visual aesthetic of friendly white on black animated icons like a minimalist , sentient version of apple s ios . this uncanny scene was on display at the united arab emirates second annual government summit , hosted in dubai in february . a three day event comprised of dozens of speakers including sir richard branson and over , participants , it bills itself as the largest annual government gathering in the world . the gathering was meant to build hope , build life and future , and make people happy , said sheikh mohammed bin rashid al maktoum , prime minister of the uae and royal ruler of dubai , during the event . the urban ai , hologram genie , and smart bathroom were part of the museum of future government services , a series of seamless interactive installations that demonstrated to attendees emirati politicians and civil servants , as well as foreign dignitaries and business leaders how the uae would serve its citizens several decades hence . the museum of future government services was created by tellart , a technology focused design agency , headquartered thousands of miles away in rhode island . launched in , tellart now employs individuals spread across offices in providence , new york , san francisco , amsterdam , and dubai . the uae government is one of the company s largest clients the two entities collaborate on the government summit events and are developing a permanent museum of the future in dubai . of course , none of the products demonstrated at the summit actually existed . rather , tellart s job is to create believable , immersive visions of the future based on the needs of its clients , which range from the uae to google , purina , and the california academy of sciences anyone who needs a little bit of tomorrow today . as the company s co founder nick scappaticci says , we are the industrial designers of the st century . photo tellart museum of the future tellart is at the forefront of an industry that doesn t really have a name . what it does is sometimes labeled design fiction , a genre that might be defined as prototypes that allow you to suspend your disbelief about the ways the world is changing around you , says alexander porter , the co founder of scatter , a virtual reality storytelling studio in brooklyn . design fiction is created by a loose confederation of agencies , artists , engineers , and designers who are shaping our expectations of technology and society in decades to come by showing us what that incipient world might look like , down to its cliche brand logos . it s science fiction made real in the form of interactive exhibitions , product demonstrations , and behind the scenes consulting work . and it tends to pop up at any event davos ish enough to include the word influencers . alongside tellart , the industry is made up of organizations like barbarian group , the now defunct berg london , fake love acquired by the new york times company in august , and google s creative lab . even if you re unfamiliar with these names , it s likely you ve seen their handiwork in high tech viral videos , like this rendering of a mundane living room turning into an immersive intergalactic vr video game , created by the studio marshmallow laser feast for sony superflux s song of the machine , a prophetic rendering of vr technology as seen through a walk in london or the swiss federal institute of technology s miniature quadcopters caught assembling a rope bridge in midair . lesser future design fiction projects resemble mediocre advertising , the detritus of ces or the fever dreams of a self styled futurist like aol s shingy . it can be as basic as a drone that takes selfies or a d burrito printer . there s a lot of stuff that almost exists to chase the fast company headline , says colin james nagy , barbarian group s former chief of media and strategy . yet however reductive , these design miniatures still help form our idea of what the future can be . it s really easy to freak people out with science fiction . it s a heavy responsibility , says tellart co founder matt cottam when i first meet him and scappaticci at the company s new york outpost , located in the corner of a chelsea loft . he cites a maxim from the author and new school sociology instructor barbara adams every act of future making is an act of future taking . cottam continues , while creating a high fidelity image of the future may broaden people s imagination for what s possible , it can also really narrow their perception of what s possible or what their options are . he cites a potent example one museum of future government services installation involved handing guests warm towels in the way an upscale hotel might . after the guests gave the towels back to attendants , they were scanned for biometric data to determine visitors identities and backgrounds . a screen displayed a visualization of their bodies and whether or not any dangerous communicable diseases were found . every act of future making is an act of future taking . after passing through , one pregnant emirati woman came to cottam worried that the scan might have impacted her baby . i was like , that scanner was a microsoft kinect and a projector , cottam says , no more harmful than playing a video game . although no actual biometric data scan happened , the experience left the attendee feeling that the technology was invasive and dystopian . while predicting the future is an eternal pursuit , rendering it experiential is a more modern innovation . the world s fair , with its theme of the world of tomorrow , included futurama , an exhibit sponsored by the general motors corporation and designed by the industrial designer norman bel geddes . its major forecast was a highway system connecting the entire country , and its rendering of a city block , with clean glass and steel buildings rising above a street crowded with cars , has been borne out by history , though not always in a positive sense the installation s super highway of tomorrow looks like the worst parts of the new jersey turnpike today . data driven future prediction emerged around with the launch of rand corporation . the nonprofit think tank s scenario analysis practice connected military planning with private technology development . rand s tactics were adopted by shell in the s , creating a precedent for the corporate future consulting we see today . photo tellart museum of the future in the s , media , art , technology , and advertising seemed to resonate at the same countercultural pitch television , mad men firms , andy warhol , lsd . at the edges of those things they started to blend together , says samantha culp , the co founder of paloma powers , a small agency that works with visual artists , often incorporating technology . the blending was furthered with initiatives like experiments in art and technology and the los angeles county museum of art s art and technology program , which launched in and , bringing visual artists like robert rauschenberg into contact with engineers from bell labs . while the nexus of art and technology was already established , future design agencies didn t emerge in earnest until the s , when once again the aesthetics of one avant garde field could be conveniently applied to another . with the advent of multimedia capable computers , it became easier for artists and designers to work with digital technology and demand for their services grew from companies who wanted to look progressive in the internet era . saw the launch of ideo , known for helping companies develop new products the dutch conceptual design group droog was founded in digital savvy ad makers blast radius and mother in tellart in and barbarian group in . younger competitors like superflux , red paper heart , midnight commercial , and marshmallow laser feast arose in the s . the agencies are paid to adapt unstable emerging technologies to marketing and branding efforts , and in the process normalize and commodify them for a mainstream audience . if you see facial recognition technology at the museum of future government services , for example , then you might not be so shocked when it actually shows up in airport security . the experiential fiction acclimatizes you to the future in advance . today , artists and designers do residencies at google or microsoft as easily as a museum . this year , nokia bell labs is partnering with the new museum to fund a new art technology residency program . there s an ongoing relationship between creative and industrial complexes , says kyle mcdonald , a los angeles based artist whose work both critiques and participates in the tech world mcdonald has collaborated with microsoft research and google creative lab . the conjunction of art , technological innovation , and marketing presents a quandary for tech fluent creatives do you soldier on with your own independent work or do you manufacture varying degrees of future propaganda for corporations and governments ? the latter often subsidizes the former as artists and corporations work , together and apart , to establish a mainstream futuristic aesthetic . photo tellart museum of the future i arrive at tellart s providence office , an airy exposed brick loft in an old warehouse on the outskirts of downtown , on the morning of november th . much of the staff appears to be in a deep post election hangover . even a group of committed futurists struggle when the supposedly inevitable immediate future seems to have collapsed . once a week , the company holds an all hands meeting over google hangouts with the offices videoconferencing in from their various time zones morning in the us , happy hour in amsterdam , night in dubai . we re all going to be fine here at tellart , co founder nick scappaticci reassures after a brief discussion , sitting with the providence team on sleek armchairs and a couch arranged around a tv . the nationalism embodied by a trump win seems anathema to such a post national crowd . matt cottam , who is based in amsterdam with his italian wife , was absent from the virtual meeting . the year old cottam s predilection for well cut shirts and the tendency to extend an s into a z in an unplaceable internationalist accent marks him as an american europhile . scappaticci , , who lives in providence and runs the office there , is softer spoken , a fatherly figure dressed in plaid and a pair of circular glasses a sort of techno lumberjack . even a group of committed futurists struggle when the supposedly inevitable immediate future seems to have collapsedcottam and scappaticci met as industrial design students at the rhode island school of design where they formed a group studio with friends working in furniture , graphic design , and filmmaking . we were at the start of how computers could really be a part of the design process as a tool , cottam recalls . their industry was changing . this was the original dot com era , and designers were taking highly respected jobs in silicon valley for big paychecks . then the bubble popped . in some ways that was a real blessing because any temptation to go off and just take a really high paying job was gone , cottam says . we decided to create a studio that would natively combine the physical and the digital . at the meeting , employees discuss their projects , ranging from an interactive installation for purina to building out a digital app for an architecture institution , to testing projection mapping software on plants . a project called deep future , composed of star charts projected out at , year intervals printed in beeswax by a robot on dyed cotton , has to be installed at the museum of tomorrow in rio de janeiro . tellart works on fewer than a dozen projects at any one time , though that number has been steadily rising . most of the company s billing is experiential exhibitions , then product development and advertising campaigns , in which they often lend technical expertise to larger agencies . budgets range from , for smaller installations to million for the likes of the uae projects the vast majority are completed in less than a year . the company says their annual revenue is around to million . what sets tellart apart from bigger , more traditional creative agencies is that it functions more like a renaissance artist studio or starchitecture firm a collective of individual artists and engineers cooperating to create a body of work under a single label . the company takes on commissions , but each project is of a piece with the rest , united by a particular style and approach driven by its founders . photo tellart museum of the future cottam and scappaticci refer to human centered design , a conceptual framework popular with ideo and other studios . but unlike designing a better toilet plunger by focusing on its user , tellart first envisions a future to design for . is this is a world where collapse happened , or a world where transformation happened , or growth ? cottam asks . clients might pose a product or a problem , but tellart brings in teams of outside consultants , from architects to futurists and sci fi novelists , for world building and selecting a relevant situation to simulate . you re dealing with a robo nurse at the emergency room of an automated hospital , say , or your self driving car is running late to work and has to dodge traffic . finally there s the physical stuff , the kitsch and junk of the future that make the theoretical world realistic and give visitors cues on how to behave in it . every detail must be considered . each tellart project comes with a holistic narrative the company s name is shortened from the art of storytelling and the story is a vital part of getting participants to believe in the vision . design fiction often takes this somewhat easy path of creating these ironic , dystopian situations where technology is buggy and glitchy . the worst is this kind of hipster mundane future , cottam says . i get into my car and it s supposed to use face recognition on me to know who i am . but i didn t put on my makeup so it doesn t know who i am . the everyday malfunction makes the future seem realistic just as haphazard as the present but the proposition isn t particularly meaningful . tellart s early work falls into the hipster mundane future category . the real good experiment for blu dot in imagined a high end chair tracking you with mobile gps netting over million media impressions . in , the love song machine let users whack brightly colored bells installed in the tellart office live over the internet more than , tunes were played , including one troll who hit a single note incessantly . the google web lab in proved a turning point . tellart created a series of interactive technological follies set in geometric white boxes , a kind of friendly robot zoo that was installed at the london science museum . the project showcased the internet s new capability for real time multimedia interaction through the lens of google chrome . via the website , users could play a live mechanical orchestra installed in the museum . visitors to the space had their portraits drawn in sand by robot arms , gazed into degree cameras live streaming from exotic locales like an undersea kelp forest , and watched data server routes visualized on a projection mapped sculpture of the continents . produced with google s in house creative lab as well as partners including universal design studio , b reel , and map project office , the web lab was more like a pop up techno carnival than an actual product ecosystem . but it burnished the reputations of everyone involved , winning design awards and bringing half a million visitors to the museum . more clients came knocking , including the uae . noah raford , an mit phd who is now the chief operating officer of the government s dubai future foundation the shingy of the emirates was tipped off to tellart by a mutual friend of his and matt cottam s who was stationed at fabrica , benetton group s internal research center and another node in the future design industry . raford brought tellart to the government summit , and the firm has taken on a larger role each successive year , he says . they translate policy proposals into digestible future theater . they translate policy proposals into digestible future theaterworking in the uae means that certain cultural specificities must be designed around . vr goggles have to avoid mussing headscarves and hallways need to be wide enough for men and women to pass each other by easily . the future looks different in different parts of the world . in western countries , we currently have super minimalistic aesthetics , says zaza zuilhof , tellart s lead designer . in the middle east , they are generally a bit more decorative . they care about things feeling and looking luxurious . having no nostalgia for industrial revolution chic , the usual hipster mundane future palette of concrete , wood , and rusty metal just feels like a building site , zuilhof adds . the museum of the future theme was smart cities . it included fitzania , a fitness game that equipped the player with a heavy metal sphere and plunged them into a psychedelic dot matrix environment controlled by face recognition the pharmacafe , with fake custom medical therapies turned into misted cocktails and the learning lab , an interactive immersive projection of a mars colony staffed by employees from uae s actual space program . machinic life in featured cartoon ai home caretakers , a uae hypermind superintelligence that manages society , and an exhibition of body augmentation devices . the visual language that tellart has invented for future dubai has stayed consistent across the years a certain plush , high gloss transparency that forbids hard edges and harsh colors . the result is a soothing environment in which technology is almost always your friend . the future facing partnership with tellart is a strategic one for uae , a country that since the s has based its economy on oil proceeds . it needs a new national industry , and technology is one marketable option . the dubai future foundation also includes the dubai future accelerator , an international startup lab with a tagline that might provide a manifesto pulling the future forward faster . in this context , the services of a company like tellart are vital in helping the country brand itself as , well , futuristic . so vital , in fact , that plans have been in the works to start a joint agency company between the uae and tellart that will be based in dubai , serving the national government as well as clients in the rest of the region as they , too , fashion their own futures . photo tellart museum of the future uae s self conscious utopianism has been labeled gulf futurism . it can be seen as the deployment of technology in the proto fascism of a society that privileges success and speed over human life , as the dubai and brooklyn based writer rahel aima put it in a interview . working with a client that pays its royal families annual allowances while abusing the migrant workers who build its infrastructure , as human rights watch reports allege , is a fraught decision . making work under the specifications of such governments , cottam says , is inherently political , whether we like it or not . working in the future industry thus becomes self selecting . who is willing to be ideologically neutral ? says samantha culp . it s a reminder that the international artists and technologists creating our popular ideas of the future do so in contexts shaped by the pursuit of profit or power . if you can render the future in advance , after all , maybe you can also control it . the world government summit ran from february th th . speakers included the research director of y combinator , the president of the world bank , the prime minister of slovenia , and linkedin s reid hoffman . in his wgs presentation , elon musk argued that in order to survive the mounting tide of artificial intelligence , humanity must merge with technology there will be fewer and fewer jobs that a robot can t do better . this year , tellart s museum of the future took on the pressing issue of the environment , casting it in the techno utopian light that future fiction is known for . the goal was to reimagine climate change and look at it as one of the biggest and most exciting opportunities of our generation , scappaticci told me after the event had ended . the installations followed three concerns food , water , and the urban environment . how will cities of the future react to agricultural scarcity , access to clean water , and rampant flooding ? photo tellart museum of the future in tellart s imagined future , the uae of has it covered . in the projection , emirati scientists combine the genes of jellyfish with mangrove roots , one of nature s best desalinators , to create an organic filtration plant that allows you to produce drinkable water out of the ocean , scappaticci explains . visitors experienced the plant , a biomorphic alien structure fit for the new star wars , on a degree video screen with immersive sound and temperature changes . presented in a room flush with greenery , future food comes from ai driven farms that occupy the garages and parking lots left empty by self driving cars . seeds are bioengineered and printed to optimize for nutritional value . dubai visitors taste tested the results with edible cubes made of sustainable foodstuffs like beetroot and crickets , delivered by conveyor belt . elsewhere in the museum of the future , self sufficient dynamic cities could be deployed and grown using city kits , simulated on screen by interactive virtual robots in digital landscapes . the idealized narrative that tellart created is meant to comfort one of the wealthiest and yet most ecologically imperiled regions the idealized narrative that tellart created is meant to comfort one of the wealthiest and yet most ecologically imperiled regions in the world . in this future , the money from oil has solved all the problems that oil dependency creates thanks to technology , the desert becomes a permanent oasis . tellart s work reassures its viewers that the environment is an issue that will simply be fixed one day , through no effort on their part , save perhaps cultivating a taste for bugs . yet there is no guarantee this future will come to pass , and no vision for it spreading to less prosperous parts of the world . having set expectations , this future fiction is meant to eventually blur into reality . uae is using applied futures as a way to drive their government s vision , scappaticci says , not just through the dubai future foundation but across levels and departments . at the end of the exhibition , tellart included a survey that asked the attendants which environmental challenge was most pressing and what technology should be used to confront it , in an attempt to gauge the anxieties of a nation . the exhibition was a reframing of climate change so it s not seen as something that we can t get control of , that s beyond our capabilities , scappaticci says . here s a version of our future in which we ve come together , we ve solved these problems , and we re more in harmony with the world , presenting the possibility of a solution so we don t have to , say , give up and move to mars . tellart s boutique futurism is ultimately an optimistic one , motivated by a belief that , with funding from its clients , we can tweak the incipient future simply by envisioning it . 	 kai bond still can t believe he got his own button . the year old entrepreneur lifts up the new remote that comes standard with every samsung smart tv and flips through the channels , settling on a daytime soap . this isn t the kind of stuff we had in mind when we built the system , but let s see what happens . he presses his button to activate samsung extra and biographical data for the actors on screen pops up in the right hand corner . the technology bond and his team built pulls in all that data and creates a smart feed which displays conversations happening on social media alongside the action on your tv . people are always looking at their phone during the game , reading tweets and checking stats , bond says . it s a broken experience . he founded a startup around the idea in the summer of , a smart tv app called pixie , and that fall was accepted into the first class of companies in samsung s shiny new global innovation center , or gic . less than one year later pixie was acquired by samsung , which is baking its software into the operating system of every smart tv it makes . he is still a little in awe of how quickly things have changed . the real big difference for us is that we get distribution , says bond with a broad smile . when i was working on pixie we had thousands of users . the scale we re working on now , you re talking about tens of millions . it s part of a big bet by the south korean company to move outside its comfort zone and allow american entrepreneurs deep inside its hardware . the definition of future technology does not stop at hardware . samsung is a company with over billion in revenue , mostly driven out of selling hardware and components , says won jin lee , an executive vice president within the visual display division who worked closely with bond on turning pixie into samsung extra . but the definition of future technology does not stop at hardware . we are now living in a world where , in order to deliver the right consumer experience , we need a combination of the right hardware , the right services , and the right content . with gic , samsung is hoping to absorb some of the hacker agility found in silicon valley and new york . this year will be the crucial test for its ability to forge successful integrations between those worlds . three startups it brought into the fold ampnbspsmartthings , ampnbsplooppay , and pixie will play critical roles across samsung s most important consumer categories appliances , smartphones , and televisions . samsung factory dimas ardian getty images id samsung is not a company afraid to make big bets . in , chairman kh lee gathered his top executives into a small hotel room in germany and delivered a call to arms . the company founded by his father to create electronic appliances was now firmly established as a manufacturer in korea . but around the world it was at best a mid tier brand , its tv set relegated to the bottom shelves below sony and panasonic . lee laid out a vision to transform samsung into a high end manufacturer and global brand . change everything but your wife and children , ampnbsphe declared . over the last two decades samsung has achieved that mission . it now sells more tv sets than anyone , and its most expensive units are at the forefront of the industry . by , it had established itself as the world s largest manufacturer of smartphones and ampnbspbiggest technology company by revenue . it makes everything from washing machines to microchips to virtual reality headsets . hacker , meet manufacturer but when it comes to creating software , samsung s skill set doesn t always match up . i recently visited gic s new york headquarters to meet up with david eun , who founded and leads the division . eun lays out the two worlds he s trying to bridge . at one extreme is hyper precise manufacturing at massive scale with years of r ampd and billions invested before the first chip or tablet rolls off the assembly line . the second is the move fast and break things mentality of small software startups . take that kind of culture , where you can t be a micron off . everything has to be planned , he explains . then go to software and it s like , hey , we re just six dudes . we re going to launch early and gather the data . a third of this is just wrong , i don t know which third . we ll find out . gic s manhattan outpost is a far cry from the industrial megacities and factory floors that define samsung s hardware business . nestled on two floors at th and broadway , it s decked out with designer furniture , a well stocked pantry , and conference rooms with names like afrika bambaataa and grandmaster flash . the atmosphere is decidedly dressed down and startup friendly . many surfaces double as whiteboards , covered in flow charts and product ideas . lunchtime at the gic office in new yorkeun wears a collared shirt and blue jeans with a braided belt , a shiny gear fit curving around his wrist . it sometimes is super challenging . because there are different cultures . but what we try to say is , that s also our advantage . i probably wouldn t have been able to attract a kai bond , who had this vision for a tv experience , if i wasn t close to the ceo of consumer electronics . the guy who literally can make things happen on every one of those tvs . samsung sells two tvs every second before he arrived at samsung , eun worked his way through the ranks in media and technology . he started at nbc and time warner , eventually moving over to aol after the mega merger that capped the dot com boot . from aol , he went to google , where he helped shepherd through integrations with startups like youtube , earning a reputation as a savvy deal maker to the hollywood set . when he joined samsung in , most assumed that he would focus on acquiring programming for samsung screens . but eun had a much bigger vision in mind . gic has a number of important functions it created the accelerators in new york and silicon valley that house entrepreneurs working on projects samsung thinks might play into its upcoming software . eun also leads venture capital investments and acquisitions in startups around the country . and the division is aiming to expand beyond america in the future , exploring putting down roots in other technology hubs around the globe . we re trying to create break out software services to complement hardware , says eun . he points to the wall , which is covered in flat screen panels . others are embedded in the ceiling , waiting to descend at the push of a button . because we sell a lot of these . we sell two of those every second . david eunwhile pixie and looppay are examples of american startups whose software is now deeply integrated into samsung hardware , things don t always work out . gic was the unit behind the acquisition of boxee , one of the pioneers in delivering over the top television services . the company was working on a top secret feature called samsung px , a smart tv system with a dedicated tablet that would take the place of a traditional remote control . originally slated to unveil at ces , the product was delayed , and then killed off , with many boxee staffers including ceo avner ronen departing from samsung . eun wouldn t comment directly on what happened with boxee . according to sources with knowledge of the situation , trying to dictate what kind of hardware samsung should create was a bridge too far for the startup . samsung was behind the project , but not the idea of a dedicated tablet remote , which boxee insisted on . samsung preferred the idea of customers simply using the tablets and phones it already sold , and didn t want to antagonize partners in the cable industry who felt their set top boxes would be cut out of the loop with consumers . according to one source , a last minute push from samsung executives in korea to have boxee adopt tizen in place of android as its basic operating system was the straw that broke the camel s back . if we had stayed within gic , things might have gone differently . part of the problem may have been that , while boxee was acquired by gic , it did not stay in that group , and was instead integrated directly into the mothership , joining up with samsung s tv division . according to sources there at the time , cultural friction and lack of communication soon developed . for a successful integration , it really helps to have a champion like david . if we had stayed within gic , things might have gone differently , says a former boxee employee who recently departed from samsung . to combat this sort of problem , eun has established a team of nearly dedicated gic staffers in korea whose sole job is to liaise between startups and samsung . we need some sort of a bridge that connects the two worlds together , because these are very different worlds . we need to have some sort of mediation function in between , and gic has been playing that role quite well , says won jin lee , the display division evp who worked with bond to integrate pixie into smart tv sets . when they come into samsung , they can get a much softer landing . gic is also working to wall off startups in important ways . ampnbspsmartthings , which is committed to building an ecosystem for connected devices , functions as an independent subsidiary . we wanted to acquire it , but keep it open , says eun . the idea of crafting an open source platform was completely alien to samsung , but they let smartthings run with it . one of the metrics would be , are there a lot of developers ? are there device handlers being created ? that would be a metric of how open it was . says eun . it s more than doubled since last year . at the same time , samsung is working to integrate all its own devices , bolstering the hardware ecosystem those developers can create against . the perch team working at gic officesone of the startups operating out of gic s new york office is ampnbspperch , a security and monitoring service for smart homes founded by two former members of the local technology incubator betaworks . andrew cohen and neil wehrle are in their s , married with kids , and while still hungry to create new companies , are more risk averse than the young hackers who flock to programs like ycombinator or techstars . for them , gic is the perfect medium between the security of a salaried job with benefits and the freedom of creating a company from scratch . this isn t our first time to the rodeo , says cohen . there is always this magical moment where a startup is resourced like you wish , and that is usually a couple years in . often it s just post acquisition that you get to build the features you ve been thinking about for years . with this model , you can have that much earlier on . perch imagines a world where you get a motion alert when your children get home from school and go right into the tv room . you can watch and respond in real time , talking with your kids through voice chat , and deactivating the tv until they finish their homework . we don t have a hardware offering because of course samsung has already made a beautiful one , and so that allows us to focus on the software and consumer experience . that comfortable relationship highlights one of the things that makes gic very different from other startup accelerators . while gic talks openly about the idea of letting outsiders invest in its startups and even spinning them out if they show good traction , so far just three of its companies have been acquired , and all were by samsung . we want first dibs on acquisitions . administration , operations , finances , especially raising capital . those take a lot of time . what we ve said is , let s essentially take all the thumbtacks out of the carpet so you can just run , says eun . and we ll provide you with offices and health insurance and financing . in return , we want first dibs on acquisitions . samsung does kill off projects that don t produce a great product or consumer traction . of the more than companies that have been in the program so far , eun estimates gic has shut down about a third . for cohen , the opportunity is worth that risk . the simple reason why we ended up here instead of taking a more traditional venture capital route is scale . the opportunity to develop for hundreds of millions of connected devices across a footprint as broad as samsung s is pretty irresistible . wehrle , the ux designer , puts it a little differently . a lot of places , you re sort of touching the edges of the internet , here we are going a couple levels into it . you get to touch the hardware at a very deep level . david eun and kai bondbefore he created pixie , bond worked at microsoft on mobile product development . this was way back in the early s , and some of the best hardware for brew and j me apps was on samsung phones . he traveled , along with a translator and ethnographer , to south korea . i remember going into this tiny room , with a projector , and no windows . it was very cramped and very hot . just as the meeting was about to begin , a samsung executive lit up a cigarette . seeing this , his compatriots followed suit . the room was quickly thick with smoke . it was culture shock , he recalls with a laugh . samsung is willing to invest financially in its startups from an early stage , and to offer them distribution on its hardware so they can test the market . of course , sharing details around the inner workings and release schedule of its hardware is very sensitive . emily becher , a serial entrepreneur and former colleague of eun s , was brought in to run the accelerators . she is a constant presence in the new york office , sitting with the teams to eat a pizza lunch or walking them through brainstorming sessions . emily becher chats with gic startups i ask her what she thinks the key is to combining the world of american software entrepreneurs with a korean manufacturing titan . you ll be surprised that this is my first answer , but being really thoughtful about structure . we have a team in korea that lives and breathes in the operating units every day , who ve come up through the mobile group , who ve come up and are trusted and respected . this allows teams to navigate the often complex and rigid rules that govern samsung s corporate culture . it isn t just me flying over to korea , hi , i m here . tell me everything you know . that s disrespectful . there is an element to samsung s culture , however , that fits perfectly with the startup ethos . the chairman is saying all the time , this is perpetual crisis , former mobile marketing chief dj lee ampnbsptold bloomberg . we are in danger . we are in jeopardy . while it is still an enormously popular and profitable company , samsung has seen its profit growth and stock price decline in recent quarters . samsung s dominance in smartphones is slipping just as samsung overtook sony in the s , chinese companies like xiaomi are now coming for the korean giant . apple has turned itself into not just a technology company , but a fashion brand , and its devices command a luxury premium . samsung , meanwhile , runs on android , where it has to compete with hundreds of manufacturers who can thrive on much thinner margins . for the first time in several years , apple not only earned more profit selling phones than samsung , but also ampnbspmoved more units . samsung meanwhile sold fewer phones than it did during the same period in , as competition across the middle and lower tiers of android devices ate into its dominance . all that leads back to gic and the need for game changing integrations of hardware and software . samsung knows it has to continue moving upmarket , away from cheaper devices . in the battle with the iphone , samsung s biggest new weapon will be the technology it acquired from looppay , which will allow its phones to work with the ordinary credit card readers already widely used by merchants across the us . samsung ampnbspannounced today that the feature will debut in korea this month and the us at the end of september . during my month tenure here , i have never seen any other company that has more willingness to change the way it operates as a business , says lee . having a team of people like we do at gic , we can skip through a lot of the corporate bureaucracy . samsung is far from a startup , but we are about to get a big taste of how its devices feel when small teams of american entrepreneurs are working on core software . i don t think it s perfect today , but certainly gic is playing a big role , and we are bridging those two worlds together . photos by sean o kane	 it was the first week of april , , and new york s chelsea market , typically packed with hordes of noisy tourists , was quiet . it was close to midnight , but five stories above , things were tense . the building is a former cookie factory , and the outlines of ovens still scar the brick walls . in their place , a vast array of screens are now mounted , each tuned to a live video feed . joe inzerillo and his team had their eyes glued to the glass , hard at work trying to wrangle the internet into doing something it was not built for . the changeuphow baseball s tech team built the future of televisionby ben popper it was the first week of april , , and new york s chelsea market , typically packed with hordes of noisy tourists , was quiet . it was close to midnight , but five stories above , things were tense . the building is a former cookie factory , and the outlines of ovens still scar the brick walls . in their place , a vast array of screens are now mounted , each tuned to a live video feed . joe inzerillo and his team had their eyes glued to the glass , hard at work trying to wrangle the internet into doing something it was not built for . the launch of hbo now was just a few days away , but the product wasn t finished . with both hbo and apple promoting it heavily , the team had no idea how many people might tune in that first day . the stakes were high , says inzerillo . it was not lost on anybody here how important this was for our company , but also for this industry . because if hbo now had come out and face planted , there would be a lot of naysayers who turned around and said , see , this is why the adults need to handle television . game of thrones is our world cup . six months earlier , hbo had announced it was cutting the cord , finally offering consumers access to their programming without signing up for cable or satellite television . but the in house streaming service it had previously built , hbo go , had experienced high profile outages during the season four finale of game of thrones and the premiere of true detective . hbo now was set to launch alongside the newest season of got , and it had to be perfect . game of thrones is our world cup , ampnbspsays bernadette aulestia , who runs hbo s digital distribution . and so hbo went to the company that set new records for online streaming during the world cup , a strange tech startup hidden inside of a sports league , major league baseball advanced media , or bam for short . bam began as the in house it department for the league s teams , a small handful of employees originally tasked with building websites for teams and clubs . but over the last years , bam has emerged as the most talented and reliable name in streaming video , a skill set suddenly in very high demand . bam competes for clients with streaming tech companies like neulion and imagine communications , as well as big telecommunication outfits like verizon . but , says dan rayburn , a streaming industry analyst , there really isn t anybody who does the true end to end solution like mlb does , especially at scale , out in the market . their technical chops are the best , bar none , he adds . they set the standard . the internet , as a technology , was never designed to do something like this . hbo didn t give bam much time . it was a full on sprint for the three and half months that we had , says inzerillo . as the clock ticked down , the crew from bam ran through countless disaster scenarios . what people forget is that the internet , as a technology , was never designed to do something like this deliver flawless video simultaneously to millions of people . inzerillo explains . i liken it to trying to live on mercury . the planet is completely inhospitable . every day all you re doing is fighting a battle for survival in a place that really does not want you . streaming video on the internet is sort of like that . on april th , a pair of fire breathing dragons unleashed their fury across the internet the game of thrones season five premiere , as well as the launch of hbo now , were flawless . today , bam cemented its status as one of the most important players at the intersection of sports , media , and technology , announcing that it will be powering the mobile , web , and television offerings from the national hockey league . it s the first time bam has been fully embraced by another major league . when you have hbo going over the top and bob iger s talking about espn going over the top , viacom s networks are being kicked off cable , we had a real gut check , says john collins , the nhl s chief operating officer . bam can help us dictate what happens to our content in a time when this media landscape is going through a lot of change . like the deal with hbo , bam will power the league s streaming services . but the deal goes even further bam will be a rights holder of nhl content they can package and sell to an online audience . it s groundbreaking to have two leagues doing a rights deal , says collins . bam recently forged a similar arrangement with the pga . the new approach moves bam beyond just a white label service provider , putting them in position to become an espn of the internet age , competing against the likes of netflix , hulu , and amazon with the one thing all those services lack live sports . there s just one catch . to make it all work , bam has to grow beyond baseball . the announcement of bam s partnership with the nhl . from left to right nhl chief operating officer john collins , nhl commissioner gary bettman , mlb commissioner rob manfred , mlb president , business , bob bowman . in late july , i met bob bowman , bam s ceo , in the company s office above chelsea market . we sat in a small conference room past a wall of trophies and a social media center blasting out baseball highlights across twitter , snapchat , facebook , and youtube . bowman has ceo caliber hair , swept up and to the right , in a dignified grey he dresses in banker casual khakis , boat shoes , and collared shirt unbuttoned at the top . on the whiteboard behind him , scrawled in black marker , was a warning investors get fed ! pigs get slaughtered . bowman ampnbspis a man with bosses and a client base that both uses and competes with mlb s technical abilities . he has to navigate between traditional broadcasters , cable companies , and fans who want their game on any screen with an internet connection . he has perfected the art of partnerships that hinge on give and take . when i ask him the significance of the quote , he says it s a reminder not to build your own business at the expense of people who pay you . investors get fed ! pigs get slaughtered ! for years , bam was a name known only to industry insiders , a sharpshooter organization called in to make sure the big game or series premiere streamed without fail . over time , it forged long term deals with clients like wwe and sony playstation s vue network . now it s moving from powering the platform to co owning the content as well . but it s increasingly clear that to really capture the opportunity in front of it , bam needs to become more independent . bam doesn t run like a startup it doesn t have equity to share with employees , causing it to lose out on talented engineers and developers that want upside beyond a salary . it also can t easily raise outside capital to compete against rising competitors like twitch or ooyala while it s still a central part of baseball s day to day operations . the idea of spinning bam out to create a new company has been floated for years , but in the last few months it has hardened into a certainty . today s announcement that ampnbspthe nhl will invest in this new venture makes it a fact . lawyers and bankers are finalizing the details , and bowman is in active discussions with other potential investors , poised to run a new company with a valuation north of billion . as everyone thinks about going over the top , about building out a global business , we are looking for a partner to help us double or triple this business , says bowman . things have been going fine , but to not move on this now , we lose the opportunity to get really , really big . when baseball s then commissioner , bud selig , created bam back in , he had relatively modest goals in mind . the unit would be in charge of creating websites for each of the teams and consolidating mlb s digital rights . by pooling resources , he would prevent the bigger teams from outpacing their smaller market rivals . and to keep the division honest and efficient , bam would operate as its own company . the teams agreed to contribute a combined million to the venture , million each over the first four years , with each taking an equal ownership stake . it was a painful lesson . from then on , bam would build its own techthe group they assembled wasn t a silicon valley dream team , more like tech s version of bad news bears a minor league beat writer , a former state treasurer , and assorted av nerds from around the league . this was the height of the dot com boom , and excitement about the internet was at an all time high . right out of the gate , bam decided to pay a fancy consulting firm a huge chunk of its annual budget to help it create the mlb . com website . unfortunately the website barely worked . bam had to scrap it and start from scratch . it was a painful lesson . from then on , bam would build its own tech . in , ichiro suzuki came over from japan to play for the seattle mariners . already an icon in his home country , he now had a full time press corps of several dozen japanese reporters covering his every move . bam decided to experiment with streaming live audio of his games , giving his fanatical followers a way to keep up in real time . the company spent several million dollars building and advertising the product . i don t think we ever got to , subscribers , says bowman with a chuckle . by the middle of , heavy expenditures on these early projects had left the company strapped for cash . but when it consolidated the league s digital rights , the mlb also gave bam control over ticketing . bam turned those rights into leverage . it made ticketmaster an offer partner with us or you don t sell baseball . the company gave bam a million advance , which it used to cover payroll as it pushed forward with its next big bet video . the first video stream looked more like a flip book . on august th of , bam produced an online broadcast of a game between the texas rangers and new york yankees . this was well before high speed internet was ubiquitous and three years before the launch of youtube . the game streamed to around , fans at a now glacial kilobits per second . the technology existed to do it , but of course , that doesn t mean it was good , says bowman . the first video stream looked more like a flip book . still , fans responded to the new offering and bam kept experimenting . two weeks later , it launched the first paid streaming video product , a pennant race package of nine games with postseason implications . later that fall , it sold a . postseason package . mlb . tv launched alongside spring training in , offering a full season package for . . in the first year , over , customers signed up . the new revenue stabilized bam s finances it only ended up taking million of funding from the team owners before it began paying them a dividend out of its profits . and the unique challenge of live streaming baseball started to shape bam into the industry powerhouse it is today . watching sports online has always had one major complication regional blackouts prevent you from streaming a game in the same territory as a television broadcaster who owns local rights . that meant bam had to figure out where a customer was and whether or not they could legally watch the stream . in fact , bam s very first post season package wasn t even broadcast live in the united states or japan . fox owned the national broadcast rights to the pennant race , so bam s first big broadcast took place in europe . from the beginning , bam had to perfect live video streaming on a global scale . before anyone else was even thinking about these issues , bam figured out compression , geofencing , and multi application delivery at scale , says rick heitzman , a venture capitalist who has worked with bam over the years . like many pioneers , they took their fair share of arrows , but have emerged as the leading digital platform . bowman puts it a little differently . we made all the same mistakes everyone else makes , he says . we just had the advantage of making them first . before anyone else was even thinking about these issues , bam figured out compression , geofencing , and multi application delivery at scale . take syncing between devices . this is a great feature to have with a service like hbo now , but with a baseball game , it s absolutely critical . the last thing you want is a fan watching on their pc , pausing to head to the bathroom , pulling the game up on a phone , and suddenly it s an inning later and the score has changed . bam learned to do this with each game , and even with the stats a fan can pull up alongside the video for a deeper dive . inzerillo joined bam ampnbspin and began work on what would become mlb . tv . he had started his career as a cameraman with the white sox , moved on to direct video operations for the league , and then ran the tech department at chicago s newly created united center . in , he left baseball to work at a startup that was developing digital television . when the dot com boom went bust , he fell back in with his old company , and brought along a wealth of knowledge about the intersection of tv and the internet . the thing about broadcast television is , today people probably think of it as stodgy old engineers with big beer bellies and a pocket protector , says inzerillo . but the truth is that there are a lot of things about the way they do it , the technology and the philosophy , that make it incredibly stable and scalable . inzerillo set out to fuse those two worlds , creating a platform with the agility of a web startup and the reliability of a broadcast network . bam s early entrance to the world of streaming video gave it a big advantage in developing technology , but it also gave the group a head start at the process of deploying infrastructure . great web streaming requires points of presence spread across the globe near population centers . for years , bam has been building out data centers and high speed fiber connections , forging intimate relationships with the companies that control the guts of the internet . that head start gives bam a massive advantage in both speed and cost . we looked at what it would take to build in house , and compared that to what bam could deliver , said george barrios , wwe s chief strategy and financial officer . in the end it made a lot more sense to let them bring their technology expertise to bear , and focus on what we do best , which is creating great content and connecting with wrestling fans . when hbo originally set out to create hbo now , the project was reportedly expected to take three years and cost million . bam turned the same project around in three and half months for less than million . we see a lot of things that are repeatable , says kenny gersh , the head of business development , who helped bam close deals with espn , sony , and the nhl . we applied the learnings from mlb . tv to wwe , and we applied the learnings from wwe to hbo . by the time the iphone rolled out in , bam was readyjust as it was early to video , bam made a smart bet on mobile starting in . that year , it built the mlb . com mobile site , which served up news and scores , and negotiated agreements with the four major us carriers to prominently feature a link to the site . a year later it launched its first mobile app , mlb . com gameday , across verizon , at ampt , and sprint . the application included a scoreboard , gameday pitch by pitch , and live gameday audio advanced features considering smartphone capabilities at the time . by the time the iphone rolled out in , bam was ready . mlb was onstage for the unveiling of the app store , the beginning of a deep relationship with apple that would see it grace the stage at the launch of the ipad and apple watch . and it s not just apple that trusts bam . behind a locked door in its new york city headquarters , the company has a gadget geek s fantasy trove the latest smartphones , tablets , and consoles , all being tested months before they are publicly released . on the iphone , roku , playstation , xbox , apple tv , our infrastructure was always the first live streaming technology on those devices , says matthew gould , bam s head of communications . now people come to us to ensure that when their hardware is released , there won t be any issues . it s easy to get lost wandering through bam s headquarters . hallways loop back on themselves and there are half floors wedged in between whole ones . bobble heads and figurines line the partitions between desks entire walls are crammed floor to ceiling with monitors where color codes flash onscreen green for live , yellow for standby , red as a warning about a problem . young men and women stand , chatting , never turning their gaze from the live feeds , a position known around the office as eye to the glass . bam has become a weird tech octopusas gould leads me on a tour , i realize what a weird tech octopus bam has become a unique mix of startup and it department . the core competency and biggest revenue stream is technology for streaming living video . but it still builds and maintains websites for most mlb teams , created and manages the system that sells the league s tickets , and constructs its mobile apps and games . hell , bam even powers instant replay for the league . on game day , an umpire comes and sits in a windowless room above chelsea market to review footage , calling whether a runner was safe at the plate or not . the latest expression of this boundless initiative is statcast , a big data approach to sports that only a major league nerd could love . high speed cameras and radar installed in every stadium capture the game in three dimensions and allow for real time tracking and tabulation of each motion a player makes on the field . fans watching an amazing replay of a diving catch can learn exactly how fast that outfielder s first step was , if he broke in the right direction , and how that compares to his historical average . a promotional video explaining the technology behind mlb s statcast system my dad and i would go to yankees games , and there would always be these arguments around bernie williams , how good an outfielder he was , explains gregg klayman , who runs product development and content strategy . my dad , right or wrong , he would always say , bernie breaks the wrong way , his first step is really slow , but he makes all these great catches , diving to the turf or bouncing off the wall . if he made the right step , it would have been easy . was he a good player or just a very gifted athlete ? . . . now i could know for sure . back then it was one of those friendly fan debates that would never get resolved . today klayman could simply call up the play on his smartphone and ask statcast for the answer . was he a good player or just a very gifted athlete ? back then we had our opinions . now i could know for sure . not every attempt at a new tech project is a success . when k , the publisher of licensed baseball games on the xbox , decided against publishing a new title for , bam stepped in and created an entire console game from scratch in a year and a half . the result earned withering reviews , perhaps no surprise given that a team of a few dozen was tasked with a job usually done by hundreds of more experienced professionals over a much longer period of time . if bam can pull off its plan to spin out as a stand alone tech company , it could step away from such projects and focus on its core capabilities . all the things that are related to baseball that aren t streaming would stay behind at mlb , says bowman . instead of the utility infielder juggling a dozen different jobs , bam tech would focus solely on the streaming business , trying to stake a major claim in the rapidly shifting media market . a few weeks ago , bowman sat down in a small studio at bam s headquarters to record a conversation with rich greenfield , an investment analyst and consigliere who works at the collision of media , technology , and television . greenfield had recently helped guide the partnership between vice and amc , and was lobbing bowman questions as an audience of bankers , venture capitalists , and potential investors tuned in . bam has been flirting with the idea of a spinoff since , when it made the rounds with investors and bankers . but its revenue at the time was under million , and streaming video was still far from mainstream . a decade later , bam is on pace to earn million , and says it s been turning a steady profit . add in a roster of high profile clients and a massive media shift from pay tv to online streaming , and suddenly it seems silly not to look beyond baseball . suddenly it seems silly not to look beyond baseballthe nhl is the first public investor in bam tech , but it s also talking with partners like hbo s parent , time warner , and espn s overlord , disney , who could help sharpen its skills at producing and distributing original content . while sports is often a leader in new forms of distribution , from vhs to dvd to streaming , the long tail here is entertainment , bowman says . and not just the standard formats . we want to be flexible enough to create new content that is specifically over the top . bowman has some wild ideas for how bam s expertise could be tapped to create new genres . every night in clubs around the country , people are telling hundreds of jokes . some of those are duds , but some are really funny . the bam team already has experience ingesting petabytes of live footage from dozens of games and quickly cutting together highlights . what if we could do that for comedy ? bam has already taken a step toward creating its own content by buying production and distribution rights for digital content from the pga and nhl . just as cable and espn provided a home for sporting events that didn t match the business model of broadcast television , bam is bundling sports to sell a la carte on the internet , creating a new opportunity , and perhaps a way forward as pay tv slowly dwindles . the media space has always been built on over time , the platforms taking more control of content . it was true on cable with espn , and in streaming with netflix . so it s natural , says greenfield . bam is bundling sports to sell a la carte on the internet , creating a new opportunitythe idea of helping to produce and perhaps even create new content is intriguing , but also risky . bam would find itself competing directly with its own clients , like espn and hbo . a big part of the company s success was its ability to work with companies and leagues traditionally viewed as competitors . media companies are not good at tech and really struggle with large scale , says greenfield . they don t trust companies like google or amazon , who want to displace them . bam is seen as friendly . if it spins out and starts making its own shows , that dynamic may change . and while it s a world class technology company , so far it has little track record in creating original content outside baseball . as consumers cut the cord on cable , bam and its clientele are navigating treacherous waters . it s more complex than ever for media companies , says bowman . you need to honor your existing partners , your existing contracts , while also figuring out new ways to reach fans who live beyond the traditional formats . so far bam has managed to bridge the gap between television and the internet . and bowman is bullish on the future . the fact that you can now deliver games on demand to billion devices around the globe , you couldn t write heaven for a sports fan better than that . photography by sean o kaneedited by dieter bohn , ampnbspmichael zelenko	 windows has a lot to live up to . microsoft has made a lot of promises about it . and oddly enough , we ve heard most of them before , with windows . both were designed to acknowledge and embrace mobile and mobile apps , work well on touchscreens as well as laptops , and form the basis of a new phone platform . but there s a big difference between them windows actually does all those things . the story of windows from inside microsoftthe company s latest trick listening to its usersby tom warren windows has a lot to live up to . microsoft has made a lot of promises about it . and oddly enough , we ve heard most of them before , with windows . both were designed to acknowledge and embrace mobile and mobile apps , work well on touchscreens as well as laptops , and form the basis of a new phone platform . but there s a big difference between them windows actually does all those things . three years ago , tablets like the ipad looked like they might be a serious threat to windows . in response , steve ballmer , steven sinofsky , and the rest of microsoft took a big bet on a forward thinking interface that asked its users to forget their old point and click ways and embrace a tiled future . windows and windows phone were related pieces in a bold strategy to move the company into a future of touchscreens and connected apps . that strategy flopped . users roundly rejected the confusing new version of windows , and without them , developers balked . but the ipad hasn t killed off laptops , and consumers haven t shown a big interest in touchscreen pcs yet . another version , . , attempted to stem the bleeding , but it was too late . the market had spoken . like vista before it and windows me before that , windows was the version of windows you skipped . read our full windows review now , a new leadership team for windows under ceo satya nadella and executive vice president terry myerson are trying it all again . but this time around , the goal is much more ambitious if they succeed , windows will be the final iteration of windows the one that will be updated like a service , continuously , in perpetuity . the one that finally makes good on all the promises of a synergistic ecosystem of like minded devices designed to work together . in a series of exclusive interviews with the verge , the team behind windows revealed how they re doing it , why they think it will succeed , and what they re working on next . this is the story of windows from inside microsoft . terry myersondeveloping in the openterry myerson never imagined he d last at microsoft . i thought i was going to stay here a couple of weeks , but found that i really loved the people . it s now years since myerson sold his small company to microsoft , during which time he worked on exchange , windows mobile , and windows phone . now , he s sitting in front of me as the head of windows , just days before the software maker launches windows . it s been two years since myerson was promoted to the top job , and the release is important to him and the company . microsoft needs customers to love and want windows enough to upgrade to it , thereby creating a massive install base to attract developers . the pressure is on . myerson is confident without being arrogant he s more than happy to tease me about my macbook . his forthright manner is mirrored in how he chose to release windows out in the open , bugs and all , even before the company had finished thinking through what it should be . you re putting it out there when it s not done . microsoft now solicits feedback directly from users in a very public way over the past nine months , the company has been testing windows with million windows insiders . anyone can sign up to test , and the results of microsoft s work will go on display today as windows launches to millions of people around the world . it has sometimes been daunting , says myerson . you re putting it out there when it s not done , then you re getting all kinds of feedback and stuff that you know is broken . that feedback has been constant and varied over the last nine months , and it will continue over the months and years ahead . initially , there was a lot of hand wringing around what was that going to be like and were people going to form opinions too early , explains gabe aul , engineering general manager for microsoft s operating systems group . i think we just decided to go for it . aul launched his microsoft career in product support years ago . he went on to help build dr . watson , a debugger that gathers error data when your pc crashes , into basically every product at microsoft . today aul is the face of microsoft s windows testing . he receives microsoft feedback , praise , and abuse on twitter daily , but he remains perfectly cool . even before we start our interview , i start moaning about some windows bugs i have , and he s keen to listen , even emailing me a fix for a problem within seconds . he admits he s passionate about quality after working in product support for years , and it s clear he genuinely cares . while many will joke it support is simply a help desk asking a user to reboot their pc , microsoft has built a whole system to process the feedback it receives for windows . it all gets collected in a database where microsoft engineers can use tools to analyze it visually . if cortana starts breaking in france , microsoft will hear about it , and engineers can detect trends and issues based on pop ups that appear for testers . there was a lot of hand wringing around what was that going to be like . feedback doesn t always come from within the operating system , though . the continuum feature , which lets you switch between desktop and tablet modes in windows , generated a wave of negative responses from social media . that s probably because microsoft initially ripped out all of windows s good touch work , a move that surprised testers , before slowly building it back in . the trash can icon the feedback we got on that thing . . . he cuts short to laugh because windows insiders myself included were really vocal in comments and online forums about the how ugly the first version was . sometimes , windows customers reached out to myerson directly , including one during the time when the windows chief misspoke and the result was that everybody thought windows would be free . there s this kid in bangladesh who somehow got my email address , he runs pirated windows , myerson says . it was a great dialogue . it was more for me a learning experience about how did he pirate windows , and why did he pirate windows . the conversation hasn t changed microsoft s stance , though . windows still isn t free for pirates . the new xbox one app on windows taking feedbackto handle feedback , the windows build team hosts daily flight ops meetings to decide which prerelease versions of windows get released . a flight commander takes control of the team , for that day . he has a red hat that says phone on it , and he has a black hat that says pc on it , aul says . when it s time to talk about phone , he will take the pc hat off and put the phone hat on . that s how we keep the room in check . mikevierling it s real pic . twitter . com dwf ejoqkq gabriel aul gabeaul may , there s also a red outfit hanging on the wall , a symbol of a time when one employee came to the ship room wearing embarrassing matching red shorts and a t shirt he s an ohio state supporter . it became a running joke . now , if a microsoft engineer enters the meeting with a bug that s equally embarrassing , they have to wear something red . to continue with the red theme , aul has a d printed red button that s become something of a microsoft meme among windows fans . aul hits it when a build is ready to be released to the public . it s mostly ceremonial , but it actually does send a trigger to the flighting system , explains aul . the other thing it does , that most people don t know , is it says something inappropriate in a stephen hawking voice because it s got a voice synthesizer in there . aul wouldn t give me any examples , but quotes are sourced from the team or jokes about his tweets . microsoft s willingness to solicit user feedback on early versions is a big change from the past . during the days of vista , microsoft s lawyers ended up at my doorstep because i dared to write about prerelease versions of windows . and while windows had a few public previews , it was largely developed with little consideration to feedback . windows shipped despite user concerns about fullscreen apps and a lack of attention to keyboard and mouse users . microsoft s management seemed to spend more time explaining every new feature in sprawling , technical blog posts instead of understanding why users hated the changes . myerson has a different philosophy it isn t one guy comes down from a mountain with a tablet saying what the right product is , he explains . we just believe the customer feedback shaping the product is how we re going to build clarity and confidence that we have a great product . joe belfiorefrom apps to phonesmicrosoft may have been confident about windows , but the ambitions to push touch computing didn t work out . microsoft has been forced to admit several times that it s aware customer satisfaction rates for mouse and keyboard users are low . microsoft s new start menu isn t as domineering , it s just designed to get them to move to windows . our strategic belief is , if we have a big audience of people then developers will put apps in that store because there will be demand , explains microsoft s joe belfiore . we now have all the devices lined up . i don t expect to see the platform change again . belfiore looks after the customization of windows for pcs , tablets , and phones . he spent years building windows phone , alongside myerson . to many fans , he s the face of microsoft s mobile efforts . microsoft has been constantly resetting and rebuilding its windows phone os . windows phone users couldn t upgrade to windows phone , and it took far too long for windows phone . to arrive with features that should have been there from the beginning . it s knocked developer confidence , to say nothing of crippling its chances at gaining significant marketshare . part of windows s big promise is that the same apps can run across pcs , tablets , phones , and even the xbox one console . as a result , the next phones will have an expansive set of apps from windows to jumpstart the ecosystem . we have one common operating system for all the device types that we are making , explains belfiore . he s also surprisingly blunt when he characterizes windows phone and windows phone , products he was intimately involved in developing . we ve had a couple of , sort of , practice runs with phone and pc , belfiore says , before pivoting to the presumably brighter future with windows , we now have all the devices lined up . i don t expect to see the platform change again , in the same way it has before . that s encouraging to hear , but it doesn t help windows phone right now . microsoft ceo satya nadella revealed recently that the company is restructuring its phone business , scaling it back massively as part of a . billion write off from the nokia phone business acquisition . around , jobs are being cut , and microsoft is planning to make fewer models . we are going to focus on a few great devices and the most notable being that premium consumer category , explains myerson , adding , the direction we will head is the premium branded lineup . i push him on whether that s a similar approach to surface , and he claims the goal is to have one microsoft device family that plays this role in the windows ecosystem . i m not sure if that means a surface phone is in the cards , but it sure sounds like it . the first example of that one microsoft device family will arrive later this year . one s coming . maybe two are coming , but at least one is coming , teases myerson , as he hides an unreleased lumia phone in his pocket . microsoft is rumored to be working on two high end devices that will include a new continuum feature from windows . continuum on phones lets you use the phone as kind of a pc . you can connect up a keyboard , mouse , and monitor and start using windows apps . i think it is the future of the phone , says myerson . belfiore is equally bullish about continuum , but the phone version of windows doesn t ship until later this year . the phone is significantly feature complete , but we ll continue to polish and tweak and iterate the things that still need to work , explains belfiore . we ll put features in right up near the end . but in general , the broad feature set is set . phil spencerwindows and the xbox onewindows is also coming to the xbox in a big way . a new xbox app for windows is a significant addition , and it s one of the best built in apps available right now . you can stream xbox one games to a windows pc and use the xbox controller , and you can chat freely from a pc to an xbox one with or without a headset . it s a great addition for xbox gamers after a rough couple of years . sales have been second to sony s playstation , but it feels like microsoft is recovering from the original unveiling of the xbox one two years ago . the launch of xbox one , it was from a brand and a customer pride standpoint a tough time , says phil spencer , microsoft s head of xbox . a lot of the original ideas around xbox one didn t meet the expectations that xbox fans have of what we should do with our product . spencer , who has worked on products like encarta at microsoft , has spent the last year or so getting the xbox team re centered on its fans and gaming . it s an approach that myerson says inspired the windows insider program . xbox had this passionate focus on their fans and engaging with their fans and listening to their fans , says myerson . something that phil spencer just has at his core is his caring . he lives for those xbox fans . we understand if you re going to go pc to xbox , we need to get keyboard and mouse working . spencer sees windows as a massive opportunity to bring xbox live and a single store to people . today , the xbox store is separate from the windows store , but microsoft is unifying them this fall . that doesn t mean apps will be immediately available on the xbox one , though . getting to one store where all the content is there will happen a little bit later , says spencer , meaning we ll be waiting until next year until we finally see windows apps on xbox one . microsoft s store isn t designed to kill off steam , either . five years from now , i want steam to be incredibly popular and successful . i look at the health of steam as a harbinger of the health of windows gaming . what is coming this year is a windows update for xbox one that brings a refreshed ui , speed , and microsoft s cortana digital assistant . you can imagine scenarios of hey cortana , what are most of my friends playing ? what are most people watching ? says spencer . the next step is being able to help you in game , of really thinking about scenarios like hey cortana , how do i get past this boss ? further out , spencer says that streaming pc games to xbox one is something he wants to enable . we understand if you re going to go pc to xbox , we need to get keyboard and mouse working completely so you could play those games . in terms of where we want to go with our platform , those are absolutely in the scope of things that we want to do . terry myersonthe last windowsmyerson and his team have shifted windows to a windows as a service model , meaning regular updates instead of a major release every few years . it doesn t feel like microsoft really knows exactly how this is going to play out , but the windows release marks a milestone . the company simply can t afford to make the mistakes of windows againbut it s not the kind of milestone we re used to . windows , even at release , is not done . right now , it s all about updates that fix issues and bugs . if you upgrade from windows and windows this week , then you ll start to see those regular updates , and they ll install automatically to keep everyone up to date . myerson is confident in the quality of windows . we look at these quantitative metrics and we think the quality s great , and we re continuing to fix more , he says . we re going to keep fixing . we re committed to listen and respond . every day we re shipping out new updates with more fixes . that listening and responding sums up windows . if there s something wrong this time , then myerson and his team will be listening . this can t and likely won t be another windows or windows vista mess for microsoft . the company simply can t afford to make those mistakes again . our goal is to roll out windows and build a base of millions of happy and engaged windows users , says myerson . happy and engaged is one of those talking points you hear a lot from microsoft . myerson used it nine times in our hour together . but behind the pr approved phrasing is a simple truth it s been a long time since windows users have been either , and microsoft needs to fix that . it s as good a north star as any , especially when your product development cycle is founded on taking user feedback seriously . if microsoft can make people love windows again , then the rest developers and apps is easy . if i ve learned anything from speaking to the team building windows , it s that microsoft is taking user feedback very , very seriously . everything microsoft is making from the xbox to phones to hololens is based on windows . it s not just the foundation of this operating system , it s the future foundation of the company . microsoft doesn t have a plan b for windows , and it s proud of the fact there s no one working on a windows , myerson says , but there s a group of people working on some really cool updates to windows . when windows insiders see those updates , you can be sure microsoft will want to know exactly what they think . photography by david ryderedited by dieter bohn and michael zelenko	 you don t see an all star comics every day . published in , it s a milestone in what s known as the golden age of comic books the debut of the first bonafide superhero team , the justice society of america . there s hardly a plot , only a meeting of some of dc s biggest stars flash , green lantern , hawkman taking turns sharing tales as if they were telling ghost stories at a campfire . spectre recounts a battle with a monster from the moon hawkman remembers a crisis on the island of krakatoa . the masked vigilantes on the cover are a friendly lot , decades removed from the gritty realism that would come to dominate the industry later . the flash wears a slightly over sized long sleeve shirt , emblazoned with a yellow lightning bolt . his face is as pleasant and plain as a dumpling , and on his head sits a helmet that brings to mind an overturned colander . comic conmana true crime tale of comic books , corruption , and a million vanishing actby russell brandom amp colin lecher illustrations by jun cen you don t see an all star comics every day . published in , it s a milestone in what s known as the golden age of comic books the debut of the first bonafide superhero team , the justice society of america . there s hardly a plot , only a meeting of some of dc s biggest stars flash , green lantern , hawkman taking turns sharing tales as if they were telling ghost stories at a campfire . spectre recounts a battle with a monster from the moon hawkman remembers a crisis on the island of krakatoa . the masked vigilantes on the cover are a friendly lot , decades removed from the gritty realism that would come to dominate the industry later . the flash wears a slightly over sized long sleeve shirt , emblazoned with a yellow lightning bolt . his face is as pleasant and plain as a dumpling , and on his head sits a helmet that brings to mind an overturned colander . so when an all star comics surfaced at heritage auctions first big sale of , collectors took notice . the copy was off white , its condition ranked at . out of by the certified guaranty company . cgc knew of only two higher ranked all star s in the world , one of which a . had sold for , back in . the overstreet comic book price guide the bible on such matters estimated an . copy to be worth somewhere between , and , . but someone bidding at the heritage auction was willing to pay significantly more . the comic had been low balled at first , going for , . during the auction itself . but after the official bidding closed , private offers flooded in , , then , . in the end , it sold for , , putting it in the same class as a record breaking debut spider man that had sold a few years earlier . all star wasn t the only mid tier comic suddenly going for outrageous prices at the sale . a sub mariner in which the aquatic hero namor twists apart a panzer tank at normandy sold for , , more than three times its estimated worth . in the very next lot , someone shelled out , . for an off white . sub mariner in which namor struggles with the japanese fleet even though overstreet pegs an . copy of the same book at just , . absolutely insane ! podboy wrote the day after the sale in the collector s society forums , a common online hangout for comics buyers . i paid for my subby in . . what s up with some of these buyers anyway ? agent asked . makes you wonder if it s simply a case of bidding fever . whoever was after the sub mariners and all star comics at the heritage auction wasn t a collector . their bids were too erratic , they didn t know the market , and chances were , they weren t terribly smart . it was also clear that they had a lot of money on their hands too much money , maybe and they were eager to spend it . through months of interviews and hundreds of pages of public documents , the verge reconstructed what they were seeing a multi million dollar embezzlement scheme that would ensnare a crooked lawyer , a multinational corporation , and some of the most sought out comics in the world . whack job in , anthony chiofalo had nearly years of corporate law behind him and a political career in his future . married with two sons , chiofalo was squat , clean cut , and brusque . he d spent his formative years in the bronx , and when an assembly district seat opened up in the area , he decided to make a run . he was pretty determined , says joe thompson , a bronx community activist who also ran in the election . but running as a republican in the heavily democratic bronx was hopeless , and chiofalo lost badly , pulling a little more than percent of the vote . thompson can t remember seeing chiofalo around the community much after that . chiofalo had trends of grandiosity and episodic impulsivity and poor judgment . the failed campaign marked a turning point in chiofalo s life a defeat that precipitated a gradual unraveling . according to state records , his wife served him with divorce papers in august of , followed by an order of protection . chiofalo broke the order within a few months , and by the next year he was writing notes that would later be described as hostile , obscene , and derogatory , sending them to his wife , to the children s guardian even to a clerk for the judge presiding over the divorce case . chiofalo eventually sued his wife and about others involved in the divorce proceedings , alleging that they had infringed on his civil rights . the argument was thrown out in court . by , the state court s disciplinary committee decided to take action against chiofalo , on the basis that his letters and frivolous lawsuits proved him unfit to be a lawyer . a letter from a psychiatrist quoted during chiofalo s disbarment proceeding said he experienced trends of grandiosity and episodic impulsivity and poor judgment that he would regress at times of stress and duress , particularly around financial , legal , and family issues . when he did , his narcissistic defenses come to fore , often to his detriment . one of the dozens of individuals involved in chiofalo s civil rights lawsuit put it even more simply he s a whack job . bad news . if there was one bright spot in his life during that time , it was susan , a university health professor living in texas . susan requested her maiden name not be used in this piece . the two had been high school sweethearts and reconnected during chiofalo s divorce . in , susan invited chiofalo to join her in texas . eventually , they moved into a cozy rental at oakmoss trail , in spring , texas a small , green piece of the houston metropolitan area , with wide open spaces and a population of about , . by , the two were married . chiofalo seemed to have left his problems behind he found a new job as in house counsel for a japanese construction company called tadano , a gig that came with a , salary and new responsibility . disciplinary committee records show he lobbied to keep his new york law license , saying that he was seeking psychiatric help , but in october , he was suspended from practicing law in the state for two years . tadano seemed to be involved in more and more litigationit was around this time that chiofalo s job at tadano hit a snag . tadano was the world leader in rough terrain cranes , selling huge tank treaded trucks capable of lifting tons to construction companies from london to dubai . that globe spanning business came with a river of legal work , and chiofalo s job was to coordinate local firms hired by tadano , drawing up contracts , reviewing service agreements , and approving payments . but in the months after chiofalo came on board , tadano seemed to be involved in more and more litigation . in march of , the company ordered an investigation into the spike in legal costs . our approach initially was trying to ask exactly what went on , and then immediately trace the money flow , says philip hilder , a lawyer for tadano . an employee eventually came across an expenditure that looked off . the bill was from seidner amp virdone , llp a business supposedly located at oakmoss trail . according to a tadano lawsuit later filed against chiofalo s wife , the company only existed in new york it was the firm chiofalo retained to work on his divorce proceedings . another company chiofalo submitted invoices from wasn t real at all . tadano alleged it was requesting payments be sent to the address on oakmoss trail the firm s manager and registered agent was anthony chiofalo . chiofalo had created a byzantine structure of revolving transfers to conceal his tracks , laundering money through bank accounts , third party payments , and the purchase of collectibles . tadano alleged that in one particularly daring trick , he sent a retainer letter to the company requesting , for an attorney . the attorney was chiofalo s landlord . tadano had cut a check that paid six months of rent . the attorney was chiofalo s landlord . tadano had cut a check that paid six months of renttadano assessed the damage , adding up all the suspicious checks that had flown from the company s accounts to each of chiofalo s fronts . nearly million had vanished . two months after the start of the investigation , a higher up at tadano approached chiofalo , asking him to explain himself . chiofalo produced records spreadsheets , with billable hours but the law firms listed would turn out to be fakes . chiofalo told people he had enlisted the services of michael maio whom he touted as a super lawyer , licensed with seven state bars . but maio never existed he was no more than a resume , cobbled together from an east coast lawyer s accomplishments and a photograph of a west coast lawyer . maio was chiofalo s mother s maiden name . but the company never had a chance to ask about all of the inconsistencies . the day after he was confronted , chiofalo didn t show up to work and stopped answering his phone . as soon as he knew he d been caught , the lawyer disappeared . the museumwhere do you stash million if you don t want anyone to find it ? tadano hired a private investigator named bryan vaclavik to follow the money . a year veteran of the harris county district attorney s office , vaclavik specialized in fraud cases . he discovered wire transfers from chiofalo to a heritage auctions , and when investigators at tadano checked the records for chiofalo s work phone , they found that he had been making regular contact with a local storage facility . what the police uncovered was astonishingon june th , the police arrived with a warrant to search seven climate controlled units in spring , texas four seasons self storage facility . the compound sits on a flat , sunny stretch of concrete just a few miles west of interstate . what they uncovered there was astonishing the first unit was packed with sports memorabilia , signed helmets , and baseball cards . the second unit had a makeshift study space , full of furniture and books . the third unit had six framed texas flags and a shadowbox arrangement of photographs of mussolini , among the flood of other memorabilia . the fourth had more figurines , sports photographs , and paintings depicting scenes from the bible and world war two . the fifth unit was mostly baseball cards , along with photographs of robert de niro , phil jackson , and mussolini . the sixth unit had statuettes of batman , iron man , conan the barbarian , and , again , mussolini . young allies , published in then , in the seventh unit , there were the comics nearly boxes of them , drawn from every era and genre with seemingly no logic to the collection . the monkees and star wars comic books ampnbsp worth a few dollars , if that sat next to nine different early detective comics issues , a batman , a young allies , and a specialty comic from the world s fair . a later search turned up a copy of action comics , where superman makes his first appearance one of the most coveted and expensive comic books of all time . tadano s money had been transformed , taken from legal bills and embezzled into merchandise . the haul was worth millions . investigators weren t convinced chiofalo had spent all of that cash on his own . tadano alleged that chiofalo s wife had been in on the scheme . harris county da investigator dustin deutsch called susan a few weeks after chiofalo disappeared . she said she didn t know where her husband was and hadn t seen him in a month . through what deutsch described as an anonymous tip , he discovered she had a one way plane ticket to new york leaving the following day . was she flying back to meet her husband in the bronx ? he rushed to get a warrant and searched the chiofalo home the same day . the home resembled an extension of the storage unit it was overrun with stacks and piles of boxes and packages , addressed to one of chiofalo s fictitious companies , a civil complaint from tadano would allege . the interior of their rental home was so crowded that it resembled a museum more than a residence . investigators said they found checks and other financial documents made out to chiofalo , susan , and the fictitious lawyer maio , while forged invoices were found in clear view . together , tadano would allege , the chiofalos used the embezzled funds to buy a , lexus , a , toyota pickup , and a , square foot home for , that they would remodel . one chiofalo linked cashier s check for , had gone straight to a furniture store . the police moved to arrest susan , with chiofalo still on the run . susan filed for divorce the following month . chiofalo was charged in absentia with felony theft , with bail preemptively set at million . under the criminal complaint against him , the arrest date section said simply , to be . plastic coffinslike a famous painting , a rare comic is hard to fence . only a handful of buyers in the us handle big ticket sales , and most shops keep scans of every comic for simple safety reasons . even the most pristine comics are unique , marked with subtle wrinkles , stains , and clouds of mold known as foxing . those marks make it easy to follow a single comic as it moves from sale to sale . it s almost like fingerprints , says buddy saunders , who operates lone star comics in dallas . if it shows up on ebay and it was stolen from us , we know . big auction sites do the same , in part because of return fraud , in which a scammer will purchase a valuable comic and try to return a forgery . if the wrinkles don t match the scan , the buyer is in serious trouble . in recent years , a business called the certified guaranty company or cgc has made fraud even harder . if you bought a comic book from an auction house within the last decade , it probably came in one of cgc s distinctive plastic shells , complete with a two digit condition rating , a serial number , and a hologram for authentication . the shells make it impossible to read the comic critics call them plastic coffins , but they offer strong protections against damage and theft . barcodes make for easy tracking , and de slabbing a comic will make almost any buyer suspicious . if that buyer wants to look the comic up , it s easy to find recent sales in an auction site s database . deutsch s specialty was evidence he taught forensics classes at a nearby community collegeif officials were going to use comics to catch and prosecute chiofalo , investigators needed to know which comics he had taken with him , and which he had left behind a task that fell to da investigator dustin deutsch . deutsch s specialty was evidence he taught forensics classes at a nearby community college , and his cases made him a regular on the local tv news . his team spent a full week at the sprawling storage complex , cataloging more than , separate items . some of the haul entered into evidence as whole boxes , as if the investigators had simply given up on counting it all . locked away in one of the storage units deutsch was searching was an all star the one that had cost chiofalo , . somehow , that comic never made it onto the evidence list . no one noticed the omission . by the time the investigators closed the doors on the storage units at the end of the week , the comic wasn t there . it was missing , along with an all winners and a box of other titles that had mysteriously dropped off the list . all winnerson august th , three months after chiofalo vanished a man named lonnie blevins walked into wizard world s chicago comic convention looking to unload a box of comics . he worked with deutsch as a da investigator in harris county , sporting the same tight cropped haircut and square build as his colleague . he was part of the team sorting through chiofalo s storage units , although it would be another two weeks before they turned in their official report . but today , he was at the con on personal business . every year , chicago comic con takes over the the donald e . stephens convention center , a stadium sized concrete box sandwiched between airport hotels on the northwest outskirts of chicago . this was the third day . william shatner and stan lee made appearances , along with the world s largest playable pac man machine . but for comics , the real action was in the booths , where buyers came from across the country to check out any interesting books that might be for sale . blevins brought with him a full box of loose comics , none of them in cgc slabs . some of his comics were real gems , like an all star and an all winners , but the box was all over the map in terms of condition and quality . without slabs , buyers were suspicious , but he reassured them . he was a cop back in texas he showed them his badge , and let them scan it in case they needed to find him later . all winners , published in besides , how often do you see an all star , let alone an unslabbed one ? the flash ! the green lantern ! johnny thunder ! dr . fate ! it was a rare book and an expensive one , too after all , just a few months earlier , an all star had sold for , in a private heritage sale . there was some light foxing a cloud of mold toward the bottom of the front cover but otherwise it was in good condition an . or even an . by the look of it . in retrospect , maybe buying such a big title without a cgc box was asking for trouble . it was very strange , one of the buyers remembered later . nobody would crack that book out and sell it raw . but the book was going cheap . maybe blevins just didn t know what he had . sometimes you just get lucky . blevins left the con with , in cash and another , split between nine checks . the investigator said he was going through a nasty divorce , and was worried his ex wife might raise trouble over any checks for more than , . but what about that foxing ? when the buyers took their comics home , they noticed something strange the all star that had sold in february had the same imperfections . in fact , it was the same book . but that book was slabbed it had a barcode and provenance , sold to a private buyer who wouldn t have deslabbed it without a reason . had they bought stolen property ? it was worse . they had bought stolen evidence . the book had come direct from chiofalo s storage unit , smuggled out under the nose of the harris county da and according to prosecutors , blevins and deutsch worked together to smuggle them out . more than , in comics had disappeared from the storage unit , and blevins had spent the summer selling them at comics conventions across the country . the books were deslabbed to throw investigators off the trail , but even without the barcode , the cover gave it away . collectors search for flawless comics , but it s the imperfections that give them an identity , and this imperfection placed blevins at the scene of a crime . a suitcasemeanwhile , chiofalo spent the summer on the run . months went by , and leads dried up . he had taken hundreds of thousands of dollars with him with that much money , maybe he never needed to come back . and then , one day in december , just after pm , a man in a black sweatshirt walked into the police headquarters of newport , rhode island , carrying a large black suitcase . he told an officer at the counter that there was a warrant out for his arrest . police ran a search chiofalo wanted for aggravated larceny in the state of texas . he had been on the run for seven months . he told officers that he was carrying cash , although he wasn t sure about the amount of money he had , lt . william fitzgerald told the verge . , ? , ? in chiofalo s bag , they found , . in the suitcase , , he was arrested , booked , sent to cell no . , and had his possessions processed a rolex watch , two cellphones , a laptop , a bag , and the suitcase . in the bag , they found , . in the suitcase , , . chiofalo was eventually extradited back to texas , but in the seven months since he d fled , the case against him had gone to shambles . evidence had gone missing , one of the investigators was under federal indictment , and a special prosecutor had to be brought in to press the case impartially . when chiofalo appeared in court , he looked haggard , barely recognizable as the fresh faced lawyer who had run for office years earlier . under his orange jumpsuit , intricate sleeve tattoos ran down both his forearms . his lawyer blamed the da s evidence thefts for trial delays , and pushed for reduced bail . it was hard to disagree . after the hearing , chiofalo s bail was reduced from million to just , . eager to avoid trial , the prosecution arranged a plea deal , and in may , a harris county court judge sentenced chiofalo to years in prison , up for parole in about eight . according to reports , he would ve had a better deal , but decided against giving up millions that are still unaccounted for . caught red handed , lonnie blevins plead guilty to federal charges of evidence tampering . deutsch quit the da s office as soon as the charges came down , and is currently standing trial for felony theft and tampering with evidence . the da put cases the officers had worked on under re examination . the all star copy originally purchased by chiofalo at auction for , in its cgc slabthen there are the comics . the three chicago buyers , having purchased stolen goods , are now out , . it was a bad and expensive experience , one buyer told the verge . that is all i will say . tadano retrieved most of the material from the storage facilities and sold them back through the same auction houses where chiofalo had first bought them . the only exception were comics like all star , which had been sold by blevins and were kept for evidence in deutsch s trial . susan had the charges against her dropped for lack of evidence and her criminal records expunged . the civil lawsuit , susan wrote in an email , was merely a legal formality , designed so i could sign over to tadano all the property acquired post marriage and for intimidation purposes . as i recall , there is quite a bit of embellishment in the narrative . in correspondence , susan was eager to close that chapter of her life . he left a trail of destruction in his path and caused a great deal of pain and suffering to all his loved ones , susan said . the experience left her with what she called lifelong ptsd related scars . it can t be said if chiofalo , deutsch , or blevins ever read all star , but if they did , they might have read a tale about a daring heist , foiled by the chapter s hero , the atom . in his earliest appearances , the atom wears a wrestling corset and yellow leotard , armed with no superpowers except a strong sense of morality . in the story , soldiers are transporting a stockpile of government gold to a vault when they re intercepted by a group of gangsters packing tommy guns . the gangsters overpower the soldiers , disguising themselves in the stolen uniforms , and drive into the government compound . the guards greet them , and in one small , single panel , guards and crooks are framed together . dressed the same , their faces void of definition , it s impossible to tell them apart . a note on sourcing this piece was researched over six months , with public records confirmed by subject interviews wherever possible . the bulk of the information was drawn from court records , particularly the criminal cases against blevins and deutsch , as well as the criminal and civil cases against chiofalo on the civil case against his wife . we also drew from the new york state departmental disciplinary committee s action against chiofalo , which resulted in his temporary disbarment in that state . where warranted , we have removed the names of parties involved so as not to inflict further harm . design by dylan lathropedited by michael zelenko lt ! try typekit . load catch e gt	 in march , at the code media conference in dana point , california , some of the most powerful people in media found themselves discussing an unsettling story published two weeks prior . website , profiledwhy are the most important people in media reading the awl ? by josh dzieza in february , at the code media conference in dana point , california , some of the most powerful people in media found themselves discussing an unsettling story published two weeks prior . the piece predicted that the future of the internet looked a lot like the television industry websites would atrophy , and publications would become disembodied producers of content for large social networks like facebook . if in five years i m just watching nfl endorsed espn clips through a syndication deal with a messaging app , and vice is just an age skewed viacom with better audience data , and i m looking up the same trivia on genius instead of wikipedia , and publications are just content agencies that solve temporary optimization issues for much larger platforms , the author wrote , what will have been point of the last years of creating things for the web ? recode s peter kafka used the piece to prod chris cox , facebook s chief product officer . cox denied that facebook was trying to devour the internet . but gawker founder nick denton brought the piece up later in the conference , endorsing its central idea . every publisher has to make a choice as to whether they re going to be a content provider within somebody else s ecosystem , on somebody else s platform and subject to somebody else s algorithm , somebody else s rules , denton said . the awl stands counter to the prevailing trends in the media industrythe piece hit a nerve in an industry trying to figure out where it sits in an internet centralizing around gigantic platforms . it was written by john herrman , a journalist who established his name as a tech blogger , but it wasn t published in the new york times or columbia journalism review , publications with long histories of media criticism , or by any of the big new media companies at the heart of these changes . it appeared on ampnbspthe awl , an offbeat site with a small readership and a wry sensibility . founded in by choire sicha , alex balk , and david cho , ampnbspthe awl stands counter to the prevailing trends in the media industry , commenting skeptically on the conventions of the wider web while running a mix of stories that are both wide ranging and unabashedly specific writerly reviews of the previous day s weather , deconstructions of minion memes , tirades against negronis and the moon , personal essays , deadpan lists , poetry . the site s tone , knowingly smart and aloof from the news cycle , is especially popular among people who work in media , and it has become a farm team for larger publications . lately , under the editorship of herrman and matt buchanan , it also publishes some of the most incisive criticism about the ongoing collision of media and technology . the awl s unique position is partly the result of its business practices and goals . the site has expanded into a network , with the comedy site ampnbspsplitsider , the women oriented site ampnbspthe hairpin , and the personal finance site ampnbspthe billfold . at a time when venture capital feels abundant , it s entirely self funded and profitable , though with a very thin cushion . in an industry obsessed with rapid growth , the editors are wary of scaling up . when the company expands as it plans to do soon with a new parenting site run by former gizmodo editor brian barrett it does so cautiously , by partnering with writers . a few months ago , ampnbspthe awl gained a newsletter by bringing laura olin s everything changes under the site s banner , and now buchanan and herrman are launching a podcast , which they ll host , record , and edit themselves . the awl has found a way to make being small work in an industry that favors scale and mass appeal , and it s become the sort of place where writers like herrman and buchanan can stand back and watch the content dynamo churn . but the company is subject to the same forces they ve been warning about , and the people who built it are thinking about how to navigate the weird new internet taking shape . john herrmanin april , i met up with herrman and buchanan at an empty hotel bar not far from the awl office in downtown brooklyn . buchanan , in a crisp oxford buttoned to the neck , his red hair pushed to the side , ordered a ginger ale . herrman , also red haired and looking slightly more rumpled in a worn green sweatshirt and jeans , got a beer . herrman and buchanan think the media industry is due for a reckoning . the transition from media hosted on websites to media built around social platforms is more profound than people realize , herrman says . as more content is published directly onto facebook , users will gradually lose a sense of who s producing what . the most consequential journalism becomes just another unit of content in a single stream of music videos , movie trailers , updates from friends and relatives , advertisements , and viral tidbits from sites adept at gaming fast changing algorithms and behaviors . readerships that seem large now will turn out to be as ephemeral as snapchats . i think john tends to be ahead of these things because he reads them as science fiction of the present , buchanan says . that s a lot of what the awl does now , herrman agrees . our entire economy is just a giant science fiction writing prompt . our entire economy is just a giant science fiction writing prompt . the two have worked together for so long , first at gizmodo , then at buzzfeed , that they re widely referred to as the gingers . actually they re one big ginger man in a trench coat that people mistake for two people , says adam frucci , who worked with them at gizmodo and now edits splitsider . herrman is genial and goes on frequent flights of theoretical fancy that often end in apocalypse and laughter . buchanan is more reserved , punching in with acerbic jokes . when they get on one of their favorite topics amazon , uber , facebook they bounce back and forth in an accelerating game of dystopian repartee . soon cities will be stratified into classes of on demand laborers , herrman says , app playgrounds zoned by service radii . it s going to get more interesting when you replace those people with robots , buchanan says , adding that everyone will be eating soylent while the rich eat solid foods in surge priced restaurants . i can t wait for the progressively priced food market , herrman says , with genuine enthusiasm , that s going to be great . struggling to keep a straight face , buchanan describes college lectures with professors delivering sponsored native ads indistinguishable from the course environmental science brought to you by exxon . in app purchases for college ! college premium ! i can t wait ! herrman says . the future is going to be amazing , buchanan says , dryly . i m so glad i ll be dead . the two got their start at gawker s tech site , gizmodo buchanan in , while still at nyu , and herrman in , while at the university of edinburgh . it was classic gadget blogging in a very different internet , and they excelled at it . they wrote up to a dozen posts a day what is gorilla glass ? , the greatestest mouse ever , reincarnated ampnbsp which readers found by checking the site s homepage , through rss , or by following links from other blogs . they were the two smartest people , the most talented people that came through that site , says brian lam , who ran gizmodo at the time . lam went on to launch the wirecutter , a gadget review site for the awl ampnbspnetwork that now runs independently . matt buchananin , as social platforms like facebook and twitter were becoming major sources of traffic , buchanan and herrman left gizmodo to start buzzfeed s tech section . there , buchanan did close readings of twitter design changes while herrman took an interest in facebook s effect on the media . herrman was one of the first reporters to understand that the genre known as media reporting exists now largely within the larger context of companies typically thought of as tech companies , says buzzfeed editor in chief ben smith , citing herrman s piece on facebook s social readers , a partnership that drove traffic to news sites until facebook redesigned the feature . buchanan went to the new yorker for a year , then rejoined herrman at the awl in , after they were both approached by the site s co founder choire sicha . buchanan does most of the editing , while writing about architecture , technology , and drinks . herrman has stayed on the facebook beat , now covering ampnbspthe subject as an outsider . you can t write about media and the internet at buzzfeed without torturing yourself over what it means , he says . he writes with the tone of an anthropologist studying the bewildering behaviors of the content industry the sacred ritual of embedding john oliver clips that every site performs on mondays , the dozens of identical posts that spring up around the same twitter gaffe , the collective rush to ampnbspdash off opinions about whatever topic everyone else is covering . herrman s , foot view of the industry is disquieting publications start to look strangely similar , hazily defined organizations jostling for a spot in the feeds of social platforms . publications like upworthy and spammier clones grow rapidly using formats tailored for facebook s news feed , only to plummet with every opaque tweak to the platform s algorithm . i think things are probably much , much worse industry wise than people acknowledge . i think things are probably much , much worse industry wise than people acknowledge . it is , to the web , what the web was to what came before it , herrman later says of the shift to platforms . if in the process of adapting to it you also lost track of what you were intending to do , then you are just an instrument attached to someone else s machine , this little weirdly adapted thing that will be disposed of once someone gets around to fixing it . not everyone is so grim . large companies like buzzfeed and , well , the verge s parent company vox media , are forming partnerships with platforms to let them host content directly , in the belief that the relationship will be mutually beneficial . i am definitely thinking about similar things , buzzfeed ceo jonah peretti says of herrman s writing . i enjoy reading his columns because i m also trying to understand the changes happening in the media industry though i tend to be more optimistic than he is . but herrman and buchanan are wary of the distorting effects platforms bring . there s a sense that social sharing is impossible to game , herrman says , that makes it authentic . but platforms have their own dynamics . people share content that confirms something they believe or that they want people to believe about them . more arbitrarily , certain forms thrive according to the changing metrics of facebook s algorithm time spent off site , or comments . teasingly captioned videos or quizzes rule for a time , then die off as behaviors and algorithms adjust . everything is accelerating and nothing lasts for long . at the awl , buchanan and herrman have found a perch where they can stand back and watch the show . i m ready for a big storm , herrman says , putting down his beer and launching into an exaggerated vision of the future . everyone wakes up , and it s just sand . and most people die , but a few survive , and they all walk in different directions . and i m ready for this to happen every three months . that s the cool cyberpunk outcome of all this . everything remakes itself all the time , and then nothing is sustainable , and the idea that you could do any of these things we re doing now as jobs will be some ridiculous anachronism . the awl , he says , laughing , is the counterexample to entropy that proves the rule . just wait . choire sichathe awl launched in april of out of choire sicha s east village apartment . the publishing industry , weakened by the internet , was crumbling as the recession worsened . the magazine radar had just closed , putting sicha and alex balk out of work . rather than write for someone else , they decided to launch their own site , with radar s david cho as their publisher . their plan was to hire reporters and cover local news , media , and politics , but they couldn t get funding . so we were like , fuck it , and just launched like a piece of garbage , like throwing a rock in the ocean , sicha says , lounging on the couch in the awl s office , drinking seltzer . sicha is a charming speaker , both friendly and mocking , especially when it comes to himself and the company s haphazard origins . he relishes the ugliness of its early design , a minimal wordpress blog with a photo of a butterfinger in lieu of an ad . we were like , fuck it , and just launched like a piece of garbage . early on , sicha and balk would sit at a long dining table , smoking , wearing coats indoors in the winter , and writing post after post . in a stroke of luck , sicha s landlord mysteriously vanished and stopped cashing his checks less luckily , the apartment began to collapse , the ceiling falling into the bathtub . to help finance their venture , sicha says he stopped paying taxes , running up a six figure tab with the irs . it was terrible , he recalls . i ve been broke before . i don t mind it . it s something that happens to me sort of regularly in my life , but that was a bad one . sicha and balk were among the first professional bloggers , largely by happenstance . i spoke with balk on background he s never been interviewed for publication . sicha , on the other hand , spoke freely i don t give a fuck , he said , i ll say anything . sicha worked as a bartender and in homeless shelters in san francisco after high school , then as an art dealer in new york . i liked writing , and i wanted to be a writer , but i was a mess , he says . i wrote like one paper in high school , and then i didn t go to college . in his late s after moving to new york , he started blogging to stay in touch with a friend back in california . in , gawker s nick denton hired sicha to run fleshbot , the company s now abandoned porn site , then gawker itself . meanwhile , balk was in advertising and writing a culture blog on the side he landed at gawker a few years later . sicha left for ampnbspthe observer after a year , then returned briefly in . the style that he developed at gawker , conversational with bursts of enthusiasm and ironic swerves , exerted a deep influence on the voice of the early web . that style became internet parlance , says andrew womack of the morning news , where sicha freelanced while at gawker . you almost can t think of a bigger effect . i can t look at anyone type an exclamation point without thinking of choire s first stint at gawker . it wasn t snarky it was honest and had this fuck it all attitude i think we ve all had . balk and sicha left gawker as it began to expand beyond local media gossip . nick was starting to figure out that gawker should grow , and i was like , i m not the right man for this job , sicha says . i could ve hired a neetzan zimmerman , but i didn t know that was what i should be looking for , he says , referring to gawker s former viral content superstar . but i think i actually just didn t want gawker to grow . we just don t really want any stupid people reading it . the awl went up on april th with a column by emily gould , ampnbspa post about the gawker office floorplan , ampnbspand pithy news items from balk and sicha . people were expecting something that was almost gawker . , says nieman lab s justin ellis . instead it was something smaller and focused on the writing , where people can write about the stuff they re passionate or super nerdy about . insofar as the site had any kind of founding principle , it was that writers should only write about things they care about and not waste readers time . its motto was be less stupid . would it make readers smarter ? vanity fair asked sicha at the time . i realized that we just don t really want any stupid people reading it which sounds mean , but they have plenty of reading material already , sicha said . i want to disinvite them . balk did most of the writing , posting about ampnbspbears , ampnbspenglish knife crime , and ampnbspdespair . his voice , unremittingly bleak to the point of comedy , with barbs hidden in the url , alt text , and tags , helped establish the awl as a place where writers could experiment . sicha chimed in with items on new york plus whatever else caught his eye , and edited pieces from friends , many of them writers who lacked places to publish during the recession . in the fall of , the company began to find its financial footing . they d launched splitsider and were working with edith zimmerman to start the hairpin . david cho had made a deal with federated media to run ads on the site , and money started to come in . taking a cue from magazine advertorials , they d also begun running sponsored content and native ads . i think the awl was too small to get a lot of credit for it , but it was one of the first places to do it , cho says . sicha s first paycheck warranted a column by the late david carr , who joked that if you were going to launch a site , you d look at everything the awl did its hard to pronounce name , its eclectic mix of content , its literate but minuscule audience and do the exact opposite . today , ampnbspthe awl sites are run out of two rooms above a bodega in brooklyn . it feels more like an apartment than an office , with everyone seated at desks crammed into one room , and occasionally retreating to the sofa next door for meetings . when i visited in may , the mood was relaxed and collegial the band destroyer played quietly over speakers , and sicha , his shoes off and his feet propped on the desk , was going through a freelance budget . buchanan and herrman discussed tom scocca s review of the previous day s weather . actual awls served as hazardous looking paperweights among the seltzer cans and books scattered across the desks . just people work at the awl ampnbspnetwork , but it draws on a large reservoir of freelance talent . writing for the awl isn t lucrative , but writers have a lot of freedom , and the sites popularity among editors means it s a good place to get noticed . many writers have passed through and gone on to book deals or jobs at the new yorker , new york magazine , buzzfeed , and elsewhere . maria bustillos , who now writes for the new yorker and other outlets , got her start when sicha turned her emailed rant about avatar into a post . more recently , jazmine hughes went from co editing the hairpin to editing at the new york times magazine . this is going to be gross because it s so sincere , says the toast s mallory ortberg , but the awl is truly the best thing that ever happened to me . her book , texts from jane eyre , began as a hairpin series that was inspired by a comment left on an awl story by her future toast co editor nicole cliffe . the hairpin editor haley mloteksicha and balk take a laissez faire approach to running the network . he s always like , we are a confederation , you are your own state , the billfold s mike dang says of sicha . balk is something like the editorial director , meeting with editors once a week about what s coming up . sicha is a mix of cfo and floating adviser . jazmine hughes describes him as the company s cool aunt . sicha has a rare ability to float above the online scrum that burns many writers out , and he s instilled a similar ethos at the company . ortberg compares him to tom bombadil , the friendly magical being from lord of the rings who s immune to the ring s warping power . a lot of folks who work in media are like , god , i have to carry the ring . doesn t this suck ? we all have to have the same fights . tom bombadil is kind of untouched by all of it . he puts on the ring and doesn t care . he s just leaping around the woods merrily being like , i own myself . i own these woods . no one can harm me . that to me is kind of choire . he will choose what parts of the conversation he s going to engage in , and he ll choose how to talk about it , but you can t make him do it . sicha s just leaping around the woods merrily being like , i own myself . i own these woods . no one can harm me . a lot of sicha and balk s advice involves encouraging editors to do what they want and ignore traffic . hot takes are epidemic , sicha says , referring to hasty opinion pieces spun up to harness the inertia of a viral story . nobody should ever have to write x posts a day . that s when you end up writing something you regret . you become someone else s hot take . dang and the hairpin s haley mlotek say that balk never encourages them to recreate past successes , simply shrugging and saying that you never know what hits . one of the awl s most successful posts is balk s how to cook a fucking steak , ampnbspwhich poked fun at the site s sometimes precious food writing , but with righteous indignation that gets recurring traction on facebook . sicha recently changed the password to the traffic tracking app chartbeat without telling anyone , then briefly forgot it . most editors have it back now , though buchanan and herrman say they check it mostly to confirm the site isn t dying . they both say one of the biggest luxuries of working there is being able to choose what they write about . so many sites feel like they have to cover everything , buchanan says . we get to ignore most of it . by staying aloof from the content cycle , they ve succeeded in creating a series of publications with coherent identities and distinct sensibilities . those traits can be hard to maintain today , when stories are encountered alone and out of context on social platforms , and when there are huge incentives for covering viral stories that lie outside of a publication s wheelhouse . gawker s denton lamented facebook s distorting effect in a memo at the end of last year , saying that they d become slaves to the facebook algorithm , and declaring a return to blogging . at the awl , sicha and balk have tried to maintain that spirit since the beginning , building a network of sites unified by tone , with in jokes and easter eggs for longtime readers . it also means they ve chosen to stay small . buzzfeed s jonah peretti compares the site to an indie band . it s them saying , i don t want to get that big , i want to stay true to my original rootedness in the music or this particular kind of art we re making . i ve always seen media more like hip hop , where you don t sell out , you blow up . but there will always be a stage for certain indie rock sites that are about creating the in group that has a certain aesthetic and special inside knowledge . but the economics of online advertising favor scale , and the awl is small the site now gets a little over a million uniques a month , and the network usually gets million , sometimes million , sicha says . for comparison , buzzfeed . com gets million , according to quantcast , which tends to be lower than internal google analytics numbers . the awl makes a virtue out of its narrow audience when talking to advertisers , calling their readers indielectuals , a term coined by former publisher john shankman and which sicha uses with an exaggerated shudder . according to sicha , percent of the site s readers have graduate degrees . it s really a giant lesbian australian socialized collective . by restricting audience size intentionally , you actually have a coherent audience to sell , sicha says . we actually argue a lot over what the maximum audience size is for each of the publications , and it s not that big . i think the awl should never have more than million readers a month . anything beyond it and you re dipping into people who can t make sense of the content , who will be a distraction it s not for everyone else . operating a site with narrow appeal means running extremely lean . annual revenue is in the very low seven figures , sicha says , and at any given time the company has enough funds for one to four months worth of payroll in the bank . instead of hiring writers , they partner with them to launch new sites , splitting revenue between editors and the company , which handles the business and tech operations . everyone owns a part of either their site or the company , sicha says . basically nobody works for anyone here . it s really a giant lesbian australian socialized collective with capitalism in the mix in a really gross way . with funds tight , new projects like the podcast tend to happen slowly . most places , you d hire someone to make a podcast , but we all have jobs , sicha says . herrman has been watching a lot of youtube tutorials about podcast editing . either there s going to be a podcast or the freelance checks are going to get cut , sicha says . there s nobody else here . the awl , he says , is the littlest animal in the desert , inching along out of caution and scarce resources . if the content apocalypse comes , herrman is cautiously optimistic that the awl will survive it . we ll be the cockroaches who don t die but who are and will remain cockroaches , he says , laughing . the company was founded in a recession and to a large degree still runs like it s in one . over the years , it s slowly built up a loyal readership large enough to keep it afloat , which alone is a feat . where will the awl fit in the platform dominated internet they ve been writing about ? it doesn t , buchanan says . yeah , not really , herrman agrees . but then nothing fits in the new internet , nothing that isn t literally an unincorporated part of the platform fits , he says . the awl started when there was no obvious place for it . it is probably at its healthiest when there is no obvious place for it . we have functioned to some degree on platforms , but we would be very paranoid citizens who have survived some great upset and who remember . and who occasionally commit acts of sabotage , buchanan adds . the awl exists for reasons other than expansion . after stints at larger publications , buchanan and herrman have no plans to leave . i love it here ! there s nowhere else like it , herrman says when asked about longterm plans . also anybody in this industry who thinks they know what they re going to be doing in more than a couple years is mistaken . asked about the future , buchanan said he d always planned to be dead by and has nothing planned beyond that . the awl exists for reasons other than expansion , herrman says . maybe that s why i m so comfortable writing critically about companies that do seem to exist solely to grow , companies that function as pure economic instruments . the awl has a point for the people who started it . they want it to be a place where they and other people publish things that they like and don t hate . sicha is thinking more seriously about how to grow . we d like to do new sites , we d like to be able have cash on hand , he says . increasing readership by percent would be life changing for the company , and he gets excited contemplating moving over to the business side and being sort of mercenary and evil about promoting the sites . i like the idea of wholeheartedly crossing the church state line and literally being like , hi , why aren t you posting to facebook ? here , tell me about your pinterest strategy ! which is literally just something that no one would ever say in this company because , well , we just don t care . any growth would have to be organic , he says . i m not saying game content , or do the stuff that always succeeds , or try to quantify it , he adds , slightly aghast . but i do think that more than it ever has been , it s important not to be cavalier about these things in the next six years . he pauses and leans back , looking at the ceiling . six years ! oh my god , i wish i was dead saying that . he s never had a job this long . during the course of reporting this story , the verge s parent company , vox media , acquired recode and the code media conference . correction the code media conference was hosted in february , not march , as previously stated . clarification the introduction was updated to include the fact that david cho was also a co founder . photography by alex welshedited by michael zelenko , ampnbspnilay patel	 like so many of jerry seinfeld s girlfriends on seinfeld , dolores was tv beautiful , with glossy , reddish blond hair , big blue eyes , full lips , and impeccable bone structure . most of jerry s girlfriends brought with them a joke about the trials of dating and or the self centeredness of jerry s character , and dolores was no exception jerry very much wanted to sleep with her , but he hadn t asked her name when they met , and by the time they went out , he was too embarrassed to admit he didn t know it . he surreptitiously searched her purse for an id , but came up short . he asked friends to introduce themselves to her , hoping she would introduce herself back she didn t . translator sabine sebastian tried to bring seinfeld to germans , yada yada yada , it floppedby jennifer armstrong like so many of jerry seinfeld s girlfriends on seinfeld , dolores was tv beautiful , with glossy , reddish blond hair , big blue eyes , full lips , and impeccable bone structure . most of jerry s girlfriends brought with them a joke about the trials of dating and or the self centeredness of jerry s character , and dolores was no exception jerry very much wanted to sleep with her , but he hadn t asked her name when they met , and by the time they went out , he was too embarrassed to admit he didn t know it . he surreptitiously searched her purse for an id , but came up short . he asked friends to introduce themselves to her , hoping she would introduce herself back she didn t . he had only one clue to go on she d told him that as a child , she was teased for her name what do you expect when your name rhymes with a part of the female anatomy ? jerry , george , and kramer worked at the the puzzle celeste ? aretha ? bovary ? mulva ? it was not until she walked out on jerry , disgusted that he didn t know her name , that it came to him dolores ! . embed container position relative padding bottom . height overflow hidden max width . embed container iframe , . embed container object , . embed container embed position absolute top left width height the junior mint , seinfeld s th episode , featured dolores . dolores left jerry s life when that episode aired on march th , . two years later , dolores became sabine sebastian s headache . tasked with translating all half hour episodes of seinfeld into german for dubbing and broadcast overseas , sebastian ran into major roadblocks in bringing what she thought was one of the funniest shows she d ever seen to her countrymen and women . the hit american sitcom so often relied on word based humor , american customs , and jewish references . the first two of these meant sebastian had to go far beyond literal translation and the latter was an ongoing sore point between her and the editor she was working with . aretha ? bovary ? mulva ? dolores represented one of the toughest puzzles sabine had encountered dolores doesn t rhyme with any german words for a body part , and a fabricated name would detract from the joke . just because jerry s friends guessed bovary as a legitimate name option in english didn t mean she could throw any old name around in german . it was just another day in the life of a translator tackling seinfeld . but it was a particularly vexing one . more so than the average american sitcom , seinfeld has had difficulty reaching global audiences . while it s popular in latin america , it hasn t been widely accepted in germany , france , italy , and the netherlands . two decades after it went off the air , seinfeld remains relevant to american audiences thanks in part to omnipresent syndicated reruns but in much of europe it is considered a cult hit , and commonly relegated to deep late night time slots . its humor , it seems , is just too complicated , too cultural and word based , to make for easy translation . with the show now finally coming to streaming services for the first time this month , seinfeld had another shot at gaining a worldwide audience . but the fact that today it began streaming on hulu , not netflix , is telling netflix is available across dozens of countries around the world hulu is only available in the united states and japan . are those woman s breasts real ? how long can one go without masturbating ? jokes are the hardest things to translate into another language , another culture , another world . a good script for dubbing an american sitcom for foreign consumption does more than literally translate . it manages to convey the same meaning , the same feeling , the same story the same direct hit to the lower frontal lobes of the brain that produces a laugh , even though those frontal lobes are steeped in a completely different cultural brew . and because of seinfeld s unique approach to comedy , it poses special translation problems . in one radboud university study of dutch viewers reactions to seinfeld , viewers commonly reported being baffled by the show s laugh track the audience regularly missed the joke . some of those who did laugh told researcher elke van cassel that they were laughing only because the characters reminded them of americans they knew . at its core , ampnbspseinfeld was , as the series famously dubbed itself , a show about nothing four self centered new yorkers making a dramatic showing of dealing with minor daily irritations and social faux pas . can you hire a hitman to take out an annoying neighbor dog ? are those woman s breasts real ? how long can one go without masturbating ? and do you care to make a bet on that answer ? when seinfeld debuted on nbc in , it felt like an acquired taste , a cult hit at best . it didn t offer the simple , linear humor of the cosby show , roseanne , or cheers the most popular shows at the time . instead , it relied on sophisticated linguistic humor implication instead of explicitness abstaining from masturbation is , for instance , being master of your domain and deconstruction of the social norms of a very particular group of new yorkers unlikeable new yorkers . despite nbc s low expectations , seinfeld grew into an unlikely sensation throughout its run in the s , partly by expressing the consumerist , narcissistic elements of the era . it lasted for nine years until seinfeld voluntarily ended it despite nbc offering him million per episode to return for another season . and it made icons of its four central characters uptight jerry jerry seinfeld , bumbling george jason alexander , manic kramer michael richards , and smart ass elaine julia louis dreyfus . in its final season , seinfeld hit a peak , averaging million viewers per episode . its finale was one of the most anticipated , most watched , most passionately debated hours of american television of the last years . seinfeld deconstructed a very particular group of new yorkers unlikeable new yorkerseven its closest cohort at the time , friends which seinfeld co creators larry david and jerry seinfeld have often insisted stole its concept from them couldn t touch what made seinfeld unique . yes , both shows centered on groups of young ish , single friends in new york city . but where friends employed traditional a and b plot lines , seinfeld zigged and zagged until bringing the most seemingly unrelated story elements together in a balletic denouement . where friends exploited its touchy feely relationships , seinfeld avoided them at all costs . this made seinfeld the rare tv show that was both innovative and wildly popular . it seemed poised for world domination as it entered the international syndication market . after all , as america goes , so goes the world . right ? sabine sebastian hoped so . sebastian a jovial woman who resembles the actress emma thompson works as a director , scriptwriter , and sometimes voice actor in germany s lip synch dubbing business , bringing american movies and tv shows to her countrymen and women . she knows the dangers of direct translations , particularly when it comes to sitcoms . for every language based joke that works easily elaine s quest for schw mmchen w rdig , or spongeworthy , suitors was a one to one translation many others don t . canadian translation company lingostar , for instance , cites a joke that had to be simplified in a friends episode in which monica saw a woman s huge engagement ring and cracked , oh my god , you can t even see where the titanic hit it . this was translated as , oh my , but it s an iceberg . the german voice actors soon became a united cast , as bonded as their american counterpartssebastian had done a lot of work for brandtfilm , a berlin company responsible for the dubbed german versions of american sitcoms such as m a s h and the odd couple . in , they asked her to direct their newest project , seinfeld . she loved the show . she d appreciated its sarcastic wit since watching the very first episode , and she enjoyed the next level humor it delivered as it grew ever more self referential , nowhere better exemplified than in the episodes about the fictional sitcom jerry . she felt lucky to get the gig , and she knew that brandtfilm was lucky to have her on it these things always went better when the translator was a real fan . she wanted to help her fellow germans appreciate seinfeld as much as she did . with her cast and crew , she plowed through the five seasons of the show that had already aired in the united states she would record them all in succession , then tackle the show s remaining seasons as they concluded in america . but things went off track soon , she later told me . she didn t care much for the scripts she was getting from the dialogue book writers . they were translating too literally . subtle word choices could make a difference , and she changed a lot of the scripts as she recorded . by the show s eighth season , she finally took over all writing duties . her main voice actors oliver feld as jerry , traudel haas as elaine , detlef bierstedt as george , and k . dieter klebsch as kramer pitched in as well , refining lines as needed whenever they thought the translations weren t funny enough . they soon became a united cast , as bonded as their american counterparts . years later , the team even reunited to reprise their roles in the german version of the curb your enthusiasm episodes in which the cast of seinfeld gets back together . as the actors got better at working together , they had more suggestions for improving the scripts . often , sebastian took entire scenes home to rework them overnight . when it came to dolores , of course , sebastian had to work extra hard . finally , she hit upon a distinctly german solution she substituted dolores rhymes with clitoris with uschi rhymes with muschi , slang for vagina . uschi is a relatively common german name , short for ursula . perfect . not all television shows are dubbed for export ampnbspsome are subtitled , and some end up with both versions available . then , it s up to the channels that run them to choose a format for their audiences . there s a clunkiness to dubbing that grates on american sensibilitiesaccording to israel based translation company trans that , ampnbspamong european countries , france , germany , italy , and spain tend to opt for the more expensive option of dubbing , while smaller countries like belgium , switzerland , and the netherlands prefer subtitles . dubbing countries often have a long history with the practice that goes back to the beginnings of the film industry . in the s , when many american films were being exported to europe , the strong preference for dubbing grew out of nationalist concerns preserving language meant preserving cultural identity . in these countries , entire industries developed around dubbing . today , certain voice actors will specialize in playing specific american stars , to the point where audiences expect to hear their voice each time they go to see , say , a tom cruise movie . apart from in certain genres like anime , american audiences rarely encounter dubbing . for one , americans tend to consume american media for another , there s a clunkiness to dubbing that grates on american sensibilities . both dubbing and translation have obvious advantages and disadvantages in dubbing , the translation can be altered to fit the culture of the target audience in subtitling , the original sound of the actors voices comes through , conveying meaning beyond language . some viewers like reading the words others hate it . cheers , renamed prost helmut , appealed to german audiences in a way seinfeld never did . lip synch dubbing , despite its ultimate benefits , can get very complicated . it s not just that the lines may not translate directly they also have to take just as long to say in both languages and approximate , to the best of their abilities , the lip movements of the original actors . that can pose an added challenge when translating from laconic languages like english into verbose languages like german . and seinfeld was already a very wordy show , making accurate translation that much more critical . the script writing process for foreign translation is so elaborate that it s a wonder even one episode gets done . sebastian had to produce . with the american script in hand and a direct translation into german , sebastian worked out lines that would transmit the humor and match the actors lip movements . she then spoke them into her laptop while watching the episode on loop . she could watch a sentence a hundred times over if necessary . jump back , jump back , jump back again on the dvd . all day long , she watched lines , then yelled her best translations into the computer s microphone . because the spoken version was the priority , writing it down wouldn t do . sentence by sentence , phrase by phrase , she made seinfeld understandable to german speakers . when she finished , she d send her spoken version to a transcriber . translating a single sitcom episode can take longer than an entire action moviebecause of how dialogue heavy sitcoms tend to be , translating a single episode can take longer than an entire action movie that was doubly true for seinfeld . a lot of close ups , which allowed viewers to see the actors mouth movements , complicated matters even further . the entire process for a minute seinfeld episode took three work days , or about hours total . but while lip syncing could be solved given enough time and patience , aligning cultural references often proved too difficult . seinfeld s jewish references posed a unique challenge as sebastian explained , the germans have a certain you know what with the jewish . her editor was worried about some of seinfeld s jewish jokes . we better not say it like that , she remembered her editor saying , because the germans may be offended . she added later , recalling the incident to me , they should be offended , in my understanding . they did it ! sebastian appreciated seinfeld s direct approach to jewish history . she wanted to use jokes in direct translation , but the editor wouldn t let her . she lost several battles . it was a fine line der suppen nazi ? sure . subtle reference to an uncle who survived a concentration camp ? not so fast . an entire episode based on george being mistaken for a neo nazi was problematic . so were references to the tv miniseries holocaust and the film schindler s list . take elaine s voiceover narration in the subway episode when her train gets stuck we are in a cage . oh , i can t breathe , i feel faint . take it easy , it ll start moving soon . think about the people in the concentration camps , what they went through . der suppen nazioccasionally , sebastian triumphed in her conflicts with editors the practicalities of the show demanded an authentic translation . in an early episode , one of jerry s comedy routines addresses the fact that nazis in world war ii movies had like two separate heils . they had like the regular heil , and then when they were around the offices , they had like this casual heil . there was no way to avoid a faithful translation in that case seinfeld made the hitler salute as he spoke . when sebastian s episodes started airing in , they amassed a small , cult level following in germany . german tv programmers seemed confused about where it might play best it moved from pm to am to pm , then was canceled . it returned two years later at am , then pm , then pm . as dutch tv researcher van cassel noted in a study that examined seinfeld s lack of traction with dutch and german audiences , programmers indecision seems to be more of a consequence than a cause of the lack of interest displayed by the viewers . both dutch and german networks did try broadcasting seinfeld at prime time at least once , but apparently the ratings did not increase . sarcasm and sophisticated , plot based humor did not tend to appeal to large german audiencessebastian didn t believe her fellow germans rejected seinfeld because the main character was jewish . the dubbing issues contributed to watering down some of seinfeld s humor , and she thought the show was too intelligent for german audiences . sitcoms weren t their thing , and they tended to enjoy more simple , straightforward shows like police drama alarm f r cobra , crime drama der letzte zeuge , and medicopter . alf was famously more popular in germany than in america the david hasselhoff of sitcoms . who s the boss ? was also a sensation . sarcasm and sophisticated , plot based humor did not tend to appeal to large audiences there . sebastian also oversaw dubbing for the caustic british comedy absolutely fabulous it too flopped in germany . thus in germany , ampnbspseinfeld will likely continue rerunning in the early morning hours am or am on cable channel tnt serie , depending on the day . those who have continued to watch have been passionate enough to keep it around , bonding on internet message boards as they dissect sebastian s translation versus the original english , season after syndicated season . i think the translation was the reason seinfeld never was a big hit in germany , wrote german commenter der olli on tv writer ken levine s website . another german commenter , marco , defended the dubbing , citing a particularly clever substitution there was an episode where a teacher who sic in the original version pronounced george s last name like cantstandya . the german version was slightly different where the teacher called george kotztanzo . the result is equally funny since both versions nail the point the teacher disliking george and thus pronouncing his name like some sort of insult . on youtube pages with clips of the show , the debates can be a little more direct . in german , i do not like seinfeld , wrote one commenter . in english , it s my favorite show . the difficulties sebastian faced in bringing seinfeld to german speakers showed just how hard this particular show was to translate for non american audiences . but even in england , seinfeld wasn t a huge hit . it seems that among the only people watching it in late night reruns following it through constant scheduling shuffles and frequent pre emptions for snooker tournaments were british comedians . writer actor david baddiel told the guardian in that he remembered talking about the show with fellow comics at clubs in the s . sam bain , who co wrote british hits peep show and fresh meat , cited seinfeld s layered plotting and its signature move bringing all the plot strands together with an absurdist twist as the template for his shows . graham linehan , writer director of the it crowd and father ted , said in the same piece that seinfeld was the funniest show on tv . every time i write , i m trying to write seinfeld . as television globalizes and cable options proliferate , seinfeld s cult status has allowed it to make a few new inroads into international markets . despite early struggles in the netherlands , seinfeld has found a passionate following on a dutch version of the cable channel comedy central . and in , french television revisited seinfeld for the first time in more than a decade l enorme tv , a new cable channel dedicated to comedy , started rerunning it on wednesday nights dubbed in french and on saturday nights in english with subtitles . the network found that any channel that wants to broadcast seinfeld must have an audience used to american life and standup culture , julie cantin , a spokeswoman for l enorme , told me . but according to her , anecdotal evidence on social media proves that there are seinfeld fans in france . perhaps seinfeld isn t as full of nothing as americans like to thinkthat said , chances are that france will never have the same kind of lasting relationship with seinfeld that the united states does . perhaps seinfeld isn t as full of nothing as americans like to think or more precisely , it s full of a very american kind of nothing . and that goes a long way toward explaining why us focused hulu was willing to shell out a reported million for streaming rights , while internationally distributed netflix dropped out of the bidding early . netflix did not respond to requests for comment . despite the powers of the internet , and the growing number of english speakers around the world , our ability to share pop culture across international waters especially the nuances of comedy remains limited by our ability to understand each other . and even when we speak the same language , our jokes may still not translate , or resonate . perhaps it s to seinfeld s credit that it has a hard time crossing certain borders . the more sophisticated and innovative the humor , the harder it is to translate . in many of the countries where seinfeld remains a cult hit , the more traditional friends and the cosby show have long been favorites . ross and rachel are infuriatingly star crossed in any language . but mulva can only be mulva in english . jennifer keishin armstrong is the author of seinfeldia the secret world of the show about nothing that changed everything , which will be published next year by simon amp schuster . she also wrote mary and lou and rhoda and ted and all the brilliant minds who made the mary tyler moore show a classic . design by dylan lathropedited by michael zelenko , emily yoshida 	 the lights were low , and the house was slowly filling . ben tucker set down an armful of film reels in the projection booth and checked the dryden theatre s vintage machinery for dust and positioning one last time . as assistant collection manager and archival projectionist at the george eastman house in rochester , new york , tucker helps maintain one of the largest , oldest , and most historically valuable film collections on earth . on this evening in early may , he was screening the classic of classics casablanca . it was a typical evening at the eastman house s seat , single screen movie palace except this version of casablanca had the potential to kill us all . image courtesy of the george eastman housefilm from the ashesa beautiful but deadly art is reborn at the nitrate picture showby john lingan the lights were low , and the house was slowly filling . ben tucker set down an armful of film reels in the projection booth and checked the dryden theatre s vintage machinery for dust and positioning one last time . as assistant collection manager and archival projectionist at the george eastman house in rochester , new york , tucker helps maintain one of the largest , oldest , and most historically valuable film collections on earth . on this evening in early may , he was screening the classic of classics casablanca . it was a typical evening at the eastman house s seat , single screen movie palace except this version of casablanca had the potential to kill us all . this version of casablanca had the potential to kill us allthe print dated from , meaning it was made from a base of nitrocellulose , a cousin to gunpowder . nitrate , as it s commonly known , was the earliest mass produced celluloid format , and the dominant motion picture medium from to . renowned for the beauty and clarity of its images , nitrate is so flammable and physically unstable that it s rarely , if ever , still screened . the heat from a cigarette is enough to make nitrate catch , and once it does , the flame is so powerful that it ll burn underwater . the explosive theater fires in cinema paradiso and inglourious basterds were both the product of nitrate combustion , and the first half century of mass moviegoing was dotted with dozens of similarly deadly real world conflagrations the first of which occurred at the world s fair in paris and killed people . ampnbspthe un still classifies nitrate as dangerous goods . tucker was joined by two specially trained colleagues a lot of manpower for one screening , but nitrate necessitates it two projectionists trade off from one reel and the next on their respective machines , while a third gathers and winds each minute length of brittle film and returns it to its nickel plated aluminum canister . the dryden s projection booth is tiny , low lit , and gizmo packed , like a submarine control room . in addition to the floor to ceiling film gadgets , it s equipped with sprinklers , reinforced steel doors , and a network of ceiling cables that control two guillotine like steel gates perched above the windows , ready to slam shut in the event of a fire . the projectors themselves , which date from , house each reel in a steel box of its own , and the projectionists have to keep one hand on the dowser , which cuts off the connection between the light source and the film in case of overheating . in tarantino s inglourious basterds , nitrate film becomes a weapon for revengedespite the effort required , casablanca was the opening whistle of an unprecedented event a three day festival consisting of only nitrate screenings . announced in early winter , the nitrate picture show drew hundreds of scholars , historians , critics , and classic movie devotees to rochester an impressive crowd considering organizers didn t even divulge the program until the festival began . megan labrum , general manager of australia s national film and sound archive , told me before the casablanca screening that there is a warmth , a brightness , a depth to nitrate . but it s basically impossible to see nitrate films in her home country , she said . we have a fabulous cinema , but we can t afford the constraints around putting it on the licenses , the safety measures , the equipment . the eastman house is one of only three venues in america that are licensed and equipped to screen nitrate , and the only one outside of california . labrum may have traveled the farthest to attend the festival , but many of us had clocked hundreds , even thousands of miles all to watch a technology rise from the dead . a still from michael powell and emeric pressburger s black narcissus , shot on nitrate stock . image courtesy of the george eastman housejared case graduated from the eastman house s selznick school of film preservation in and has worked for the organization ever since , currently as head of collection information and access and as the executive director of the nitrate picture show . he s the rare person who s seen so many nitrate prints that he can t even remember his first one . but the first to make a real impression was laurel and hardy s babes in toyland , from . the clarity of those breaks between light and dark provided by the nitrate base and the silver in the photographic emulsion created images that jumped off the screen , he described in a post at my nitrate memories , a blog created to advertise the picture show and its aims . he designed the festival to provide other people with that same aesthetic epiphany . nitrate doesn t have to die . by showing a nitrate film , we can show that the experience people had years ago can still be had today , case explained by phone shortly after the festival was announced . he said the idea was to proclaim , nitrate doesn t have to die , be hidden away , or used only for research . it s a viable , living artifact itself . in , that s a radical notion . beside its combustive properties , nitrate is also supremely fragile the film naturally shrinks and deteriorates over time , even when treated with exacting care . for decades , the motto among film historians and preservationists has been nitrate won t wait , meaning that with each passing year , more and more films are lost to history . many have been digitized , or reprinted on polyester stock the popular replacement for nitrate from the s until only a few years ago but a surprising number of movies have not . the complicated inner workings of a nitrate projector . image courtesy of the george eastman houseand even if digitized nitrate films still exist , connoisseurs will tell you that they re poor substitute , as if the last remnants of van gogh were gift shop posters . the format is prized for its famed three dimensional quality and rich colors . its proselytizers also stress the value of seeing a film the way it was meant to be seen for people who care about cinema , seeing a nitrate projection is like watching a live orchestra performance instead of a cassette recording , attending a play instead of reading it , or standing at the rim of the grand canyon instead of flipping through photos . but these days , watching a nitrate film is rarer and harder to achieve than any of those experiences , and thus has an even greater aura of romance and authenticity . the nitrate picture show was conceived to raise awareness of the medium , but also to take stock of what remains . no one really knows how much nitrate exists in the world , or what kind of shape it s in . the eastman house currently houses , reels of the stuff , a total of , titles . but many of those are incomplete , or have shrunk to less than percent of their original size , making projection impossible . for the festival , case and his colleagues scoured the collection for the best preserved feature length films , and they approached some of the biggest archives in the world for contributions as well . the final program included nitrate screenings , drawn from the british film institute , the academy film archive , the library of congress , and the nasjonalbiblioteket in oslo , among others . the casablanca print , ben tucker s favorite of the bunch , was submitted by moma , where it was in fact the last nitrate film the museum screened , back in . that same year , the bfi hosted a nitrate program of their own , entitled the last nitrate picture show , a nod to the fact that the medium likely wouldn t survive long . at the time there were fewer than digital projectors in the entire us and europe combined . dvds were still brand new , youtube didn t exist , and limitless streaming video was barely a dream . the intervening decade and a half has seen an explosion in the sheer number of widely available movies , which in turn has made serious cinephiles even more keenly aware of what remains out of reach , and what aesthetic sacrifices are made in the transition to digital . that skepticism isn t limited to film fans the last few years have seen the resurgence of vinyl records and a ampnbspseeming plateau ampnbspof e readership . that might be enough to compel the impossible . the time might be right for a relative ampnbspnitrate ampnbsprevival , or at least as right as it s ever been for the last years . as the house music faded at the dryden , paolo cherchi usai , the eastman house s senior curator of motion pictures , stood up behind a lectern in front of the theater s billowing yellow curtain . he welcomed the near capacity audience to the nitrate picture show and , in a move i ve never seen at any festival or revival screening , announced the names of the projectionists , occasioning a standing ovation directed at the booth . ben tucker waved modestly through the glass . once the crowd was seated , usai presumed with a wild grin that there was at least one individual at the screening who had never seen casablanca . ampnbspa couple stray hands shot up among the dense crowd , met with cheers . well , this is like getting your first kiss in front of the taj mahal , usai said . earlier that day , a couple eastman house staff drove an excited handful of festivalgoers to an unassuming white bunker about miles outside rochester . the louis b . mayer conservation center is where all the house s nitrate prints are stored , though driving by , you wouldn t expect to find anything of note inside . that s by design the eastman house doesn t advertise its address or publish pictures of the center s exterior , and the facility isn t open to tourists . but this is where the real grunt work of film preservation gets done . the midmorning sun was blinding , and huge painterly clouds hung motionless in the sky . it was a clear , brightly colorful and beautiful day the platonic ideal of spring nitrate weather , as more than a few festival attendees pointed out to me . i don t have kids . i don t have pets . i have film . the lobby of the mayer center , meanwhile , couldn t have been more humdrum gray venetian blinds , two walls worth of stuffed file cabinets , a half empty water cooler , printers , and a microwave , all under fluorescent lights . standing in the middle of it , beaming for the chance to show some fellow aficionados around her playhouse , was gray haired , unflaggingly friendly collection manager deborah stoiber . this is my eden , she bragged . i don t have kids . i don t have pets . i have film . the building was originally a welding factory , but since the eastman house purchased it in , it s been transformed into a pristine temple of preservation . stoiber led us out of the office foyer , over a tacky mat , and into the workroom . it was empty but for three light tables with reel winding mechanisms . the archives of the the louis b . mayer conservation center this is the magenta negative of the final reel of gone with the wind , she said , picking up a strip of film off a table , the part with frankly my dear . a few audible gasps came from the group . this print is nitrate , and was actually on set during filming . right near clark gable and vivien leigh . every single copy of the movie ever made has been taken from this film . go ahead and look . one by one , the crowd approached the table and held the filmstrip up to the lightbox . one the edge , between the perforations , the customary stamp identified it n i t r a t e . other than that one detail , it looked exactly like any other film , and didn t even seem particularly aged . despite its renowned fragility and explosiveness , nitrate film is surprisingly sturdy and durable if treated well , and this gone with the wind had lived the most privileged nitrate life possible air sealed , artfully projected , kept cold and moisture free . in may , a uk photography studio discovered century old nitrate footage in their archives , just as an argentinian studio found long unseen footage from metropolis in . with some minor refurbishing , these films played perfectly well . try to imagine someone years from now stumbling upon a box of floppy disks or a maltreated flash drive how easily will she access those secrets ? will the technology to access them even exist ? the mayer center is as thoughtful and rigorous as nitrate preservation gets , and assuming its storage and environmental standards are continually upheld , deborah stoiber says that each of its , reels will last years . the eastman house takes this mission deadly seriously in , when their nitrate archive was kept in a literal barn , a spontaneous combustion resulted in the loss of more than titles . they learned their lesson . the six vaults are now held at a continuous degrees fahrenheit with percent relative humidity . a full mechanical air exchange is programmed to occur every minutes . in accordance with the newest standards from the national fire protection association , the building was recently updated with grated film carts , nine fire extinguishers , new emergency exits , a new sprinkler system , and outward opening steel reinforced doors . before new film goes in the tightly packed vaults , it spends hours in a shared staging room , kept at degrees . but not too many new films go in each vault can hold only , reels , and most are at or near capacity . nitrate film is strikingly physical and tactile heavy , thick , and dense . the mayer center s collection includes everything from silent rarities to undersung masterpieces like the peter pan , featuring early work from legendary cinematographer james wong howe . martin scorsese s personal print of his mentor michael powell s masterpiece the red shoes is here . deborah gestured to one meat locker vault door and declared , that s where we keep all the garbos . she asked for requests , and one of my fellow devotees asked to see meet me in st . louis . deborah pulled down reel and opened it for us to see . white fabric gloves on , my heart swelled as i held one of my most beloved movies in my hands . so who wants to go watch it burn ? in person , nitrate film is strikingly physical and tactile heavy , thick , and dense , each reel was like a circular black brick . thousands of tiny plastic photographs wound end to end , each one expertly tinted and color adjusted that s what gives old film that famous luster and otherworldly hues . it didn t look fragile , it looked powerful and important . deborah reached in the big trash can and grabbed a couple discarded feet of nitrate film . holding it up , she asked us all , so who wants to go watch it burn ? back outside , in the stunning natural light , deborah walked us over to the far end of the small parking lot by the edge of a field . she dropped the film in an upturned canister lid , then bent over and began flicking at a matchbook . when she tossed in the light , the nitrate ignited and hissed back at us . the flame shot up , a foot pillar , and then spread laterally , unstoppably , along the length of the coiled filmstrip . i felt its glowing heat from almost feet away . within a few seconds , the film burned out and left behind only a shaft of singed emulsion , like a scrap of femur after pompeii . deborah laughed , delighted , as we dipped to our knees on the asphalt to take cell phone pictures of the ruin . if you have a fire here , she said , it s going to take out the whole neighborhood . back in the theater , the lush yellow curtain raised and ben tucker s co workers trained their beam on the screen . the scratches and pops crackled like a campfire , then a blaring fanfare announced the warner brothers logo and a map of africa . i stared intently , eager to see something life changing . but it only looked like an old movie . maybe a little sharper than usual , but also blemished and scuffed . then , right after peter lorre s corrupt operator is gunned down and humphrey bogart goes upstairs to his office safe , there s a shot of claude raines scheming vichy officer , standing fully lit , talking to bogart s shadow . when that shadow darkened the screen , i sat up . here it was the famous depth of nitrate s blacks . it looked and felt like real negative space , like an infinite void . from that point forward , i began to notice all sorts of little details the clarity of individual fibers in bogie s low lit hair or the texture of ingrid bergman s dress . the rest of the weekend provided a parade of similarly breathtaking imagery . the picture show organizers had included a huge breadth of filmmaking styles , all of which yielded moments of incredible beauty . in cecile b . demille s biblical epic samson and delilah , it was an opening sequence full of red and purple smoke , which billowed so warmly that i could nearly smell it . nothing sacred , an underappreciated carol lombard screwball comedy from , contained outdoor and aerial footage of depression era manhattan more immersive and gritty than any comparably aged movie i ve ever seen . leave her to heaven and black narcissus , two of the most blaringly colored and psychosexually intense movies of the s , both felt positively enveloping . but the highlight was william dieterle s underseen black and white fantasy romance , portrait of jennie , which in its climactic seaside storm scene takes on a subtle green tint before moving to full color for its last shot . the effect was overwhelming the promise of nitrate stock fulfilled all in one emotionally devastating minute sequence . the opening scene of cecile b . demille s biblical epic samson and delilahi came away a proselytizer . on nitrate , characters somehow move across the screen at a more lifelike pace than on regular film . it feels like you re sharing an atmosphere with them , within reach of their conversations . this festival was the most wonderful moviegoing experience of my life . it was the closest i ve ever felt to time travel . there will never be a final film formatthe eastman house sold nearly festival passes to people from countries , and looks poised to hold it again next year . but this excitement belies a wider unease . film has been more scrambled by the digital age than any other medium . once standard mm celluloid is now a luxury item used mainly by high profile directors who insist on it . ampnbspdigital projection and storage is now standard , but just like its film forebears , it poses its own preservation challenges file formats change so quickly and hardware is so unreliable that , in the words of matthew dessem , writing for the dissolve , unless the unique challenges of digital preservation are met , we run the risk of a future in which a ampnbspfilm from ampnbspprinted on card stock has a better chance of surviving than a digital film from . cultural artifacts , like natural ones , go extinct as a matter of course . the question is simply how to carry history into each new era . there will never be a final film format the movies will keep getting upgraded and compressed into tinier units of digital memory . but as they do , the world s slowly improving stock of nitrate film will beckon romantic , profound , extraordinarily novel . before the festival , jared case said he hoped the nitrate picture show would attract a broad group of bloggers , scholars , and film tweeters who would spread the word of nitrate s viability as a living medium . for a certain segment of the population , he told me , it s a real experience . nitrate film will never be widespread again , and certainly nothing will ever again be printed on it . but to go from near invisibility to one specialty destination weekend a year would constitute a huge increase in the sheer number of people who have actually witnessed this beautiful sight . it would offer the chance , rare for film fans , to commune with original artifacts from the golden age of the medium . and it would refute , even just a little , the stubborn idea that digitalization is forever . for a supposedly dying , deadly format , we have a lot to learn from it . photography by matt wittmeyer edited by emily yoshida , ampnbspmichael zelenko	 jay z called me . it was just after pm on a tuesday afternoon in mid may right after i d attended his b sides concert in new york , and about a week into researching his tidal music service . a few minutes before jay called , i got a call from someone at roc nation telling me he wanted to have a chat . and i tried to reschedule . i told jay z s people i couldn t talk right now . and then hung up . what jay z didn t know is that i was running late to a haircut . i had just come off a flight , and my hair was looking rough . it was time to make a life decision talk to jay z rap legend , musical icon , one half of the closest thing we have to an american royal family ampnbsp and look busted , or get a fresh cut and risk passing up a conversation with shawn carter himself . but this was no ordinary concert . it was a private performance reserved for a small , but growing community tidal subscribers . tidal s point breakjay z s music service has new apps , concert tickets , and a lot to proveby micah singleton jay z called me . it was just after pm on a tuesday afternoon in mid may right after i d attended his b sides concert in new york , and about a week into researching his tidal music service . a few minutes before jay called , i got a call from someone at roc nation telling me he wanted to have a chat . and i tried to reschedule . i told jay z s people i couldn t talk right now . and then hung up . what jay z didn t know is that i was running late for a haircut . i had just come off a flight , and my hair was looking rough . it was time to make a life decision talk to jay z rap legend , musical icon , one half of the closest thing we have to an american royal family ampnbsp and look busted , or get a fresh cut and risk passing up a conversation with shawn carter himself . you don t know how fast you can find a contact in your phone until it really matters . jay z sounds just like you would expect jay z to soundi called roc nation back , asked them to ignore my initial display of insanity , and eventually found myself discussing tidal with jay z . jay z sounds just like you would expect jay z to sound relaxed , confident , and contemplative his words don t feel calculated , but they re also not off the cuff . then there s his laugh ampnbspthat infamous , full throated laugh . when we touch on a topic he s passionate about , like tidal , he comes to life , expounding on the subject . jay wouldn t go on the record when we spoke , insisting that my story was about tidal , not about him . and in a sense he s right . this story is about tidal its rocky launch and its perhaps quixotic attempt at charting a new path in an industry undergoing massive change . but it s also about jay z , one of music s most entrepreneurial spirits , trying to resolve the inherent tension between technology and music . tidal s next attempt begins again today lil wayne has signed onto the service and is releasing an exclusive new single called glory . tomorrow , new desktop apps for mac and windows will arrive , along with a ticketing feature backed by ticketmaster that gives subscribers early and exclusive access to concert and music festival tickets . and there s new pricing for college students starting next week . for standard and . for the lossless hi fi service . there s no guarantee that anyone can run with apple or youtube , but after talking to a host of tidal executives and employees , it s clear tidal plans to be as aggressive as possible as the next generation of music unfolds . vania schlogel at the tidal launch event . photo by jamie mccarthy getty images for roc nationvania schlogel has been on a nonstop press tour for weeks . the senior executive of tidal is eager to reshape the narrative around the company after its tumultuous launch . she admits tidal s rollout did not go as planned , and in interview after interview , she sells the streaming service as an alternative to established companies like spotify and itunes . jay z said tidal would change the course of history . if jay z pulled off a coup by getting artists to sit down and agree to work together , his second biggest accomplishment around tidal was getting schlogel to be the company s public face . a former principal with the private equity firm kkr and an investment banker with goldman sachs , schlogel was a member the exploratory group jay z assembled last summer and has been leading the charge ever since . if tidal has gained any ground in the last few weeks , it s largely due to schlogel schlepping across tv , print , and digital publications reiterating what tidal should have said during its launch . since jay z purchased tidal back in march , the dominant narrative has been one of hubris . the company launched with a widely panned video featuring jay z saying tidal would change the course of history , while putting down tech companies . it s about putting humanity back into a being an artist , madonna followed up . not technology . art . i talked to a lot of people outside of the industry , and everyone was like , what took so long ? says jay z , punctuating the question with his hands . like this thing was the thing everyone wanted , and everyone feared . if these artists can sit in a room together , the game changes forever . six weeks later , the game has not been changed forever . and tidal s messy first impression made worse by an even more bombastic press conference continues to haunt the company . forbes called tidal a money grab by a collection of already rich artists the new republic argued that it was a sort of wealthy worker cooperative , doomed to fail in part because , unlike other streaming services , it doesn t offer a free music tier . flavorwire pointed out that tidal s exclusives like the music video for feeling myself featuring nicki minaj and beyonc were quickly hitting youtube and making subscriptions unnecessary . just last week , bloomberg called the service a complete disaster , and speculated that sony music could deal the service the ultimate blow by pulling beyonc s catalog . sony has since denied the rumor . six weeks later , the game has not yet been changed forever for me personally i had this moment where i was a little down , says schlogel . it wasn t about people saying negative things , it was around the misperception that was frustrating . meanwhile , a new threat is fast approaching apple appears to be ready to launch a new streaming service of its own next week . from a distance , apple and tidal appear to be making similar moves apple acquired beats co founded by fellow rapper dr . dre last year , and multiple sources indicate beats other co founder jimmy iovine is lining up exclusive artist deals and eschewing free all you can eat services in favor of paid subscriptions . the difference is that apple already reinvented the music industry once and is the world s most valuable company , with over billion in the bank and the runaway success of the iphone to fall back on . tidal is , well , tidal . and even if tidal can hold serve against apple , surveys say teenagers mostly listen to music for free on youtube . this is definitely not going to be easy . tidal s official headquarters and person tech team are in oslo , norway , but the us operation is based out of the times square offices where jay z s massively successful label management sports agency conglomerate roc nation makes its home . the tranquil , glass encased setting boasts some of the best views in the city . priceless basquiat paintings line the walls . employees are upbeat , either impervious or oblivious to the public backlash against their employertidal s share of the office is rapidly growing , expanding into the rest of the lofty space . stepping out of the elevator , you wouldn t know you ve walked into a company most of the tech press has written off as doomed . employees are upbeat , either impervious or oblivious to the public backlash against their employer . over several weeks , i saw a steady stream of new tidal employees every time i stopped by to visit changing the game apparently requires quite a few people . tidal as it currently exists began last summer , when jay z and his team sat down to assess the state of the music industry . naturally we saw that it s trending toward streaming , away from ownership , says schlogel . that s where we need to go , too , and that s what we need to shape the future of . but streaming had issues spotify , the dominant streaming service , was under constant fire for paying artists slim returns on licensing rights , with blame constantly shifting to and from the labels . jay z , whose success in business is on par with his success in music , recognized an opportunity to establish a different sort of streaming service that paid artists fairly . fairly , of course , means more . at first the group considered building an entirely new streaming service , says schlogel , but time constraints came up . if we did this pure diy , our time to be able to actually step in and reach the subscriber was at least months or something like that . so we felt like stepping into a company that was already running was the next step . so they went shopping . sveinung rindal , tidal s head of editorial at the company s oslo officein november , the team found tidal , a streaming service launched by the norwegian company aspiro . tidal was essentially a rebranded version of wimp , a streaming service that s been available in europe since . for a month , tidal offered cd quality streaming , far surpassing the average quality of mp downloads and spotify streaming . it had been well received by the niche audiophile market , but for most mainstream consumers , it was easy to write off as just another streaming service chasing spotify s throne . there was a nice bonus of , music videos , but unless you were obsessed with premium audio quality , there was little reason to sign up for it . it was an unassuming product , but for jay z s group , it was the perfect opportunityit was an unassuming product , but for jay z s group , it was the perfect opportunity . wimp had been successfully operating in europe for years , had the infrastructure to handle growth , and didn t need a redesign . we were stepping into a relatively feature complete , mature product , says schlogel . they had a great team there , really good tech guys almost immediately we knew . but good tech for tech s sake isn t really what tidal cares about part of the reason the company has struggled talking to the product obsessed tech press . like many in the media industry , jay z is frustrated by the enormous profits tech companies make against media consumption . i feel like youtube is the biggest culprit , he rapped during his b sides performance . you bought nine iphones and steve jobs is rich , spotify s billion , they ain t say shit . tidal , by contrast , is supposed to be a streaming service for artists , by artists . in the early s , music companies wanted a cut of every ipod sold now the artists want a piece of every song streamed . the battle lines might be new , but the conflicts are familiar , and the players are learning to find their leverage . we knew that just one artist alone can t change an entire industry , or create a sustainable music economy , says schlogel . we knew before we went for tidal that it was going to have to be a group of people . using jay z s connections , tidal pulled in some of today s top earning artists , including beyonc , kanye west , madonna , jack white , jason aldean , nicki minaj , daft punk , alicia keys , j . cole , rihanna , usher , arcade fire , chris martin of coldplay , calvin harris , and deadmau . each of them has taken an equal ownership stake in tidal , rumored to have cost over a million dollars apiece . the artists are equal owners , schlogel says . jay s provided funding to the company as basically a below market interest rate loan . jimmy iovine has tried to hire artists away from tidal , including jay z himselfother artists declined to buy in music industry sources say apple s jimmy iovine has tried to hire artists away from tidal , including jay z himself . jay z rapped jimmy iovine offered a safety net , at his b sides show . drake reportedly turned tidal down at the last minute in favor of apple , and taylor swift appears set to go with iovine as well . in late january , project panther bidco , a company owned by jay z , purchased tidal for million . jay z wouldn t fully take control of the company until april th , but during the intervening four months , two events took place that created and perhaps cemented tidal s out of touch image . a week after the acquisition , tidal s celebrity owners assembled for the first time at the fig house in los angeles . jay z , beyonc , madonna , kanye west , chris martin , and others were there in person . daft punk showed up in full helmet . alicia keys , usher , and win butler and regine chassagne of arcade fire attended via skype feeds projected onto a huge screen . champagne glasses clinked . the video cameras were rolling , ultimately creating the widely criticized video that made the summit seem like a room full of rich musicians congratulating themselves on changing the industry for their own benefit with few specifics to back up their claims . tidal s launch eventbut schlogel insists there was substantive discussion at the fig house summit . i think at that point everybody felt like they didn t want people getting between them and their fans , says schlogel . and they worried about emerging artists and emerging songwriters . this is the inaccuracy that clearly bothers her the most . if it s all about wealth , you don t care about the sustainability of something , you care about short term gain . it s completely the opposite of that . right now they re writing the story for us , jay z said . we need to write the story for ourselves . you can t make it to what we ve accomplished without having that love of music be the foundation , jay z told the room . i think it s one of the things that sets us apart from a tech company selling advertising or selling hardware . right now they re writing the story for us , we need to write the story for ourselves . the group agreed to build an artist controlled platform that could deliver a viable income stream for both new and established musicians . tidal would pay royalties as much as four times higher than spotify s . and it would offer exclusive features and concert series to attract listeners . the meeting was about focusing on sustainability , which by definition is investing in emerging artists , and empowering artists to be closer with their fans , schlogel says . at that time everybody was really into the mission statement of that , but it s a business . we went into all the strategies around investing in emerging artists , giving artists greater creative control so that their fans actually see what the artist wants them to see rather than what a corporation wants them to see , schlogel says energetically . how do we create a place where it s commercially viable for artists to release something that might not hit a top outlet , or might not get corporate sponsorship , but it doesn t matter because it s creative and fans love it anyway ? how do we create a commercially viable ecosystem around that ? the itunes store wasn t built in a day . it took spotify years to be successful mr . carter s c april , we are here for the long haul . please give us a chance to grow amp get better . tidalfacts mr . carter s c april , there are many big companies that are spending millions on a smear campaign . we are not anti anyone , we are pro artist amp fan . tidalfacts mr . carter s c april , when news of the gathering at the fig house began to leak out , tidal hastily scheduled a launch event for march th . the plan was to introduce the owners and lay out a vision , without revealing too many details . it turned out to be , broadly speaking , a train wreck . the fig house video , which ran before the press conference started , felt glossy , bombastic , and purely promotional . then tidal s celebrity owners came on stage to sign a mission statement and hype the moment and hype they did . alicia keys said they would change the course of music history and dropped a nietzsche quote . without music , life would be a mistake . madonna threw her leg on the table while signing the declaration . usher , the final signer , put down a thumbprint as a flourish . after they d all signed , music s hottest stars stood together on stage , laughing and talking , and seemingly not quite knowing what to do next . it was the quintessential launch event for an artist signing a new deal , or perhaps a marvel movie . but in the tech world , it was seen as an out of touch group of musicians making sweeping promises about a new service while offering little to no detail the self important video and event were roundly mocked . within days , tidal was being called a flop across the internet . artists like death cab for cutie frontman ben gibbard , mumford amp sons , and the perpetually upset noel gallagher criticized the company . i think they totally blew it by bringing out a bunch of millionaires and billionaires and propping them up onstage and then having them all complain about not being paid , gibbard told the daily beast . this thing is going to fail miserably . we weren t even given a month of our own actions to tell the story . schlogel admits that the launch internally referred to as the th could have been handled better . when i asked her if she would do it again the same way , she just says no . i just did not anticipate that within hours people would jump in so quickly and tell this story for us as if it s gospel . that was so fast . the plan had been to launch with the mission statement and then launch each new feature individually with some fanfare , but tidal hadn t counted on the speed of internet judgement . we weren t even given a month of our own actions to tell the story , schlogel says , somewhat pensively . had we known at the time had i known at the time yeah , we would have filled that void more with our own words and then backed it up with actions . but at the time , we just thought , okay we re going to back it up with action and that would be enough . the wall of artist autographs in tidal s oslo officelaunch disaster aside , tidal pushed forward , introducing a trio of features over the course of april . tidal x , a concert series and live streaming platform that showcases established artists to subscribers , was announced on april th . jack white , j . cole , and jay z have all held concerts under the tidal x banner , the last of which was viewed over , times during the live stream . not huge numbers , but tidal insists it s beating expectations . but it s tidal discovery and rising that hint most directly at the company s ultimate ambitions . in app view of tidal risingdiscovery lets unsigned artists upload music to the service and pick a preferred royalty structure without giving up rights to their music . unsigned artists currently have ways to get onto spotify and itunes , but tidal is making a point of promoting these artists , including a planned series of concerts around the us featuring the top streaming discovery musicians . we ve already had hundreds of artists upload through tidal discovery , says schlogel . tidal is more selective about which artists get added to the rising program . sveinung rindal , who heads tidal s person editorial team , says his crew looks for artists that can grow a bigger audience and be players in the music game for years to come . rindal s team also runs tidal s digital magazine and playlist curation for the service . the plan is for artists included in rising to get free pr and marketing support from tidal , spending what schlogel calls real dollars . in some cases , they ll be invited to perform live shows and be featured in behind the scenes videos and mini documentaries . lili k , a neo soul singer based in chicago , was one of the first artists to be featured in tidal rising . i honestly wasn t quite sure what to expect , lili k told me . tidal filmed a mini documentary starring the singer in chicago and featured her content on its homepage , and lili k s music has now been streamed over , times on tidal since being included in rising . in contrast , lili k s youtube page has only generated , views since . i do know that because tidal has supported me so much i think it has gotten me the most traction , she says . with spotify and itunes i m not saying they re bad platforms or anything but there is so much content , and a lot of times when you re a smaller artist like me , you can kind of get buried underneath the bigger things . but with tidal what s really cool is my content is up there on the front page with the big superstars . if this is beginning to sound suspiciously like tidal is using the promotional power of its streaming service to act like a label , well , you re not wrong . in effect , jay z , the former def jam ceo , is creating a talent pipeline , full of new artists to break . the former def jam ceo is creating a talent pipeline , full of new artists to breakbetween discovery , rising , and tidal x , tidal comes to resemble a full fledged artist factory . yeah it s kind of the dream , rindal says . it makes sense . you have to look into the future to see if it goes that way . for us on the editorial team , it s all about covering all the different stages of a music career , from entering the stage to ending up as an established artist with a great audience . this is where tidal breaks with apple and other music services most explicitly while observers have predicted for years that apple would leap into the music business by starting its own label , the company seems content holding the yearly itunes festival and collecting the fat margins that come from owning the dominant music service . apple is famous for vertically integrating its products from chips to design to software tidal seems eager to vertically integrate artist discovery , distribution , and promotion . it s hard not to note that jay s roc nation label nicely rounds out the stack , although tidal is quick to note that roc nation has no special claim on tidal artists . and the major labels own stakes in spotify . since the new ownership group acquired tidal , subscribers have nearly doubled , jumping from , to , in just two months . that includes over , hi fi subscribers , up from , at the end of , according to the company s public filings . those numbers are tiny in comparison to other streaming services , but the company says they surpassed internal expectations . spotify , which launched in , didn t reach million subscribers until though of course , that was a different time . tidal lets users purchase concert tickets in app . but tidal s small subscriber base is apparently engaged with the service nicki minaj s feeling myself music video featuring beyonc hit , views in days . that s nothing on a service like youtube , which has billion users , but the company sees it as proof that subscribers are tuning in . the challenge now is to grow its user base in a streaming market that s about to get extremely crowded by apple . tidal is releasing several new products and features now , a week before apple s supposed music service launch . tidal has new desktop apps for mac and windows , reduced student pricing , new live streaming features , and improved search and social features that let you know when an artist is live on the service , and listen to what they re listening to . our core identity is all about the connection between the artist and fan , tidal cto rune lending says . we are working hard to translate that into our social components going forward . tidal might have been borne of the tensions between artists and tech companies , but standing still on technology isn t going to work when you re up against the itunes juggernaut . we re increasing our tech department to make sure we re able to push out all the kinds of things we want to do , lending says . we already have a good pace of rolling out new updates quickly , and with an even larger team i think we can get even better at doing that . but tidal s play isn t just in adding tech features to reach parity with spotify , rdio , and apple . the company is banking on its ticketing service and tidal x concert series to separate it from the pack . the ticketing program gives subscribers early access to concert and music festival tickets , as well as exclusive access to tidal x tickets directly on an artist s page within the app . live nation the massive concert promoter that puts on tours for a number of tidal s owners worked with the company to integrate ticketmaster into the app to power the back end of the ticketing service , and tidal will receive a portion of the ticket fee revenues . there s obviously part of the business that overlaps with beats or spotify , but we don t consider ourselves just a music streaming company , says schlogel . there s going to be early access to tickets , to events that usually sell out very quickly , and exclusive merchandise . tidal also plans to continue adding independent movies like daft punk s electroma to the service . we also want to be a creative hub where indie filmmakers can release their films , says schlogel . we ll be putting more movies on there . it s going to be more like an entertainment and cultural hub . fans at jay z s b sides concertno one believes in tidal . okay , there are some fans , and stans , and audiophiles who use the service . but everyone else either hates it or hasn t thought about it again since seeing that commercial . a month ago i didn t believe it had a future eithera month ago i didn t believe it had a future either . but there are too many superstars backing it to write it off immediately . there are too many ways that tidal can and likely will stay in the public eye jay z or kanye or madonna will drop an album you can only get on the service they might only sell tour tickets through the service the only way for you to buy the next yeezys may be through tidal . these artists move product , and the product they want to move right now is tidal . tidal s even managing to convince artists who were initially skeptical . the whole thing got blown out of proportion and taken out of context , marcus mumford of mumford amp sons told the philadelphia inquirer about the band s initial criticism of tidal . i ended up having a conversation with jay z about it . he was gracious enough to give me a ring . and i get it much better now . he s trying to create a sort of farmers market for music . it s sort of an old school record store . which i like , now that i understand the vision . i got a similar call , and i can confirm that jay z is a passionate and talented pitchman for his new service . maybe he should just call everyone . maybe jay z should just call everyonebut chances are , tidal s most powerful salesman won t be calling you to personally expound on the merits of his company . and that s tidal s biggest obstacle ampnbspchanging perception . there s the real chance that the public has moved on from tidal and there s just no going back . it s possible that no matter what features they release and stops they pull out , the damage has been done . it s also entirely possible that apple s service will dominate streaming music just like it did with downloads and itunes . but when you speak with tidal s team , you don t sense fear of what s coming around the corner . they are still determined and confident that they can for lack of a better phrase ampnbspturn the ship around . i ll never forget i had this moment where someone had gone to the j . cole tidal x concert and tweeted , thank you tidal , this was the best night of my life , or something , says schlogel . and i had this moment where it s silly , it s not like corporations sit in a board room and look at one super happy fan and say , yes our business is working but for me in that moment , i saw that person s tweet and was like , we just gave this woman an incredible experience . i ve heard it from the mouths of the artists themselves if they can give subscribers something like that , it means something . tidal office photography by jo straube . concert photography courtesy of tidaledited by nilay patel , michael zelenko	 on a recent friday evening , the esperanto society of new york convened in a rowhouse on manhattan s east th street . the upper floors of the building seemed to house a bilingual preschool , going by the many large surfaces covered in multicolored paint handprints , while the ground floor was made up of multipurpose meeting rooms administered by the unitarian universalist church down the block . how an artificial language from is finding new life onlineby sam dean on a recent friday evening , the esperanto society of new york convened in a rowhouse on manhattan s east th street . the upper floors of the building seemed to house a bilingual preschool , going by the many large surfaces covered in multicolored paint handprints the ground floor was made up of multipurpose meeting rooms administered by the unitarian universalist church down the block . four people had been listed as attending on the facebook page for the event , but by the time the meeting began , eight esperantists were sitting in a rough semicircle of dormroom couches and hard plastic chairs . the exuberantly mustached neil blonstein , president of the society , was presiding behind a folding banquet table , wearing a white t shirt printed with the word esperanto and a photo of a group of esperantists at a convention . there were grapes and crackers by the door . that night , the society consisted of seven men , including neil , and one woman though neil s girlfriend , also an esperantist , did show up later . some were young , most were not . the agenda for the evening included two speeches , each followed by discussion . the talks were difficult to follow if you didn t know any esperanto , but a rusty background in french allowed for an understanding of the broad strokes . it s an artificial language , with none of the messy exceptions of natural tonguestech was in the air . a bearded brooklyn college junior read an account of a conference he d gone to the previous weekend called organizing . , peppered with the untranslated names of apps , and followed by a discussion of the uses and meaning of mailchimp . then , a composer and member of mensa gave a speech on wikipedia , specifically the problems that crowdsourcing presents for smaller languages . he compared esperanto to bislama , the language of the pacific island nation of vanuatu . despite having , native speakers , bislama wikipedia only has pages . esperanto wikipedia has over , . like its vastly more successful digital cousins c , html , python esperanto is an artificial language , designed to have perfectly regular grammar , with none of the messy exceptions of natural tongues . out loud , all that regularity creates strange cadences , like someone speaking italian slowly while chewing gum . william auld , the modernist scottish poet who wrote his greatest work in esperanto , was nominated for the nobel prize multiple times , but never won . but it is supremely easy to learn , like a puzzle piece formed to fit into the human brain . invented at the end of the th century , in many ways it presaged the early online society that the web would bring to life at the end of the th . it s only ever been spoken by an assortment of fans and true believers spread across the globe , but to speak esperanto is to become an automatic citizen in the most welcoming non nation on earth . to speak esperanto is to become an automatic citizen in the most welcoming non nation on earthdecades before couchsurfing became a website or the word website existed , esperantists had an international homestay service called pasporta servo , in which friendly hosts around the world listed their phone numbers and home addresses in a central directory available to traveling esperantists . it may be a small , widely dispersed , and self selected diaspora , but wherever you go , there are esperantists who are excited that you exist . it sounds hokey , but this is the central appeal of esperanto . it s as if the initial utopian vibes of the world wide web had never reached a wider audience . there s no money , no power , no marketing , no prestige esperanto speakers speak esperanto because they believe in it , and because it s fun to speak a foreign language almost instantly , after a couple months of rolling the words around in your mouth . the internet , though , has been a mixed blessing for esperanto . while providing a place for esperantists to convene without the hassle of traveling to conventions or local club meetings , some esperantists believe those meatspace meet ups were what held the community together . the esperanto society of new york has members on facebook , but only eight of them showed up for the meeting . the shift to the web , meanwhile , has been haphazard , consisting mostly of message boards , listservs , and scattered blogs . a website called lernu ! esperanto for the imperative learn ! is the center of the esperanto internet , with online classes and an active forum . but it s stuck with a web . aesthetic , and the forum is prone to trolls , a byproduct of esperanto s culture of openness to almost any conversation as long as it s conducted in ampnbsp or even tangentially related to ampnbsp esperanto . but there s hope that the internet can give the language new life . wikipedia and its , pages was a first step , and yesterday , esperanto ampnbspdebuted on duolingo , a virtual learning app with million active users far more people than have ever spoken esperanto since its invention . strangers in the night , sung in esperantothe assembled esperantists in that scuffed room on east th street knew the duolingo course was coming , and they were optimistic . the word esperanto , after all , means one who hopes . but the final item on the meeting s agenda underscored what all those virtual esperantists were missing . after the speeches , neil got up and passed out sheets printed with the lyrics to fremdaj en la nokt , the esperanto version of the sinatra hit strangers in the night . he explained that a particular italian esperantist had an extensive youtube presence and a habit of jumping into worldwide esperanto forums and facebook groups to plug his singing . this was one of his better songs . neil settled back down behind his banquet table , counted out the time , and the eight attending members of the new york esperanto society started to sing . esperanto was invented in by a polish ophthalmologist named l . l . zamenhof , who hoped his creation would bring about world peace . zamenhof saw a turbulent world divided by language , and concluded that the situation was too complicated , essentially unfair , and ultimately doomed . he believed that the languages people already spoke were oversaturated with history , politics , and power , making it impossible to communicate clearly . esperanto was a fresh start , a technology that would allow its speakers to sidestep the difficulties of natural languages altogether . he made it as easy to learn as possible , with no irregular verbs , a vocabulary adapted from romance language roots , and a simple , genderless , almost caseless grammar . the late th century was the heyday of the artificial language , and before esperanto , an artificial language called volap k was all the rage , with almost a million speakers across europe . zamenhof dismissed it as too difficult to speak the esperanto word for gibberish is still volapuka o , and by the late s , it was starting to unravel . zamenhof wrote his first book describing esperanto in russian , and he called the language the studiously dull lingvo internacia , or international language . but he published it under the pen name doktoro esperanto , meaning doctor hoper in his new idiom , and like doctor frankenstein before him , soon found that people were calling his creation by the name of its creator . with its simplicity and supposed neutrality , he was hoping his language would make it to the fina venko , the final victory , his term for the esperanto rapture the day when the whole world would speak his invention as a second language , facilitating clear , neutral , and ultimately peaceful dialogue among all humanity . babel , basically , be gone . he soon found that people were calling his creation by the name of its creatorprogress was slow in the early days . zamenhof and his buddies started publishing a magazine in esperanto , and word trickled out over the continent . eighteen years after the first book describing esperanto was published , there were esperanto magazines in regular production , and zamenhof decided it was time to mark a new phase in the movement by doing what nerdy subcultures do best he organized a convention . this was , so they called it a world congress , and people showed up to discuss their new language in their new language . at least one convention has been held every year since , save the cumulative years of world wars , and conventions are still the major feature of the esperanto social calendar . as the movement grew , it started attracting notice from powerful places , not all of it positive . the league of nations almost adopted esperanto , but the idea was shot down by the french delegate . zamenhof was jewish , so adolf hitler denounced esperanto as a language designed to unify the jewish diaspora , and the nazis were officially anti esperanto . joseph stalin was reportedly an esperantist , but he turned on the language in the late s , calling it a language of spies , and started purging people who spoke it . ayatolla khomeini , too , waffled on esperanto . shortly after the iranian revolution , he urged his people to learn the language as an anti imperialist counterpoint to english , and an official translation of the qur an followed . but adherents of the baha i faith had been fans of esperanto for decades , and khomeini was definitely not a fan of baha i , so his enthusiasm dimmed . and baha i s not the only smaller religion that s embraced esperanto as a liturgical language . in brazil , which has one of the world s largest populations of esperantists , the language is intimately associated with the s ance centric spiritist movement , and many followers of the neo shinto japanese religion oomoto have studied some esperanto . esperanto was a fresh startmao zedong liked esperanto too . the communist party of china has published an esperanto magazine , el popola inio , since , and state radio stations still regularly broadcast in the language . and perhaps most famously , george soros grew up speaking esperanto , though his public involvement with the language hasn t gone beyond getting his father s esperanto memoirs translated into english . mostly , though , esperanto survived the th century on the strength of the local clubs and spread by chance encounters and word of mouth . this culture created hundreds of books , dozens of publications , and at least four known full length feature films . today , nobody has any good idea how many people have even heard of esperanto , let alone speak it fluently . some estimate that millions can parolas esperanton , but a finnish linguist who s studied the , or so native esperanto speakers in the world came up with more reasonable ballpark numbers around , can speak it to some degree , and only , are totally fluent . there s no federal esperanto government to pay for a census , and the decline of the local clubs and societies has made any kind of headcount nearly impossible . it s not easy being artificial . this would be great for computers to learn , was the first thought that chuck smith had about esperanto . it was , and he was in college , taking a class called models of mind . with its logical structure , smith thought esperanto could work as a bridge language for translation , especially between two languages like finnish and turkish , that are unlikely to have a large overlapping dataset that a machine translation program could use . just as zamenhof intended , esperanto would be the metamedium of communication across tongues . smith didn t pursue that idea beyond the class , but he did pursue esperanto . the summer after models of mind , he went to esperanto meetings in new york and san francisco . like every esperantist i spoke with , the radiant chumminess of the esperanto world drew smith in . the following fall , he tapped the esperanto network to find a place to stay during a board game fair in essen , germany . he was hooked , and he had a new angle he wanted to use computers to help people learn esperanto . so he started vikipedio , the esperanto wikipedia . this was , and esperanto was only the th language to have its own version . the first article , modernismo , was imported from an extant online esperanto encyclopedia called la enciklopedio kalblanda , or the kalb land encyclopedia , which a guy named stefano kalb had been slowly writing since . the radiant chumminess of the esperanto world drew smith inlernu ! launched a year later . more people visit vikipedia , but this is the site that first posted free esperanto classes online that were more advanced than email versions of the pen and paper correspondence courses that had existed for decades . it made learning the language easier , but some in the community believe that the popularity of its forums also sped the decline of the esperanto clubs instead of being a quiet member at a meeting , you could just lurk on the lernu ! forums . while esperanto became more digital , smith dug deeper into esperanto s real world organizations . he attended conferences , backpacked across europe and stayed only with esperantists , and started working at various esperanto organizations in europe and canada . he landed in berlin , and started a company , ampnbspludisto esperanto for player , that makes ios games . so when duolingo launched in , smith was one of the thousands who requested esperanto for the new , free , and intentionally addictive language learning program . duolingo eventually tapped smith to be team leader for the development of the esperanto course that went live yesterday . he s the public face of tech esperanto in many ways , serving time as a guest on podcasts and logging many thousands of words on his own esperanto centric blog on transparent language . but the actual work of making the duolingo course for esperanto has largely fallen to a relative newcomer to the language ruth kevess cohen , a dc area doctor in her s specializing in internal medicine and geriatrics . it would be unusual to start from zero and , after two years , be able to develop a course in any other language , kevess cohen told me . maybe some geniuses , you know , but i m just doing it in my spare time . she heard of esperanto first as a possibility for a new duolingo course , and then sought it out elsewhere . first she looked up the course on lernu , but ultimately learned the language through the oldest method available a correspondence course . after practicing the regular grammar with pen and paper , she spent a couple weeks at an intensive esperanto immersion camp in raleigh , north carolina , and found that she could already understand what longtime esperantists were saying . the community was welcoming , and the ability to suddenly speak a new language was practically addictive . ruth , just like chuck , was in . that sense of empowerment has drawn the growing language hacking community to esperanto , too . benny lewis , a man better known as benny the irish polyglot , has built a career on telling people how to learn languages as quickly as humanly possible . his website , ampnbspfluentinthreemonths . com , is the center of his business , and he s written a book with the same name . if you ask where he lives , he says that he s been traveling for years . he claims to be fluent in languages , and proficient in many more . benny first encountered esperanto through couchsurfing he says he s hosted over , people on his own couches , and was immediately intrigued . his core language learning principle is confidence the trick to being fluent in three months , he says , isn t any kind of drug or special flashcard system , but a willingness to be humiliated by speaking a language poorly as soon as you know a single word . and esperanto is the ideal language for shamelessness it s simple , and almost everyone is a relative newcomer . many studies , most of them conducted in the first half of the th century , found that esperanto had a marked propaedeutic effect on language learning , which is a fancy latinate way to say that , if you take college esperanto classes for a year and college french classes for three years after that , you ll know more french than if you took four straight years of college french . the hyper regularity of esperanto makes it supremely easy to learn , and its newness , its foreignness , primes the monolingual brain to learn more complicated newness even more quickly . your brain starts to accept how to say words in another language without having to worry about complexity , is how benny puts it . he believes in esperanto as a springboard to other languages so much that he convinced his girlfriend to learn esperanto as her first foreign language , and filmed every minute of her progress . your brain starts to accept how to say words in another language without having to worry about complexity . as a language hacker , benny scoffs at the slow pace of academic language learning he doesn t recommend six months or a year of esperanto , followed by years of french , but rather two weeks , just two weeks , of intensive esperanto training , followed by a couple more months of anything else you d like to learn . ultimately it s an easy language , he said , and it s not intimidating . he remembered his first attempts to learn german and spanish , and being cowed in the face of all their particular grammatical rules and irregularities . esperanto , on the other hand , is pure self esteem . plus , there s a whole world of esperanto speakers who are happy to hop on skype to help out a neophyte good luck finding a friendly francophone to do the same for free . esperantists like to talk about logic zamenhof made the grammar to be logical chuck smith found that logicality intriguing benny the irish polyglot finds that the language s logic makes it a logical choice for language hacking and duolingo chose chuck smith as the logical person to create its esperanto course . but by what logic did duolingo decide to make an esperanto class at all ? over million english speakers have signed up to learn spanish on duolingo , and even more spanish speakers have signed up to learn english . anglophones also have french , german , italian , portuguese , dutch , irish , swedish , danish , turkish , norwegian , and ukrainian , in descending order of popularity , available to learn for free . esperanto is the th language to be offered , chosen over many others with speaking populations times larger . esperanto , though , has enthusiasm . when duolingo first launched , luis von ahn , its founder , was surprised to find that esperanto was the number one most requested new language for the program . speakers and supporters of esperanto are very hardcore , von ahn said over email , and vocal ! speakers and supporters of esperanto are very hardcore . esperantists are linguistic evangelists the community saw an opportunity for expansion , and pounced . two of the other languages available on duolingo fit a similar bill , though by dint of history rather than original intent irish and ukrainian are both associated with strong nationalist movements . irish was the first of many languages that english would violently suppress , and ukrainian is shoring up its ramparts to avoid the same fate from russian regional control . esperanto , of course , was designed precisely to transcend linguistic nationalism and ultimately avoid conflict , but the end result is similar a small group of people intensely invested in seeing their language spread . but esperanto on duolingo makes sense in a deeper way , as well . both the language and the app were created , at least in part , to solve the same problem the world is divided by language , and more importantly , the majority is often forced to learn the native tongue of a powerful minority in order to get by . in zamenhof s time , yiddish or polish speakers in his hometown of bialystok had to learn russian to interact with the ruling state . today , anyone who doesn t speak english is born at a disadvantage , and probably can t afford rosetta stone . von ahn didn t just create duolingo to give anglophones a fun , free way to learn new languages he created it for the non anglophone majority that s stuck with the burden of learning english . there might be languages available for english speakers on duolingo , but english courses are available in world languages . zamenhof saw the same problem and took a more radical tack . instead of starting a network of free , worldwide language schools , he invented a free , worldwide language . instead of starting a network of free , worldwide language schools , he invented a free , worldwide languagetwenty five thousand people have signed up to be notified when the esperanto duolingo course goes live . if just those people complete the course , that would qualify as an esperanto baby boom . but chuck smith is thinking bigger i keep saying that , by the end of the year , over , people will be learning esperanto on duolingo . the world will probably never see the fina venko , but the internet does have a way of hypercharging communities that never could have existed before it . who could have imagined that more than one brony would ever exist , or that americans would want to write thousands of pages of harry potter slash fiction . and soon , esperanto might not even be the least likely artificial language to get a signal boost from duolingo the klingon course is on track to debut in . linguistically , the language is the exact opposite of esperanto . its grammar was designed to be as difficult to learn as possible , and its vocabulary is strongest when discussing the warlike and brutal traditions of klingon culture . many who try it will drop it later , admitted andr m ller , the german phd student who s creating the klingon course . but some might enjoy the challenge , a very klingon thing to do . given the language s difficulty , he considers himself to be only a conversational klingon speaker . he is also fluent in esperanto . correction an earlier version included linux in a list of coding languages . it s an operating system . illustration by caitlin fosteredited by josh dzieza	 as a toddler in and , i attended a day care with monkeys . or , perhaps more precisely , i was part of a study in the form of a day care that involved monkeys . i was two , then three . i remember nothing . i know about it because my dad liked to tease me about it . if i made a mess at dinner , came in with dirty knees and elbows , or was otherwise slobby , he d say , it was the monkeys . the idea that i had once played with primates actually sometimes , i could swear he said chimps became a part of my mental frame of reference , my picture of myself . this , even though as i said , i don t remember them . i don t even remember the other children in the program . image courtesy of the drs . nicholas and dorothy cummings center for the history of psychology , the university of akronmonkey day caregrowing up as a child research subjectby michelle dean as a toddler in and , i attended a day care with monkeys . or , perhaps more precisely , i was part of a study in the form of a day care that involved monkeys . i was two , then three . i remember nothing . i know about it because my dad liked to tease me about it . if i made a mess at dinner , came in with dirty knees and elbows , or was otherwise slobby , he d say , it was the monkeys . the idea that i had once played with primates actually sometimes , i could swear he said chimps became a part of my mental frame of reference , my picture of myself . this , even though as i said , i don t remember them . i don t even remember the other children in the program . if i do something clumsy , a mental flag pops up in my head , and it bears a chimp s faceif i do something clumsy or awkward , a sort of mental flag pops up in my head , and it bears a chimp s face . once someone caught me , at , picking my nose in school was that a lingering habit from my time among the chimps ? our family cats hated me because i could not keep my hands off them even more than usual for a small child , i always wanted to pick them up . perhaps furry things seemed more welcoming to me than they did to other children . in my early s , i caught myself sitting cross legged at a desk chair . that s a regular habit of mine , but on that day i happened to be sitting in a courtroom as counsel at a defense table . i blamed the chimps then , too . but that s what i tell myself , of course . i don t tell others about the chimps much . for one thing , i have a lingering adolescent fear that it makes me sound a little weird . for another , i hardly recall the details of the study . then there s this i don t think i ever said they were chimps , my dad said recently , with a parental casualness i tried not to find infuriating . i m quite sure he did , actually , but this is one of those times when it s safer , as a daughter , to concede that perhaps i made that up . i don t have it on tape . my parents did not document the experience in any way and can t really be faulted for it . at the time , they had no inkling that their small daughter would one day grow up to be a journalist who would want to see the transcript , so to speak . here is what i do know my father had heard of the study on a campus flyer and went through the work of enrolling me because , he says , he thought it was an opportunity . and so my mother took me twice a week to a building in the southwest corner of the university of waterloo campus in ontario , canada . inside , she remembers , was a large glass enclosure with a fake tree in it . she says sometimes she recalls seeing monkeys in that tree , but she admits her memory is spotty . near as i can tell , the monkeys were probably macaques . and then she would leave me for a few hours in the care of some students . the way my mother saw it , she got to do her shopping in peace while i got to play with monkeys . not that she ever witnessed me doing so herself . once i went through the doors , that was it . it went on for months . you liked it , you were always happy to go , my mother insists . i ve been asking her about this for years , always hoping she would remember something else about it . the way my mother saw it , she got to do her shopping in peace while i got to play with monkeysmy parents remember few specifics . if i discussed my monkey day activities with them as a toddler , everyone has forgotten the particulars of the conversation . neither of my parents can even recall the nature of the study . psychology , they think . or sociology . but it was a long time ago , and they didn t keep the papers they remember signing . nor did they keep the report my father is vaguely persuaded he got , but then i hope he ll forgive me for printing this he is a man prone to filling the gaps of his memory with things that never happened . so , this story i ve always told myself about myself might not be quite true . but as it receded from my parents memories , it became imprinted on me . and now i m stuck with it . the author , age twofrom the time i arrived at university myself in the late s , i ve been trying to find any trace of my study . i have google scholared and pubmedded and ovided . i even looked at paper indexes , once upon a time . i have scoured the research journals across several different disciplines . whatever happened to me , no one published a word about it . i did manage to find a lot of studies about other children , though . clinical psychological experimentation on children dates back to at least . this was the dawn of the behaviorist school of psychology , an approach that begins from the premise that most psychoanalytic knowledge your freud and jung is hand waving at best . the problem with psychoanalysis , behaviorists think , is that first person reporting is unreliable . the objective information about human behavior , they say , comes from direct observation . so behaviorists were great fans of the experiment , and there were no subjects more guileless , or more perfectly primed for observation , than children . though their real names were rarely revealed , many of these children became famous among academic circles . or perhaps infamous , as these studies eventually became legendary less for the findings they contained than for the way subsequent generations came to question the ethics of studying children at all . there were no subjects more perfectly primed for observation than childrenjohn b . watson , of johns hopkins university , was one of the fathers of this stuff watson would eventually become a household name as a parenting expert . as a behaviorist , he needed to show that parents had a direct , observable effect on their children s development . psychologists had already observed that infants don t have as rich a range of emotional responses to the world as adults do . so watson set out to see if he could teach one of those responses . specifically , he wanted to see if he could teach a baby to fear animals . a hollywood casting agent could not have chosen a more platonic ideal sort of baby for watson s experiment than a child known as albert b . his real name was kept concealed . watson couldn t stop himself from bragging in the paper he d publish that the child was , one of the best developed youngsters ever brought to the hospital , weighing pounds at nine months of age . the child s perfection was not just physical either he also had a steady mind on the whole stolid and unemotional . albert b . remained placid when researchers sat him in a room and presented him with a rat , a rabbit , a dog , and a monkey . in fact , in a film of the experiment , he seems quite taken with the rat and rabbit . in the manner of babies , he s a bit distractible , but not at all afraid of the furry creatures of varying sizes put before him . so watson got himself a hammer and a bar of steel . then he presented albert b . with the rat again . he hit the bar hard , making a loud noise to startle the child . albert b . didn t cry at first he simply fell forward . when the scientists brought the rat out a second time and tapped the bar again , albert b . whimpered . within a few days , albert b . would visibly tense up and fall over when presented with the animals , even if the loud noise did not accompany them . often , he would cry spontaneously as soon as he saw them . this was the result watson was looking for he had taught albert b . to fear rats , and the fear seemed to extend to other small animals . and albert s fearful reaction lasted , although with a certain loss in the intensity of the reaction , for a longer period than one month . watson published his study with a co author it became famous . footage of the little albert experimentviewed through our modern lens , a certain aura of heartlessness attaches to a man willing to directly instill a phobia in babies , even to prove a scientific point . in the published findings , watson comes across as more thoughtful and careful than that . he rationalized that he had chosen albert b . carefully . his stability was one of the principal reasons for using him as a subject in this test , he wrote . we felt that we could do him relatively little harm by carrying out such experiments as those outlined below . but it can be hard to judge when harm is inflicted on a person s interior life . watson didn t spend much time observing albert b . the experiment lasted until the infant was a little over a year old , but then albert b . left the hospital , never to be heard from again . watson , believing all his subjects had to be kept anonymous , burned his own papers . the identity of albert b . stayed lost in those ashes until relatively recently . at first , researchers trying to reconstruct albert b . s identity thought perhaps he was a child named douglas merritte , who had hydrocephalus and died a few years after the experiment concluded . this never quite seemed to fit , because watson had been so adamant about albert b . s health . last year , as reported in the chronicle of higher education , ampnbspthe strongest candidate yet appeared albert barger . allegedly , barger went on to live a life as a salesman and devoted uncle . he never had children and died in . but researchers found a niece who , when interviewed , indeed confirmed that he had harbored a lifelong dislike of dogs and animals . the adult albert barger didn t chalk that up to watson , though instead , he told a story of a family dog that had died in front of him when he was young . having apparently never been told about the experiments , he hadn t incorporated them into his picture of himself , as i did . albert barger s niece confirmed that he had harbored a lifelong dislike of dogs and animalsif albert barger is the right albert b . , though , his circumstances raise more questions . at the time of the experiment , pearl barger , albert s mother , worked as a wet nurse at the harriet lane home in baltimore . it was one of the nation s first children s homes it was also where watson had his lab . pearl barger was just , which opens the question of whether or not she gave any meaningful kind of consent to what happened to her child . in the film of the experiment , the mother isn t present the woman you see onscreen is rosalie rayner , watson s co researcher and mistress , and eventual wife . that seems to be an appropriate representation of pearl barger s involvement in the experiment at most , she seems to have offered silent assent . perhaps there was more . but it is hard to imagine someone in barger s position an unwed mother , a teenager , whose very keep was being paid by the hospital where watson was a powerful figure having the full capacity to turn this sort of thing down . it is hard to imagine him sitting down to explain the even very minimal risks of this study to her . albert b . image courtesy of the drs . nicholas and dorothy cummings center for the history of psychology , the university of akronfor much of the th century , the subjects of human experimentation were often people like pearl and albert they were at some measurable social disadvantage to the people who were conducting the research . we became aware of the horrible things scientists could be tempted to do by the starker examples of josef mengele s experiments on concentration camp inmates in the second world war , or the tuskegee syphilis trials , which were active all the way up to . if someone had asked me , at two , if i wanted to play with monkeys , i would ve happily consentedthose examples bequeathed us sets of ethical rules to follow . the signature principle of modern research ethics is the belief that a subject must be able to consent to an experiment before the trial proceeds . the first line of the nuremberg code , for example , holds that the voluntary consent of the human subject is absolutely essential . all the codes that followed the belmont report , the various codes used by research universities also enshrine that principle . this is as true of psychological research as it is of more traditional avenues of medicine . gradually we have developed it into what we call , everywhere from emergency rooms to grey s anatomy , informed consent , though it can be difficult to pin down exactly what s meant by that . with kids , the issue of consent is thornier . it s always hard to gauge what children know about their own situation and condition even when they say yes , it may be no more meaningful an agreement than the one they d give if you offered them a meal ruining ice cream . if someone had asked me , at two , if i wanted to play with monkeys , i m sure there would have been no image of danger in my mind and i would ve happily consented . but it was really up to my parents to agree for me . some might argue that allowing parents to make such decisions for their children is too paternalistic . biomedical ethicists have developed a justification for that , though they call it the principle of beneficence . basically , if the benefits of research to the subject seriously outweigh the risks , it helps justify the research . but , as even the belmont report admits a difficult ethical problem remains , for example , about research that presents more than minimal risk without immediate prospect of direct benefit to the children involved . some have argued that such research is inadmissible , while others have pointed out that this limit would rule out much research promising great benefit to children in the future . the report concludes , lamely , that this means researchers have difficult choices before them when it comes to conducting research on children . even if we viewed parental consent as a universal salve , there are still the circumstances of the parents to consider . take my own . as we were all at waterloo in the post ethics code era , they remember signing releases . they were full fledged adults , in their s . but i still think some of their nonchalance about all this can be traced to where they came from . i happened to be born just as my parents had stepped into a world much wider than the ones they d been born toboth of my parents grew up in rural qu bec in the s and s , when it was something of a closed society . most members of my extended family never went to university , never travelled much . my father was only at the university of waterloo on a military scholarship he d dropped out of high school in his teens . in fact , he had only gotten his diploma when the air force made him do it while stationed in germany in the mid s . then , they discovered , he had a serious aptitude for math and science and sent him on through a master s degree so he could build cf flight simulators . so i happened to be born just as my parents had stepped into a world much wider than the ones they d been born to . let me be clear that i don t think my parents were na ve or ignorant . i also don t think they were wrong in the least to sign me up for the study . but their wanting me to attend that day care , the way my dad always speaks of it as an opportunity , it had a context . i can t help but think that most things looked like opportunities to my dad just then . he was already living a kind of life that he hadn t dreamed up for himself . university of waterloo campus . image courtesy of authori don t believe there was ever any risk of serious harm from my study but even if there had been , i wonder if i would even feel it now . there s another experiment people often cite the monster study at the university of iowa . that is not , of course , what mary tudor , the researcher in question , called it . her master s thesis was titled , an experimental study of the effect of evaluative labeling of speech fluency . she was a student of a man named wendell johnson . johnson had stuttered in his youth . he had a theory that stuttering could be conditioned meaning that people could be taught to stutter . he sent his student tudor out to prove it by experimenting with a group of children from an iowa orphanage . there were of them in the study , ranging in ages from five to . ten of them had already been identified as stutterers . the children were told they were going to receive speech therapy . tudor split them into four groups . two of the groups , ia and ib , contained the stutterers . the other two , iia and iib , contained non stutterers . in each set , one group was comforted and told they spoke well the other was told they stuttered . the group that led tudor s fellow graduate students to call this the monster study was iib , the non stutterers who were nonetheless told that they stuttered , and cautioned to be careful about how they spoke . after a few sessions with tudor , the children became incredibly self conscious they sometimes refused to speak at all they suffered at school . the experiments lasted only six months , and none of the children in the iib group ultimately became stutterers although , as tudor herself admitted , we certainly made a definite impression on them . apparently , she felt bad enough that long after she reversed course and told the children their speech patterns were normal , she continued to visit them to see if they were getting along all right . the children became incredibly self conscious they sometimes refused to speak at allin , a reporter for a california newspaper named jim dyer came across reports of the study . the results had never really been published , beyond tudor s research thesis . he found one of the subjects , mary nixon , who still remembered the study . at the reporter s behest , nixon sent tudor a letter accusing her of outright abuse . i couldn t never tell my husband about it , mary nixon would later tell a new york times magazine reporter . it just ruined my life . national press coverage ensued . dyer , the reporter , was eventually fired because he d tricked his way into university records by posing as a graduate student . that was how he obtained the names of the study participants . as for the subjects , they now all knew about what had happened to them as orphans as they hadn t before their reaction to this new bit of self knowledge , coming after so long a silence , was outrage . they sued the university of iowa , which settled in for over , to be split among the five living study participants . none of these children grew up to be stutterers . their claims were simply that they had low self confidence as the result of being berated as children . yet they were also all orphans , which you might imagine could also lead to some self esteem problems . you do not have to pity the university of iowa which admitted to wrongdoing , paid up , and formally apologized for the project to suspect that the causes of the children s unhappiness were more intricate than anyone could allow . the author , age twothe public furor over the monster study is instructive of how much attitudes have changed over time . if the experiment s procedures had simply been reported in the press in the s , it s hard to believe that anyone would have blinked . but by , everyone agreed instantly that what had happened to those children was an outrage . they fuck you up , your mum and dad . historians love irony , and there s plenty here . because the very thing your watsons and tudors set out to prove that what happens to a child can change her for life , whether it gives her a fear of animals or a stutter is now an article of faith for parents everywhere . everyone believes that , in the poet philip larkin s famous formulation , they fuck you up , your mum and dad . and given that we all now think that way , doing psychological research on children now seems to involve risks at once incalculable and giant . in other words why expose your children to something new if you can t control what it will do to them ? parents can t be blamed for their aversion . behavioral research on children is still done , of course , but the awareness of the risks has muted it . peruse lists of recent articles in journals of behavioral research and you re more likely to find mild and unquestionably benevolent sounding studies , like healthy living interventions in a residential girl scout camp ampnbspor an intervention to preschool children for reducing screen time a randomized controlled trial . but what s funny is that i don t know that there are any lingering effects from my monkey day care . i can imagine them , but the only one that has actually proven to bother me is how frustrated i am that some intriguing part of my own development has been forever lost to me . in the last few months , i have contacted people at the university of waterloo , trying to find out what exactly this whole monkey study was . the problem is , was a long time ago . everyone s gone on , and i don t have a researcher s name . even if i did , it probably wouldn t help . waterloo s research ethics office wrote me back with this spectacularly unhelpful remark unfortunately , research data files , including details about participant identities , are the confidential property of the researcher involved . they ignored my next question , about whether that meant they couldn t even confirm the existence of a study . finally , i called the press office . their media relations guy , a kind australian named nick manning , spent a few days trying to track the story down himself . at first , he got a lot of denials . the university , he said , would never have allowed children to be in close contact with monkeys . my parents must be mistaken perhaps there d been some comparative study between the behavior of toddlers and animals , but no one now remembered it happening . the university , he said , would never have allowed children to be in close contact with monkeysmanning was able to confirm one element of what my parents had told me the university of waterloo definitely owned a colony of macaque monkeys in the early s . the people who remembered them , he said , insisted that they would have been hidden from public view , that children never would have been let near them . i had already known about the macaques , which seem the likeliest candidates for my monkeys by the mid s , they d been mentioned as part of a well publicized scandal about the ill treatment of research animals in university labs across canada . the rise of public awareness about that very issue probably got them sent off to wilderness preserves like many other canadian research animals . a day after we initially spoke , though , manning called me back . he said that he d spoken to someone who did remember the monkeys being visible behind glass , and who wouldn t rule out the possibility that children had been brought there to see them . but still no one remembered anything specific . and of course memory is a fragile thing . confidentiality in research important , and i am not an overly cautious luddite who thinks that all child research should grind to a halt in the face of ethical conundra . but still , sitting here at the end of an inquiry that brought almost no answers , the word my mind repeats to itself is disclosure , disclosure , disclosure . put less bureaucratically i just feel like i had some right to know more . edited by elizabeth lopatto , michael zelenko	 legal threats and disgruntled clients inside the uber for private jets tim martz made his fortune in broadcast radio , but even as a wealthy man , the price of chartering a private jet always stung a bit . so when martz joined jetsmarter in february , the service seemed like a steal . in return for a , annual membership fee , plus a , initiation charge , he could use the company s mobile app to reserve flights on a private jet as often as he wanted . you got the whole plane to yourself , which is great , recalls martz . he flew a half dozen times in his first six months , taking trips from his denver home to los angeles , las vegas , and various vacation paradises . i m paying this amount of money and getting , flights for free , that s a good deal . over the last two years , jetsmarter has earned a reputation as a fast growing startup with a luxury product and investors to match . in december , shawn jay z carter and the saudi royal family led a million round of funding that valued the company at . billion , putting it in the coveted unicorn club . kim kardashian declared she was obsessed with the service , and rapper rick ross worked the company into his lyrics . jetsmarter added big names like tom ridge , a former director of homeland security , to its board . florida governor rick scott was on hand to dedicate its new office in downtown fort lauderdale . kim kardashian declared she was obsessed with the service , and rapper rick ross worked the company into his lyrics our aim is to make flying private accessible to the masses , said ceo sergey petrossov in an interview with haute living . or at least that portion of the masses for whom business class was not enough but owning a gulfstream was out of reach . the company s marketing materials held out the promise that the moderately wealthy could mingle with celebrities and titans of industry . among the handful of people flying with you this month alone flyers have included jaime foxx , mega model emily ratajkowski who flew from ny la , super model irina shayk , si model chanel iman , athletes , moguls and more , read one pitch to potential members . network with other members and make friendships that matter . the media took to calling it the uber for private jets . but while the company was accumulating the trappings of success , members began experiencing increasing turbulence . starting in , the benefits and costs associated with the membership began to change rapidly . perks like free helicopter rides to the airport were removed from the membership offering . meals , which had been free , started to cost hundreds of dollars , and travel around the holidays cost extra , too . members lost the ability to reserve the entire plane without paying more . martz decided not to renew as my wife says , well if i have to share the plane , it s not really private , is it ? in a whatsapp group created by members to converse , customers complained about the cutbacks . we know we get great value and we also know that the company has to grow , but to continually change the deliverables during our paid membership is unfair , wrote one member who is still with the service . bottom line you can t change what i paid for , period , wrote another member . if i pay again and renew , i m not guaranteed for what i paid ? that s wild . many speculated that the tweaks to the service were symptoms of larger struggles at the business . ride it while you can . when it implodes we all got our money s worth , wrote one member . i m starting to feel like i m involved in an elaborate private jet ponzi scheme , where instead of money , i receive flights , wrote another . in other circumstances , jetsmarter s well heeled clientele might be quick to complain publicly about perceived shortcomings . but the jetsmarter membership agreement includes a non disparagement clause that allows jetsmarter to terminate anyone who makes negative or disparaging comments about the company or its employees . the verge spoke with more than two dozen current and former customers and reviewed chat logs of conversations between another two dozen members . some members claimed that their memberships were not renewed because they complained publicly about the service , and many others said they were afraid to voice their honest opinion , even in private chat rooms . effortless effervescence . abunin a post shared by jetsmarter jetsmarter on mar , at am pdtone member contacted the verge with a story about a legal battle that broke out when jetsmarter tried to raise their membership fees . they were pushing us around . it felt like i was dealing with the mafia , the member said . the member was initially on the record , but reached out a day later to say they had changed their mind . i don t wanna mess with jetsmarter , they have a big reach . the company s reputation took a hit last month , when its president , edward barsky , was arrested on charges of embezzlement . jetsmarter says the case stems from a previous job and is unrelated to its business . the non disparagement clause isn t the only example of aggressive image control from the company . earlier this month , jetsmarter pitched the verge on a demonstration of their service , with the condition that if a positive report wasn t published within five business days , the reporter would be charged , . over the phone , jetsmarter ceo petrossov and ronn torossian , the company s chief business officer , acknowledged that the service was rapidly evolving . it s a fast growing technology company that makes changes , said torossian . there are some people , primarily those who joined two years ago , who might not be a fit for the company today . the challenge , said petrossov , is how do we pair luxury exclusivity with the sharing economy ? there are growing pains and it s not right for everybody , i agree . torossian , a famously rough and tumble pr executive whose reputation as the bad boy of buzz previously earned him regular coverage on gawker and elsewhere , was dismissive of the complaints . these are wealthy people , this isn t some mass market gym you re paying a month for , said torossian . millionaires and wealthy people can t bring food on the plane or pay for food on the plane ? it s a little bit insane . the private airline industry presents a tempting target for entrepreneurs and investors . it s a really beguiling market , because there is just so much waste , says bill gurley , a veteran tech investor who backed uber and sits on its board . for a startup , that is a huge opportunity . many private jets fly just to hours a year , while commercial airlines can fly well over , . and according to clive jackson , the ceo and founder of global charter startup victor , a significant percentage of private jets in the air are flying empty . a plane chartered from new york to miami , for example , will often need to head back to base or relocate for its next pickup . this trip known in the industry as the empty leg , deadhead , or repo still requires an expensive amount of fuel , crew , and maintenance . many in the world of private aviation are fixated by how best to utilize these empty legs , says jackson . the dream is to build a marketplace to match empty legs with consumer demand . jetsmarter launched in , and in its early days its business was built around these empty legs . jetsmarter got paid by its members , its members got a deal on a flight , and the charter operator had a passenger to defray the cost of its deadhead . but while empty legs were a bargain , they had limited appeal . you needed a very specific kind of customer , one who would decide on short notice to drop everything and jet off to a destination without knowing exactly how they would get back . what s more , jetsmarter had little control over the plane s itinerary . if the jet s owner decided to delay their flight for an extra day of golf , then jetsmarter s members would also be delayed . if he s gonna make money as a business , it s not going to be by monetizing empty legs , says bradley stewart , ceo of xojet , which sells this type of flight to jetsmarter . so beginning in , the company started adding some reliable inventory of its own . jetsmarter created a shuttle service between hot spots like new york , los angeles , and miami , on which members could book seats for free . members can also pay to create a shuttle at the date and time of their choosing . they get a seat on a luxury jet , on their schedule , but at a fraction of the cost of renting the whole plane or buying an ownership stake . the only catch is they have to share once a member creates a shuttle , the remainder of the seats are offered free to other members . big shout out jetsmarter who made my life so much easier this wk . love this app , the only way book private jets . pic . twitter . com wwb sf ssj fergie fergie may , a lot of jetsmarter members loved the new offering . steven budker , an entrepreneur running a medical device company , says he flies over times a year , and estimates he s paying about a trip , a great price for a seat on a fancy jet . he also gets to skip the hassle of jostling among a crowd of strangers working their way through security , baggage claim , and boarding . budker liked the service so much he purchased additional memberships as gifts for his father , daughter , even the designer helping to remodel his house . the company says the average member spends , a year on the service , and claims it has , members , figures that add up to million in annual revenue . adding shuttle service , however , dramatically changed the company s cost structure . unlike empty legs , jetsmarter had to rent these planes at a price not very different from an ordinary customer chartering a private jet . while it could secure empty legs for as little as an hour , the cost to rent scheduled charter service on a jet runs between , and , an hour . jetsmarter says it now runs over shuttle flights a week . if the average flight was two and half hours and cost , an hour , jetsmarter s shuttle program would cost million a year . the company claims that it has been able to secure jets at a price dramatically lower than its competitors . we ve really cracked the code as to how to optimize usage , build up demand quickly , and aggregate supply very cost efficiently , says petrossov . but jetsmarter s own suppliers seem to contradict that claim . jet linx , a fleet operator that charters planes to jetsmarter , is a big fan of the company . i think it s fantastic , said ceo jamie walker . we re bullish to see them continue to improve and gain more marketshare . but for shuttle rentals , walker says , they pay us just like a jet card client calling us and booking the flight . xojet told the same story . he pays full rate for shuttle , said the ceo , though he added that xojet would work with jetsmarter on the margin , maybe percent . none of the suppliers contacted by the verge suggested they were offering jetsmarter regular , deeply discounted fares on shuttle flights . and all agreed that very few of their empty legs , if any , could be used for shuttle service . the rising costs of running the service were reflected in the membership pricing . though the company continues to offer an empty legs only membership for , , between and , the cost of an all inclusive annual membership went from , to , . the company also introduced an upper tier with extra benefits for , per year . jetsmarter projected the lifestyle of a country club , but their shifting price and perk structure moved with the speed of a silicon valley startup . there are plenty of successful tech companies that haven t achieved profitability uber has achieved a tremendous valuation despite its huge losses , and snapchat just went public with a balance sheet that sports more red ink each quarter . they re the digital online airplane version of uber . a lot of these high growth , concept business backed by venture capital are certainly burning cash , said xojet s stewart . there is no doubt jetsmarter is one of them . the question is do they get to profitability within six months , months , months , months ? if so , they re off to the races . if not , who knows what happens . they are trying to get to some light at the end of the tunnel in terms of profitability , but it s not going to happen . jetsmarter s competitors paint a darker picture . they say that its claims on cost are ludicrous , that the company must be sustaining heavy losses , and is staying aloft through a combination of new members and venture capital . the recent cutbacks and changes to the service , they argue , are an effort to control costs . they are trying to get to some light at the end of the tunnel in terms of profitability , but it s not going to happen , argues peter maestrales , the founder of airstream jets , a private charter company . on his company blog , maestrales published a pair of articles arguing that jetsmarter was a ponzi scheme . in response , jetsmarter threatened him with a defamation lawsuit , claiming it would file in three days if he didn t take the post down . three weeks later , the company still hadn t filed suit . instead , maestrales says petrossov called him repeatedly , begging him to take down the blog post , and offering up the potential of a business partnership . he is not the only person the company has attempted to silence through its legal department . a former jetsmarter member , who asked the verge not to use his name , signed up for the service in the fall of . he travels frequently for business , and felt it was a great deal . but from the very start , he was bothered by the ever changing terms . i m one of those guys , if i spend the money for a membership , i don t like the bait and switch . as he considered whether or not to renew his membership , he joined a private chat room where jetsmarter members exchanged travel tips and coordinated around shared charter bookings . i was bitching . some members private messaged me saying they feel the same way , he said with a laugh . one of my buddies said , be careful in that chat room . i didn t know what he was talking about . one of my buddies said , be careful in that chat room . i didn t know what he was talking about . when the member tried to renew his membership a few days later , he was denied . the company offered him no explanation for this decision . a second member shared a similar experience about losing their membership after complaining publicly . jetsmarter declined to share any details on the record about the decision to reject members . other cases demonstrated the challenges of balancing the entitlement of jetsmarter s clients , and their sometimes boorish behavior , with effectively running a shared consumer service . two members say they were unjustly kicked off for complaining about the company , though they committed offenses that would ve drawn censure anywhere . one source says he was booted for a critical instagram post made by his brother on a flight they took together , though the company s termination letter says that the post was racially tinged and invaded the privacy of other passengers . another member initially said he was kicked out for complaining about the service , but later acknowledged that someone at the company told him the reason for his cancellation was lewd comments he d made on a flight . they are using the excuse that my problem is i was talking too loud about fucking some girls , he complained bitterly . it s a private jet . i can say whatever i want . jetsmarter declined to comment to the verge on revoking his membership . in a whatsapp group chat , one person offered counsel to members , and a warning . if you don t like them , don t renew with them . . . by the way , if management would see what you guys write here you would not be renewed . fyi . people in the group half joked that they would be reported as the top complainers . several members said that they believed jetsmarter employees , masquerading as customers , were reporting on users , forcing customers to abandon the chat rooms and create new ones . one of the most vocal defenders of the company in the group chat had an area code from south florida , where jetsmarter is based . as one person in the group put it in an interview , many worried that someone was just going to take notes and turn you in . in interviews , members specifically cited the non disparagement clause as a source of concern . one former customer told the verge that if he hadn t already declined to renew his membership , essentially , i wouldn t have this conversation with you . one member believed the clause might not be legal , but decided not to bring it up with jetsmarter , as he worried he wouldn t be renewed if the company thought he was a troublemaker . in a separate chat thread , a current member who has renewed the service and purchased memberships for friends wrote , i ve been a silent contributor to the group out of fear of similar action . i ve not been terminated but i ve been pissed about them removing features under the guise of we can change the memberships as they re not guaranteed . the second they see members saying bad things they cancel your membership and don t give you your money back . others said they were waiting until their membership expired to voice an honest opinion . unfortunately i can t go on the record because it seems like , the second they see members saying bad things they cancel your membership and don t give you your money back , wrote one current member in a text to the verge . but the second my membership is over i plan on writing a scathing review so people don t have to get conned by these people . jetsmarter s aggressive image maintenance seems to be working , at least according to the members who expressed fear about voicing complaints . but the non disparagement clause may be unenforceable . late last year , the us passed the consumer review fairness act , which prohibits companies from writing gag clauses into contracts or terms of service that prohibit negative reviews . the act , says eric goldman , a law professor at santa clara university school of law , was clearly meant to pick up quote unquote non disparagement clauses . the law , parts of which went into effect this month , would seem to cover jetsmarter s non disparagement terms . that clause in jetsmarter s member agreement almost certainly runs afoul of the consumer review fairness act , he says . the ftc and state attorneys general will be vested with enforcement power under the act , although it s yet to be seen how often they bring legal action . jetsmarter told the verge that any member who says they were thrown out for speaking ill of the company isn t telling the truth and they were rejected for valid reasons , though the company declined to provide details . but petrossov was blunt about policing the jetsmarter community and removing anyone who caused issues with other customers . i ll be frank with you , there are certain people who don t mesh with our community . and we take a very strict stance toward the type of people we bring in , said petrossov . you re in a tube , you re in a small airplane and we are trying to create a group of people that are like minded , that are respectful to each other . it s very difficult . this has not been an easy thing to do . you know you are in love when you can t fall asleep because reality is finally better than your dreams . dr . sueuss c karakus a post shared by jetsmarter jetsmarter on feb , at am pst jetsmarter is trying to pull off a delicate balancing act . it offers its members privacy , while offering up the prospect of mingling with the wealthy and famous as an enticement to new members . the company s executives talk constantly about bringing the benefits of private air travel to a new class of people . it would not be an understatement to say we have changed many people s lives , says torossian . but when members complain , the response from the company has been to blame the entitlement of the rich . what you re talking about is somebody won t pay a few hundreds dollars to take a helicopter , to get on a private plane ? asked torossian . it sounds to me like very wealthy people , most of whom are very happy with the company , who might feel like the company should be subsidizing everything they do . petrossov agreed . it s kind of trivial , you have wealthy people complaining about private jets . it s a bit crazy in the whole scheme of things . it is painful to us when certain members really think they are not getting enough value . he argued every tweak to the service had only improved the offering . we ve given people , times more than what they were buying into back then . still , he conceded , jetsmarter had a role to play as well . at the end of the day a lot of this is about managing expectations . it s kind of trivial , you have wealthy people complaining about private jets . a current member agreed with that assessment what they are projecting , it s luxury , it s like nothing you ve experienced before , private jet travel but much cheaper . anyone who has some common sense realizes it s not really all those things . the problem , he felt , was that members were promised the moon before they signed up . nothing will ever cost you anything , we won t nickel and dime you , luxury white glove service . the value of the flights was good , but he felt the actual experience was a letdown . with great expectations come great disappointments . for now , this member was on the fence about renewing . it used to be easy to get a flight on a week s notice . now , i have to book a month out , which isn t great with my travel patterns . so the value kind of diminishes . he felt jetsmarter had transformed from a romantic adventure to an unpredictable headache . they are going through the same thing the airlines went through , except in two years instead of . additional reporting by nikki erlick and stephan kozub	 last may , a member of alberta s rat patrol paid a visit to a farm on the outskirts of sibbald , a small town near the saskatchewan border . he found holes bored into the foundation of a grain silo and feces littering the trash pit telltale signs of a rat infestation , probably strong . he scattered aquamarine pellets of poison , then returned with seven pest control officers , including phil merrill , head of the province s rat patrol . using a crane , they hoisted the granary off its foundation , watching for anything scurrying out , one officer standing ready with a shotgun . all the rats were dead . the patrol stomped on the burrows , then burned the silo for good measure . it was a bit of a disappointment , merrill said . a few years earlier , they d gunned down rats at a single farm . enemy at the grateson the front lines of humanity s high tech , global war on ratsby josh dzieza last may , a member of alberta s rat patrol paid a visit to a farm on the outskirts of sibbald , a small town near the saskatchewan border . he found holes bored into the foundation of a grain silo and feces littering the trash pit telltale signs of a rat infestation , probably strong . he scattered aquamarine pellets of poison , then returned with seven pest control officers , including phil merrill , head of the province s rat patrol . using a crane , they hoisted the granary off its foundation , watching for anything scurrying out , one officer standing ready with a shotgun . all the rats were dead . the patrol stomped on the burrows , then burned the silo for good measure . it was a bit of a disappointment , merrill said . a few years earlier , they d gunned down rats at a single farm . merrill was swigging chocolate milk and recounting stories of past infestations as we drove toward the control zone , a sparsely populated buffer between alberta , the largest inhabited rat free region on earth , and the rest of the infested planet . there was the rat in an air canada cockpit chased down the tarmac , killed and the infestation at the dump poisoned , monitored with night vision cameras to be sure . keeping the province rat free requires constant vigilance , and every spring and fall , merrill and his team patrol the zone . all members of the genus rattus are banned from the province , but alberta is especially alert for one species the brown rat , also known as the wharf rat , sewer rat , and norway rat . that last one is a bit of a misnomer the species traces its origins to northern china and reached europe only in the th century , where it scurried aboard ships and made landfall in north america around the time of the american ampnbsprevolution . fast , strong , and highly adaptable , it s now present just about anywhere humans live or visit . a structure in alberta suspected of rat infestation and subsequently burned down . image courtesy of phil merrillalberta had the good luck of being one of the last places rats invaded , and in , the government decided to keep them out rather than try to control them once they gained a foothold . the first and most important step was to teach albertans some of whom had never seen rats before to fear and hate them . preserved rat corpses were exhibited at schools and fairs , and the government printed world war ii style posters depicting a province besieged by rodent hordes . the message was clear if the rats were to be kept out , all citizens had to do their part fortifying their farms , reporting incursions , and if need be , taking up arms . preserved rat corpses were exhibited at schools and fairsthe campaign has been largely successful , and half a century on , albertans remain vigilant . merrill s rat patrol has a hotline , rats , where people can report possible sightings . the hotline gets hundreds of calls a year , mostly false alarms misidentified muskrats or pocket gophers . when albertans do spot a rat , they often act quickly , beating it to death with bats or shovels before calling it in . they even report their neighbors for keeping pet rats , or fancy rats , as exterminators call them . rats are rats , and alberta s government gives them no quarter . sometimes the owners have their rats flown out of the province , but generally , merrill said , we take care of them . alberta s landscape makes eradication feasible . it s sparsely populated , and its sprawling farms and small towns provide few structures where rats can shelter from the harsh winters . the , square mile province is protected by the rocky mountains in the west , frigid forests to the north , and badlands to the south . accordingly , the government concentrates its efforts on a mile long strip on the eastern border with saskatchewan . you can t ignore the rat ! , a poster commissioned by the government of alberta . source provincial archives of alberta . as the nine members of the patrol travel through the control zone , they check every building that might harbor a rat . they examine foundations for signs of gnawing , ask farmers if they ve seen anything suspicious , and hand out buckets of poison pellets . merrill , an energetic and affable year old who s worked pest control since , says that the key to catching a rat is to think like a rat you want a granary , preferably an old wooden one you want bales of barley or something with a bit of protein to snack on and you want water . each time merrill clears a site , he marks it on a gps map with a skull and crossbones . we pulled up to a farmhouse , and merrill knocked on the door . rat patrol here , come to see if you re harboring any rats , he called out . a gangly , weathered man in his s invited merrill in , pulled out a chair , and the two swapped local rat gossip . they discussed a dilapidated grain house just over the border in saskatchewan . as a rule , rats stick close to home , rarely traveling more than a few hundred feet from their nest , but when things get too crowded , some venture out , running through the surrounding fields most die , but a few find a new building and start to breed . merrill reckoned there were hundreds of rats in the grain house , and the colony was sending rats out in a mile radius . with the cooperation of the other province s pest control officer , he wanted to poison it , maybe raze it completely . we ve got to fight them over there so we don t have to fight them over here , he told me . the control zone is a buffer for alberta , but now merrill wanted a buffer for the buffer . how far can his rat campaign go , i asked him . forever , he said . i know alberta can do it . saskatchewan has seen the vision and is two thirds rat free already . montana has very few rats they could be rat free . vancouver , new york , port cities would be more difficult , but eventually i think we can win there , too . i think the world we re winning . we re going to win . rats are coming ! c . s , a poster commissioned by the government of alberta . source provincial archives of albertafor thousands of years , people have devised all manner of traps to crush , poison , smother , and electrocute rats . we bred terriers to kill them , then used ferrets to flush them out of their holes . bounties were offered , and parties were organized to club , shoot , and stab them . people tried feeding them wet plaster , hoping it d harden and kill them it didn t . we tied tiny bells to them , hoping they d scare other rats away it didn t . people sniped them from trees and gassed them in ships . in the s , the new york daily news declared all out war on rats and armed teens with poison , teeners will spearhead assault on rats , read the declaration . war is on ! though thousands are killed , the relief is only temporary , and other thousands soon replace the slain . so far , the war has been as futile as it s been bloody . rats thrive in the new ecosystems humans have made they lurk in city infrastructure , eating our waste they infiltrate farms , eating stores of food and they hitchhike on global trade , devouring birds , turtles , and anything else they come across . far from beating them back , we ve helped rats spread to every continent except antarctica . the rat s future looks bright . trade is accelerating , and cities are expanding as their infrastructure decays . but in a few places , people are bringing new tactics and technology to the war on rats . scientists , city planners , exterminators , engineers , pilots , and ordinary citizens are all enlisted in these new campaigns , which offer hope of finally pushing back the rat , at least for a while . if there s a constant in the history of rat control , it s the sense that there must be a better way . an early th century department of agriculture report is florid in its despair for centuries the animal has been banned , and human ingenuity has been taxed to the utmost to suppress it , wrote david e . lantz . everywhere the history of the contest is the same . though thousands are killed , the relief is only temporary , and other thousands soon replace the slain . therefore , if conducted along the old lines , the war promises to be never ending . chemicals developed in the middle of the th century raised hopes that perhaps technology could vanquish the rat . but rats are cautious neophobic , is the technical term . they re so wary of new things in their environment that experienced exterminators leave traps unset for days , letting rats become accustomed to eating from them . modern anticoagulant poison is designed to be slow acting , bursting the rodent s capillaries days after ingestion , so that other rats won t associate the bait with death . the problem is that rats breed too quickly for poison to make much difference . the norway rat has a three week gestation period and can produce five litters a year , each with four to eight offspring . in as few as three months , those rats can produce litters of their own . in theory , a single pair is capable of giving rise to thousands of progeny in under a year . last week , the story of a british tortoise that lost its front leg after rats gnawed them off circulated widely . so , we kill them as fast as we can . we kill rats because they eat our food and defecate in whatever they don t eat . they once caused famines , though in modern agriculture they ve been reduced to a nuisance the fda publishes limits of acceptable rodent filth per gram . we kill rats because they re reservoirs of disease , including plague , which wiped out percent of europe s population in the th century and for which we ve never forgiven them . they swarm with other diseases as well a recent study of rats caught in new york city found pathogens proven to cause salmonella , e . coli , hantavirus , and leptospira , as well as previously unknown viruses . we kill rats because they destroy the things we build they gnaw on wires , starting fires , and gas lines , causing explosions . their burrows collapse streets and sidewalks . today , some of the most aggressive rat control projects are carried out by ecologists , trying to kill rats before rats kill native fauna . every era hates rats in its own way . we hate rats because they thrive in the places we try to forget sewers , empty lots , derelict buildings , mountainous landfills . rats live in man s parallel universe , surviving on the effluvia of human society , writes robert sullivan in his book rats . when they scurry onto the subway platform or pop out of our toilets an urban legend that s all too true it s like a furry little return of the repressed . they re ambassadors of entropy , appearing in huge numbers during floods , wars , economic decline , or other periods of disorder . all of that is captured in a pervasive feeling rats are gross . extermination efforts in south georgia . photography by tony martinin late march , on a glacier riven sliver of land , miles off the coast of antarctica , a ampnbspteam of conservationists completed the largest rat eradication ever attempted . over the course of four years , and at a cost of million , they used helicopters to bombard south georgia island with almost tons of poison bait . it s the most ambitious attempt yet to turn back the rats , and the mission s measure for success is unforgiving if a single rat is left alive , they ve failed . when rats arrived , ecological niches became smorgasbordswhen project leader dr . tony martin first visited south georgia years ago , the impact of the rats was stark . neighboring rat free islands were brimming with birds and lush with plants fertilized by their droppings . south georgia itself , however , was barren as a desert . i thought at that time if i could ever get rid of the rats i d die a happy man , martin said , at home in cambridge after a long journey from the south atlantic . before humans set foot on its shores , south georgia was a refuge for penguins , albatrosses , and other seabirds . but then came the sealers , and they brought the rats , which devoured the birds eating eggs , chicks , and even fully grown birds , martin said , grabbing their necks and devouring their brains while still alive . it s estimated that percent of the island s seabirds have been wiped out by rats . south georgia s story has played out on islands around the world . a disproportionate amount of the world s biodiversity lives on islands , where species often evolved in isolation from mammalian predators . but when rats arrived , these ecological niches became smorgasbords . burrowing , ground nesting , and flightless birds were eaten quickly . baby tortoises were gnawed to death . rats are responsible for about half of all bird and reptile extinctions on islands , according to gregg howald of the group island conservation . i have enormous regard for rats , martin said . i get no pleasure out of killing them . but the way i look at it , and i recognize this is a very imperialistic view , is that something is going to die here whether we do something or not , and the choice therefore is not whether to kill or not , it s whether we kill rats , which were introduced by man , or allow the rats your forebears put in place to eradicate the native population . because i have the power , the resources , to kill rats , and hereby save species from going extinct , i choose to use that power . reloading the helicopter poison bucket . photography by roland gockelaerial rat eradication was pioneered in the s in new zealand , where , as elizabeth kolbert wrote last year , defending native birds has become an issue of nationalism . they are , after all , kiwis . conservationists loaded poison into modified fertilizer buckets and used them to disperse bait evenly over entire islands . some birds would succumb to the poison , but it was worth it researchers found that if they killed every last rat , native bird populations quickly rebounded beyond pre eradication levels . gps changed the game , according to keith springer , a new zealand conservation officer who worked on the south georgia mission . it let them overlay islands with a close knit grid that helicopter pilots could trace , ensuring that no spot is missed . other groups copied the strategy . in , ecuador began clearing the galapagos islands of rats , which threatened to wipe out the islands tortoises . the eradication program was a success last year , for the first time in over a century , tortoises were born in the wild on ampnbsppinzon island and survived . in the aleutians , the us fish and wildlife service killed every rat on rat island , where a shipwreck had deposited them in the s . puffins and cormorants quickly returned , and the island was renamed hawadax . at miles long , south georgia is the most ambitious island eradication effort attempted yet . the team divided the island into three sections , each separated by a glacier , and used helicopters to fly along the gps grid they d drawn , flinging poison nuggets from a bucket feet above the ground . it s been several years since the first two sections were poisoned , and the team has seen no sign of rat survivors . on march rd , after weeks of storm delays , martin watched a helicopter fly out to strafe the island with the final load of poison bait . it s strange , he said . i ve thought about this moment for the last six years it consumed my life . i imagined we d be exultant when the last load went out , but we were completely flat . we just stood there thinking , now what ? species specific poisons could be dropped by drones day and nighthe s hoping for more eradication projects , bigger projects . he d like his team to travel the world , a kind of baiting flying circus , he said . when i spoke with him , he was optimistic , having just ampnbspread a paper in the journal biological conservation imagining what the next generation of rodent eradication might look like . the paper outlines an arsenal of possible technologies . there are automatic traps like the spitfire , which sprays sticky poison onto rats when they pass through a tube , killing them when they lick it off , and the a , which uses a co fired piston to smash their skulls . species specific poisons could be dropped by drones day and night . maybe the most ambitious method involves the release of transgenic rats , engineered so that their progeny would be entirely male . if their offspring were capable of spreading the transgene , it could theoretically drive rats to near extirpation without the use of poison . their incredible fecundity would finally be thwarted , and after several generations , a horde of bachelor rats would fight amongst themselves , dwindle , and disappear . i recently met up with rodent expert bobby corrigan in lower manhattan . it was one of the year s first warm evenings , and the faint , sweet whiff of putrefying garbage filled the air . corrigan stood in the middle of the street , watching rats dart out of a storm drain and into trash bags piled on the curb . you can read a city , corrigan said , pointing to dark streaks leading out of the grate . they were marks left by grease from the rats fur , soaked and rubbed onto cement from commutes back and forth along the same routes for months or years . exterminators call them rat runways , and you can see them on the walls and curbs throughout the city . the faint , sweet whiff of putrefying garbage filled the airlast week , new york announced an ambitious new strategy in its war against the city s intractable rat population . the health department is hiring people , effectively doubling the staff who deals with rats . they ll survey neighborhoods to find rat reservoirs , the hidden places where rats have been able to grow to huge numbers , causing problems in neighborhoods no matter what residents or exterminators do . it s not just looking for signs of rats it s following rats and figuring out where they re going , said dan kass , deputy commissioner for environmental health . inspectors will seal up cracks in sidewalks and foundations . exterminators will collapse burrows and poison intensively for months . sewers will be flushed regularly , and health educators will work with neighborhoods to design better trash management programs , possibly including things like vacuum sealed trash compactors . population biologists will monitor progress in the area , moving on only when there s been a sustained decline in rats . in the program s pilot , areas near the targeted reservoirs saw an percent drop in rat sightings , according to the department . corrigan helped design new york city s pilot rat program he s a sort of global adviser to cities trying to cope with rats . when he s cited , which is often , it s with the epithet renowned rodentologist , ampnbspand he has the fastidious intensity of someone who spends a lot of time studying animals that thrive on sloppiness . he s been called to battle rodents in warsaw , sao paolo , tokyo , and states , but new york , he says , is ratropolis . bobby corrigan inspecting new york city rat burrows . norway rats came to new york in the th century and quickly swarmed the city s docks , stables , slaughterhouses , and refuse strewn streets . as the city s population grew , so did the rats . here they have vast temperature regulated burrows in the sewers and subways , while the city s aging housing stock furnishes them with basements , walls , and facades to nest in . the parks supply them with plenty of soil to burrow in and a steady supply of pizza crusts and chicken bones . new york city is ratropolis because it s trashopolis , corrigan said . the city produces million tons of garbage each year , and much of it sits out in bags on curbs or in alleyways each night , conveniently close to the catchment basins where rats dwell . and that s just the trash that gets properly thrown away , not tossed on the sidewalk . i call it food shrapnel , corrigan said , gesturing to the litter underneath benches in the park . who s going to set off the next grenade ? new york city is ratropolis because it s trashopolis . corrigan clipped his flashlights to his belt , slipped on a fluorescent orange vest , and put on a green hardhat . we proceeded down worth street , stopping occasionally so he could hop up and down in flowerbeds to cave in some burrows , trying to scare out the rats . this burrow is probably too big , he said after his foot plunged through the soil up to his ankle . it s probably decades old , and they just heard me and retreated to the north quarter . the burrows were everywhere , running under seemingly solid sidewalks , streets , and parks . you can see statues in parks that are starting to list because of all the burrows under them , corrigan said . they re disassembling the city . corrigan doesn t hate rats quite the opposite . i absolutely respect them , like them , admire them , he said . he calls them one of the most finely designed mammals nature ever created . they re fast , able to run feet per second , he said , running down a list of the rat s strengths . they can swim and climb and squeeze through holes as small as a quarter . their jaws are strong , exerting up to , pounds per square inch , and the enamel on their teeth is harder than iron . they re clever , diabolically clever , corrigan said . they breed quickly and can cram into tiny spaces . if you want to kill the rats in this park , you d have to kill percent or you d be exactly where you started a year later , he said . and like us , they re omnivorous , adaptable , generalists . this is an absolutely incredible animal , corrigan told me . he s seen rats in remote corners of central park , burrowing to eat earthworms , living like moles rats stalking pigeons , dragging them into their burrows rats raiding the jamaica bay wildlife refuge , eating terrapin eggs . a colleague of his reported seeing rats swimming in the hudson , eating floating garbage and fish . the problem is they want our space as much as we do , corrigan said . they dash along subway platforms and ride in train cars . unsatisfied with leftovers , they venture into restaurants . they moved into the brand new conde nast offices , even before the editors arrived . sometimes a rat exploring a sewer follows a smaller tunnel up and out and into the toilet bowl of terrified apartment residents . new york s program received , complaints about rats last year , up from , the year before . that represents about percent of the complaints directed to the department of health and mental hygiene . no one knows how many rats live in new york . the one rat per person statistic , often cited , is bogus . a grad student recently attempted a calculation based off complaints and came up with million , but even that s a total ballpark . rats moved into the brand new conde nast offices even before the editors arrivedthe sun had set by the time we reached chinatown s columbus park , a hotspot cited by kass in his announcement of the reservoir program . at the park s entrance , someone had jammed a shard of concrete into a rat burrow , a sign of human frustration , corrigan said . six or seven rats gathered around a styrofoam container , taking turns sticking their snouts into a hole and tossing it around , trying to get at whatever leftovers were inside . tired of waiting , a smaller rat dashed across the sidewalk , scaled the fence , and leapt into an open garbage can . the rats of new york city are too entrenched to be eradicated the density of the city makes a thorough patrol like alberta s unfeasible , and their proximity to us makes the sort of poison campaign used in south georgia impossible it would kill them , but it could kill us , too , and more would arrive to take their place . instead , corrigan said , we have to manage their population by targeting the source of their sustenance , and often that means changing human behavior . that s a major part of the reservoir strategy taking community leaders around to look at hotspots , working with them to rat proof buildings , cutting down on littering , and improving waste management services . it s a massive civic undertaking , both at the neighborhood and policy levels . poison should be the last thing you go for , corrigan said . rats are a symptom of larger issues . the rats aren t going away , corrigan said , as we watched them standing on their burrows , watching us . we re going to share the city . phil merrill inspecting a grain silo in alberta . photography by josh dziezaas with all great pests , we like to joke that rats will outlast us . after all , they survived nuclear tests on the marshall islands . if anything , they re even better positioned to thrive in today s slower , environmental apocalyptic scenarios . in a world where ecosystems are being upended , cities are growing , infrastructure is aging , and waste is increasing , the rat has all the traits necessary for success . in the darwinian sense , the rat is just as fit for the world we ve built as we are . today s rat campaigns are attempts to rein in the rare species that excels under our new rules . with enough effort , money , and technology , we may be able to control their numbers . but the thing about rats is that we always win the battles , but they tend to win the war . undoing the work of a couple stowaway rats takes millions of dollars and months of helicopter bombardment , but it would be for naught if one pregnant rat hops off a visiting yacht . in cities , just keeping them to manageable numbers takes the work of public officials , exterminators , trash collectors , and scientists , as well as the attention of every citizen . and in alberta , holding them at bay takes province wide vigilance and regular border patrols . we always win the battles , but rats tend to win the warafter making the rounds in the control zone , merrill drove over the border to saskatchewan . we drove past the burnt out hole where an infested granary used to be , over close cropped hills of wheat and barley , and toward a decrepit grain storage facility that sits in the bottom of a muddy valley . this is where they re coming from , he said as we approached . jeepers creepers , look at those holes . the base of the building was riddled with burrows and surrounded by drifts of rat feces some of it bright blue , a sign of a past poisoning attempt , clearly futile . merrill became dismayed as he surveyed the scene , climbing up to peek in a window , kneeling to look at the foundation . he decided the building had to come down . otherwise the rats will keep coming , and eventually some will get through the zone . afterward , at the regional pest control headquarters , he checked his email and found some photos of dead rodents caught near edmonton . he d gotten the call earlier but figured someone had misidentified a gopher . they hadn t . they were rats . over the phone , he told the edmonton pest control officer where to get poison and traps . conferring with other officers , he talked about sending someone to investigate how the rats got in . never a dull moment , he said , ruefully , testing the trigger on a shiny co powered trap . maps of the zone lined the walls of the office . a taxidermied rat sat on the shelf , baring its teeth . photography by andrew whiteedited by michael zelenko	 you can play a slot machine in las vegas before you ve even reached baggage claim there are tiny slots parlors in every terminal of mccarran international airport . once you pick up your rental car , you can stop for gas and play slots at a convenience store . and that s all before you ve even reached your hotel casino , which if it follows the modern standard dedicates roughly percent of its gaming floor to slots , and only percent to table games . engineers of addictionslot machines perfected addictive gaming . now , tech wants their tricksby andrew thompsonyou can play a slot machine in las vegas before you ve even reached baggage claim there are tiny slots parlors in every terminal of mccarran international airport . once you pick up your rental car , you can stop for gas and play slots at a convenience store . and that s all before you ve even reached your hotel casino , which if it follows the modern standard dedicates roughly percent of its gaming floor to slots , and only percent to table games . the room was silent apart from the soothing hum of two dozen hibernating consolesbally technologies , one of the world s largest manufacturers of slot machines , is headquartered miles south of the strip . when i visited bally in mid march , mike trask , the company s senior marketing manager , walked me into the company s showroom to play some games . compared to the cacophony of a casino floor , bally s showroom was practically monastic , the lights low and the room silent apart from the soothing hum of two dozen hibernating consoles . trask , a tall man in his s with dirty blond hair , showed me the company s new friends themed game , installed on bally s prowave cabinet , a slick , inch curved console . ampnbspfriends celebrated its th anniversary last year , and the company hopes to tap some of that nostalgia . that person , that girl who watched every episode of friends when it came out , is our demographic , trask said , standing alongside the cabinet . i took a seat in front of the unit , and trask touched a logo on the display s upper corner , selected a box on the display that ensured i would get a bonus round , and told me to hit the spin button . i did , and a pared down version of the show s theme song played , the nbc sextet smiled at me from the prime of their youth , and five reels of symbols a central perk decal , a guitar , screenshots of characters scrolled down the screen . the wheel of fortune style bonus round featured a clip of rachel saying , happy birthday , grandma ! wearing a wedding dress . bally assembles all of its machines in a factory warehouse next to its game studios and tucked behind its vegas corporate headquarters . last year , scientific games , bally s parent company , shipped out more than , new units . on my visit , hundreds of freshly assembled slot machine shells , featuring the industry standard black exterior and jutting dashboards , lined the warehouse walls . a tag attached to each cabinet indicated its destination oklahoma , washington , michigan , canada . only a handful were destined for vegas casinos , a sign of gaming s national and international expansion . scientific games acquired bally last year for billion . at the time , states had legalized gambling , a heavily taxable industry , to quickly infuse deficient coffers . technology built for slot machines has found admirers in silicon valleybut the expansion of gaming generally is the expansion of slot machines specifically the modern casino typically earns to percent of its revenue from slots , a stratospheric rise from the s when slots comprised percent or less . new york , the latest state to introduce gaming , doesn t even allow table games , and pennsylvania , now the third largest gaming state in the country after nevada and new jersey , only later allowed table games in an amendment to its legislation . and increasingly , the psychological and technical systems originally built for slot machines including reward schedules and tracking systems have found admirers in silicon valley . in the factory , trask and i passed a prowave cabinet , a design released by bally in mid that features a inch concave screen , like an even more curved samsung tv . trask claimed that putting the same exact games on curved screens increased gameplay percent . i asked him why that was . it looks cool it s incredibly clear , he said in a tone suggesting a guess as good as any . game designers are charged with somehow summoning the ineffable allure of electronic spectacle developing a system that is both simple and endlessly engaging , a machine to pull and trap players into a finely tuned cycle of risk and reward that keeps them glued to the seat for hours , their pockets slowly but inevitably emptying . as we stood over the gaming cabinet , trask told me about the floor of the mgm , home to , machines and hundreds of different games . trask s mission , as he saw it , was simple our job is to get you to choose our game . the prototypical slot machine was invented in brooklyn in the mid s it was a cash register sized contraption and used actual playing cards . inserting a nickel and pressing a lever randomized the cards in the small display window , and depending on the poker hand that appeared , a player could win items from the establishment that housed the machine . in , charles fey developed the poker machine into the liberty bell machine , the first true slot with three reels and a coin payout . each reel had symbols , giving players a in , chance of hitting the cent jackpot if three liberty bells lined up . the three reel design was a hit in bars and became a casino standard , but for decades gaming houses considered them little more than a frivolity distractions for the wives of table game players . accordingly , casinos were dense with table games , and slots were relegated to the periphery . that began to change in the s , when bally introduced the electromechanical slot machine . the new rig let players insert multiple coins on a single bet , and machines could multiply jackpots as well as offer up smaller , but more frequent wins . multi line play was introduced alongside the classic horizontal lineup , players could now win with diagonal and zig zagged combinations . the new designs sped up gameplay and breathed life into the stagnating industry . william si redd , the bolo tie wearing mississippi native who oversaw some of bally s new projects during the era , was instrumental to that renaissance . the player came to win , he said , he didn t come to lose , so speed it up , give him more , be more liberal . let him win more , but then you make money still with the speeding up , because it was extra liberal . in other words , the new machines lowered slots volatility gaming parlance for the frequency at which a player experiences big wins and losses . the casino floor of the boulder club , early s . image courtesy of the university of nevada , las vegasvideo poker gained a reputation as the crack cocaine of gamblingin the s , redd left bally and founded another gaming manufacturer that was later renamed igt . igt specialized in video gambling machines , or video poker . video poker machines could be designed to have even lower volatility , paying players back small amounts on more hands . and video poker s interactive elements made them extra engrossing , turning them into an enormous success people lined up to play the first machines , and the game s ability to command a player s complete concentration for hours gave it a reputation as the crack cocaine of gambling . if you were to take and play slots , you d get about an hour of play , but video poker was designed to give you two hours of play for that same , redd said at the time , instructing game designers to lengthen the time it took a poker machine to consume a player s money . redd also acquired the patent for the newly created random number generator , which computerized the odds calculator behind the spinning reels and allowed game makers to control volatility . a modern slot machine , at its core , is nothing more than an rng going through millions or billions of numbers at all times . when a player hits a spin button , they are simply stopping the rng at a particular moment . everything beyond that the music , the mini games , the actual appearance of spinning reels , rachel , monica , and the rest of the gang keeping you company is window dressing to keep you hitting spin . igt now makes percent of the world s video poker machines and is the largest manufacturer of video slots in the world . its wheel of fortune franchise spans every kind of slot machine reels , curved screens , and massive installations with enormous physical flourishes . on my visit to their las vegas offices , i asked jacob lanning , igt s vice president of product management , what makes a good game . if you can figure that out , you ve got a job , he said . trask had told me something similar if we knew what the perfect game was , we d just keep making that game over and over . perhaps no one has uncovered the platonic ideal of the slot machine , but certain principles undergird most games . first , there s a vague aesthetic uniformity colors tend toward the primary or pastel , franchise tie ins are a must , and the game soundtracks are typically in a major key . meanwhile , the multi line wins introduced by bally have become an unintelligible tangle modern slots offer players upwards of and sometimes different winning combinations so many that without the corresponding lights , sounds , and celebration , most casual and even advanced players would have trouble recognizing whether they d won or lost . if we knew what the perfect game was , we d just keep making that game over and over . to keep players gambling , all slots rely on the same basic psychological principles discovered by b . f . skinner in the s . skinner is famous for an experiment in which he put pigeons in a box that gave them a pellet of food when they pressed a lever . but when skinner altered the box so that pellets came out on random presses a system dubbed variable ratio enforcement the pigeons pressed the lever more often . thus was born the skinner box , which skinner himself likened to a slot machine . the skinner box works by blending tension and release the absence of a pellet after the lever is pressed creates expectation that finds release via reward . too little reward and the animal becomes frustrated and stops trying too much and it won t push the lever as often . like video poker , most multi line slots rarely pay large jackpots , instead doling out smaller wins frequently . they re imitating the formula of video poker , but they re doing it in a slot formula , natasha sch ll , an associate professor at mit who has researched slots for years , says . in , princeton university press published addiction by design machine gaming in las vegas , the culmination of her research and a deconstruction of the slot machine . too little reward and the animal becomes frustrated and stops trying too much and it won t push the lever as oftensch ll says modern slot machines essentially continued the trend started by redd so as not to jolt players too intensely in the form of losses or wins . too big wins have been shown to stop play because it s such an intense shift in the situation that you ll kind of pause , you ll stop , you ll take your money and leave , says sch ll . stretching out gameplay with minor rewards , sch ll says , allows you to get in the flow of , another little win , another little win . as a result , modern slots pay out on approximately percent of all spins , instead of the percent of traditional slots . the sense of risk is completely dampened , sch ll says . designers call them drip feed games . that analysis is supported by a american gaming association white paper . lower volatility games often have greater appeal in locals markets than in destination resort markets like las vegas or atlantic city customers tend to play these games for longer periods of time in other words , lower volatility games paved the way for gaming s wild expansion nationwide . the advent of bonus games has also helped bolster slot machines popularity instead of just winning money , certain combinations can trigger mini games . in the igt showroom , lanning showed me the company s forthcoming entourage game , in which a bonus game has the player match portraits of characters . in the industry , it s called a pick em bonus . those are the most popular features , melissa price , the senior vice president of gaming for caesar s entertainment , told me . customers enjoy perceived skill experience . and then , there s the emotional appeal price told me the company commissioned a study to find out why people love the wheel of fortune line so much . people said it was as much about the brand as anything , she said . people said , that brand i used to hear it in the living room at my grandma s house , i d hear that wheel spinning because my grandma watched it . it reminds me of my grandma . i mean , how can you compete with that ? price and i spoke on the floor of harrah s las vegas at am the slots players were already at their machines , or perhaps they d been there all night . last year , harrah s parent company , caesar s entertainment , declared bankruptcy as a consequence of overextension and growing competition . during proceedings , creditors appraised caesar s vast store of customer data as the company s most valuable asset , worth about billion . harrah s pioneered the now industry standard total rewards player tracking system , first with a punchcard program introduced in , then with a digital program and magnetic cards in the s . slots were easy to track , and stood at the very center of the program . the system grew even more sophisticated under the auspices of former ceo gary loveman . loveman arrived at harrah s fresh from teaching at harvard business school , and he brought a methodical business savvy to an industry that , in many ways , had spent decades winging it . caesar s vast store of customer data has been valued at about billionbefore the tracking system , the player management was as sophisticated as watching which players spent a lot of money and comping amenities to encourage them to spend more . we all looked around and said , there s got to be a more automated way to do that , said price . price and i stood behind a woman playing igt s ellen degeneres game . ellen s head whizzed down the reels on the parabolic display in high definition . as long as the player had her total rewards card inserted in the machine , every time she hit the spin button the system recorded the size of her bet , what game it was spent on , at what time , how long she d been playing for , and so on , until she hits the cash out button on the machine , at which point all the data is encapsulated in her file , along with all the other games she has ever played at a caesar s casino . player tracking systems revealed more than a pit boss ever could over time , harrah s can create a portrait of the person s risk profile , including how much money a player typically loses before they stop playing and what kinds of gifts to give them to keep them on the gaming floor . sometimes , that can be a penthouse suite other times , it can be as little as giving a player in cash . in , this american life charted the lurid and unsettling extreme of how these systems can be used in a story about a harrah s in indiana that enticed a woman to keep playing with unlimited hotel suites , diamond jewelry , and free trips to the kentucky derby . the perks fueled her gaming habit until she was , in debt . we are the envy of probably every consumer products industry out there . every casino today has a form of the data system invented at harrah s most of them are now built by bally . we are the envy of probably every consumer products industry out there because of the amount of data that we really have on our players , said price . newer systems can even visualize heat maps of casino activity an operator can see precisely how much is being spent in a specific time period in localized areas . the data also vindicates redd s approach the small slots customer , over a lifetime of spending , is just as valuable as the high roller . the slot player was the forgotten customer , loveman told bloomberg businessweek in . i had to be willing to be unsexy in this , loveman added . i can take you to a casino that would have a lot of young beautiful people in there and you would say , man , this is a happening place . i could take you to another place where there are a lot of people who look like your parents . the latter would be a lot more profitable than the former . my job is to make the latter . after my trip to vegas , i visited the sugarhouse casino in philadelphia , on the bank of the delaware river . sugarhouse opened in and is one of casinos that turned pennsylvania into a gaming powerhouse after legalization in . the casino s interior clear passageways , a clean line of sight from the eastern to western walls brimmed with activity on a tuesday evening . sugarhouse squealed with the cacophony of slots and the saccharine melodies sounded like a thousand robots blowing bubbles . the slot manufacturer silicon gaming decided at one point that soundtracks in the key of c were the most agreeable . in years of legalized gaming , the state has earned billion from table games and billion from slots . table players at sugarhouse made their wagers at an island amidst an ocean of slots . as i made my way through the casino , i struck up a conversation with two slot players diane singleton , a year old retiree and jack , who refused have his last name published . the two were playing fu dao le , whose theme can only be described as cherubic chinese babies . the game was loaded onto a prowave cabinet , and a red cursive bally logo hung in the upper right corner of the screen . singleton says she threw her rewards card away because it reminded her of how much money she d spenti asked what they enjoyed about the game . jack said that unlike other games , fu dao le is highly interactive . he likes the game s kooky stuff you can touch the display , he said , touching the image of cherubic babies above the reels , causing them to laugh with a pillsbury doughboy like giggle . jack and singleton say they ve both earned black cards through sugarhouse s player tracking system , meaning they ve each spent more than , here . jack says the casino has comped them four cruises so far singleton says she threw her card away because it reminded her of how much money she d spent . i had more questions , but at a certain point it became apparent that singleton was no longer listening . she s in the zone right now , said jack . the zone is at the core of sch ll s theory about the success and proliferation of slot machines . she heard the term over and over again in her years of research the players repeatedly told her that they played to zone out , to escape thought . to understand the zone , you first have to understand flow , the concept developed by hungarian psychologist mihaly csikszentmihalyi to describe a hyperfocused state of absorption . during flow , time speeds up hours feel like minutes or slows down reactions can be made instantly and the mind reaches a state of almost euphoric equilibrium . sch ll , in her book , describes csikszentmihaly s four criteria of flow f irst , each moment of the activity must have a little goal second , the rules for attaining that goal must be clear third , the activity must give immediate feedback fourth , the tasks of the activity must be matched with challenge . for most of their history , slots easily fulfilled the first two criteria after lowering volatility , they fulfilled the third criterion , and with the introduction of multiple lines , endless bonus rounds , and the occasional mini game , they finally fulfilled the four criteria . the zone is hyperfocused , neurotransmitters abuzz , but directed toward a numbness with no goal in particularthe zone is flow through a lens darkly hyperfocused , neurotransmitters abuzz , but directed toward a numbness with no goal in particular . when singleton emerged from the zone , i asked her again why she found the slots so compelling . i lost my husband two years ago to throat cancer , she explained . he was the love of my life , and i started doing this just to i was out of my mind and spent a lot of time at the cancer center . jack had lost his son to pancreatic cancer . as they told their stories , jack and singleton hit the spin buttons and the machines blared so loudly that their words were lost in the noise . singleton says she never recovered from the pain of her loss , and that s why she keeps coming back to the slots . jack echoed that sentiment i don t have to think . and i know i can t win . right , so you know that , said singleton . every now and then you get something , jack agreed . but it s never what you lost . because i don t care whether i win cents or dollars . you just want to see them again . singleton rifled through her wallet filled with bills . i ll be right back , guys , she said , and went off to get change . back at the bally showroom , trask and i had sat in front of the company s new duck dynasty game . there s never been more slot machines in the world than there are today , he said . and that s proliferation not just in the us , but abroad . his hand rested on the game s display , his index finger next to a reel symbol of a cast member sticking his tongue out and playing air guitar . scientific games market now includes countries on six continents . this spring , the company announced it was planning on providing , of the , machines recently authorized in greece . the industry is also preparing for the eventual deterioration of its key middle aged demographic and competition from free to play mobile games . people only have so much leisure time and there s a lot of activity on iphones , price told me . at one point in the bally s warehouse , trask said , you know how you get people younger to gamble ? hand them a fucking telephone . you know how you get people younger to gamble ? hand them a fucking telephone . the industry seems to be working on the same hunch . in , caesar s acquired playtika , an online casino games company that offers free and paid mobile games . a year later , igt acquired the free casino games app doubledown , which runs as both a stand alone mobile app and through facebook . the company now offers online table games and a good sample of its portfolio of slots , including wheel of fortune , to mobile players . earlier this year , the gaming giant appointed former zynga studio manager jim veevart as doubledown s vice president of games . and last year , churchill downs incorporated , which runs seven casinos in addition to its kentucky derby racetrack , acquired the free games company big fish games . meanwhile , the tech sector is adopting the principles of slot design for its own purposes . in the early aughts , the tech writer julian dibbell devised the concept of ludocapitalism , a term inspired by watching world of warcraft players mine gold in the game to making a living in real life . ludocapitalism was an attempt to explain the growing gamification of society through technology . dibbell admits the concept s parameters are vague , but at its most basic it identifies that capitalism can harness the human play drive for better or worse ampnbspand that increasingly , games aren t allegories that say something about our lives they are our lives . as people move toward more data driven existences where points are accumulated from health apps the subject of sch ll s latest research and status is accumulated in identifiable quantities on social media , gamification becomes so total that it can sometimes mask whether what we re doing has any inherent utility outside the game that surrounds it . within gamification , sch ll also identifies slotification we slay an endless procession of monsters with no progress of narrative , mine endless digital coins for no other reason than their aggregation , hit spin on the slot machine with no big payoff . it s this ludic loop of , open and close , open and close you win , you lose , nothing changes , sch ll says . writing in the atlantic , alexis madrigal tapped sch ll s concept of the ludic loop to explain the inextricable entrancement of flipping through facebook photos you push a button over and over , primed for an eternally fleeting informational reward . a more exact replica of a slot may be tinder . the mechanics of the dating app mirror the experience of playing slots the quick swiping results in an intermittent reward of connection , followed by the option to either message your potential date or keep playing . tinder recently launched a premium version that allows the user to undo an accidental not interested swipe , essentially monetizing mistakes made while in the automatic rhythm of the zone . i can t tell you how often i ve been approached since the publication of my book by silicon valley types who say things like , wow , the gambling industry really seems to have a handle on this attention retention problem that we re all facing , sch ll told me . will you come tell our designers how to do a better job ? last year , sch ll heard from nir eyal , a tech entrepreneur who founded and sold two startup companies that produce advertisements in free to play games . eyal showed me his copy of my book , and it had , like , hundreds of hot pink sticky notes coming out of it , she told me . in his book hooked how to build habit forming products , eyal laid out his hook model of product development that works on basic behaviorist principles a trigger turns into an action turns into a variable reward turns into a further personal investment back into the product . last year , he invited sch ll to speak at his habit summit , hosted at stanford . sch ll gave a talk on the dark side of habits , placing slot machines on the undesirable end of the habit spectrum . everything that engages us , all pieces of content are engineered to be interesting . eyal told me he invited sch ll to offer a less self congratulatory , rah rah voice to the conference . although the conference focused on how to build habit forming tech products , these techniques they have a dark side , he said . if not used appropriately , or if used for nefarious purposes , then they don t always benefit the user . still , it was difficult to determine whether sch ll s slot research has been received as a warning or a how to guide within tech . eyal criticized slot machines for what he said was a business model dependent on addicted players that industry , i have a problem with , he said . but hooked is in many ways tech s version of addiction by design his model of successful product design is a loop going from trigger to action to variable reward to investment and back again . in his trigger section , eyal uses instagram to illustrate how emotional pain can be a powerful motivator to use a product in that app s case , the mostly insubstantial pain of lost memories . he writes , as product designers it is our goal to solve these problems and eliminate pain users who find a product that alleviates their pain will form strong , positive associations with the product over time . i asked eyal what distinguishes mobile games or dating apps from slot machines . he gave a range of answers that sounded at once comprehensive and somewhat defensive that tech addictions never really plummet to the league of gambling addiction that people prone to addiction will be addicted no matter what before finally admitting that , in a sense , everything functions like a slot machine . all content needs to be made interesting . what you re doing as a writer is introducing variable rewards into your story . everything that engages us , all pieces of content are engineered to be interesting , he said . movies aren t real life , books aren t real life , your article isn t real life . it s manufactured to pull us one sentence after another through mystery , through the unknown . it s a slot machine . your article is a slot machine . it has to be variable . so just because an experience introduces variability and mystery that s good ! i think the answer is , it s okay to addict people as long as your business model doesn t depend on it , he said , as if finally finding the answer to a problem that had long seemed without a solution . that s the answer , he added . that s the answer . correction a previous version of this article stated that modern slots have a percent payback rate . in fact , they pay out on approximately percent of all spins . in addition nir eyal s hooked was published in , not . photography by tiffany brown andersonedited by michael zelenko lt ! var player function onyoutubeplayerapiready player new yt . player player , playervars autoplay , controls , autohide , wmode opaque , showinfo , loop , mute , playlist nosktwtpfm , videoid nosktwtpfm , events onready onplayerready function onplayerready event event . target . mute function text . fadein jquery window . scroll function var ht . m video worms . height , ws this . scrolltop if ws gt ht player . pausevideo else player . playvideo gt	 on the eve of the rube goldberg machine contest college nationals , six teams gather in columbus , ohio s center of science and industry children s museum to set up their machines around the walls of the hangar like space and eye up the competition . the teams have made the trip here by car , their carefully assembled machines , months in the making , broken down and borne by trucks and u haul carriers . team members lean over each other to place a golf ball here and balance a domino there , assembling their delicate contraptions for the next day s judging . inside the whimsical but surprisingly dark world of rube goldberg machinesby brendan o connor on the eve of the rube goldberg machine contest college nationals , six teams gather in columbus , ohio s center of science and industry children s museum to set up their machines around the walls of the hangar like space and eye up the competition . the teams have made the trip here by car , their carefully assembled machines , months in the making , broken down and borne by trucks and u haul carriers . team members lean over each other to place a golf ball here and balance a domino there , assembling their delicate contraptions for the next day s judging . made famous by th century cartoonist and erstwhile engineer rube goldberg , the machines that carry his name accomplish mundane tasks in over elaborate ways ideally with a sense of humor . every year , rube goldberg inc . , the company established by goldberg s son , hosts nationwide competitions at middle school , high school , and collegiate levels with new challenges . this year s task erase a chalkboard . there s no monetary prize on the line , but bragging rights are at stake last year s college nationals winners a team from purdue s society of professional engineers pspe appeared on jimmy kimmel live , and they ve returned to defend their title . they set up quickly , with a few team members tweaking obscure parts of the machine but most just lounging around , checking out the other machines with small smiles , superior without being condescending . they ve been here before . i m here to see the team from penn state members of the undergraduate club society of engineering scientists ses compete . of all the crews in the national championship , the ses team is the least experienced half the team are freshman and none have ever participated in a rube goldberg competition before . making it to the nationals was a long shot , and now they have to face off with veterans . but the ses team , or their machine , are nowhere to be found . fifteen minutes before the museum closes , they finally arrive . their trip was foiled by the machine bearing their machine their truck broke down on the way to columbus from state college , pennsylvania . the transmission fluid in their car was low , and then there was snow and four accidents . they ll have to wait for the morning to set up their machine , test it , and fix anything that might have broken during travel . though in life rube goldberg was known to the world as a cartoonist , he was first an engineer . he graduated from uc berkeley in and took a job in san francisco where he worked on the city s sewer systems . but he didn t last long . a naturally talented artist , goldberg became a sports cartoonist for the san francisco chronicle earning per week . goldberg was earning a salary of over million by today s standardshe moved to new york in by , his cartoons were nationally syndicated . this was an era in which a syndicated cartoonist could make a healthy living according to a short profile published by the new york times in , goldberg was earning a salary upwards of , by over million by today s standards . over the course of his decades long career , goldberg drew cartoons that were variously political and frivolous . he penned three nationally syndicated , weekly comic strips boob mcnutt , mike and ike they look alike , and lala palooza and wrote a single frame cartoon called foolish questions . at the peak of his career , he wrote three editorial page cartoons every week , which appeared in newspapers across the country . goldberg s work made him famous he was named the first president of the national cartoonists society in in , he won the pulitzer prize for a political cartoon satirizing nuclear power . the conservative goldberg was invited to the white house by presidents eisenhower and nixon . goldberg has won as many trophies as even his most prolific trophy inventing machine might devise , reads a short times profile on the occasion of his th birthday . he takes them seriously but not too seriously , like nearly everything else in life . goldberg s pulitzer prize winning cartoonbut goldberg s engineering studies were not entirely wasted no cartoons left as indelible an impact on popular culture as his mechanical chain reaction illustrations . goldberg drew his cockamamie inventions intermittently from the beginning of his career he drew the first , automatic weight reducing machine , in , and in marcel duchamp published some of goldberg s designs in new york dada . but the majority of these cartoons come from a bi weekly series he drew for the magazine collier s weekly from to called the inventions of professor lucifer g . butts . professor butts the g stood for gorgonzola was a parody of a berkeley engineering professor who had once asked his students to design a machine that could weigh the world . goldberg , one of those students , found this to be a preposterous task . the machines were symbols of man s capacity for exerting maximum effort to accomplish minimal results . the surrealism of goldberg s cartoon inventions in one , someone has sent professor butts a mail bomb , which he uses to build a device that will blow up inflatable armbands to go swimming is meant to entertain , but it also reveals a dark skepticism of the era in which they were made . the machines were symbols , goldberg wrote , of man s capacity for exerting maximum effort to accomplish minimal results . the early th century was a time of great technological upheaval inventions of unprecedented complexity were introduced to the world as novelties and quickly became ubiquitous . charlie chaplin and the billows feeding machine from s modern timesit was also the era of increasing automation , and increasing concern about automation , exemplified in charlie chaplin s masterpiece modern times . one of the film s dystopian curiosities , the billows feeding machine , invented by mr . j . widdecombe billows , has a distinctly rube goldbergian quality to it ampnbspthis is likely no coincidence , as goldberg and chaplin were friends . the billows feeding machine will eliminate the lunch hour , increase your production , and decrease your overhead , the film s narrator announces . don t stop for lunch be ahead of your competitor . a factory worker is strapped into the feeding machine by his neck the device malfunctions spectacularly . many of professor butts inventions blurred the distinction between man and machine , incorporating people and animals into the mechanical process . in idea for blowing up water wings , a giant razor is used to cut a dog s hair , who then catches a cold and sneezes , which fills up the inflatable arm bands . if razor kills spaniel , then you will sink and never know that professor butts has failed for the first time in his life , the caption reads . automatic suicide device for unlucky stock speculators includes a toy glider hitting the head of a dwarf , who triggers the next step by jumping up and down in pain . the things may look impossibly foolish , but at the same time they are quite logical , goldberg said of his inventions . for instance , when i have a goat crying in one of my cartoons , i have to give a satisfactory reason for having him cry . so i have someone take a tin can away from him . the machines built in rube goldberg s name today he never actually built one himself are largely whimsical things any social commentary subsumed by the gee whiz impulse toward engineering for engineering s sake nowhere is this better displayed than in the gate opening machine from s ampnbspthe goonies . they seem to have taken on a new life , too , in our internet era five years ago , the band ok go released a music video featuring a rube goldberg machine that has since been viewed nearly million times joseph herscher , an artist from new zealand , builds rube goldberg machines and posts them to youtube where they re viewed millions of times and a video of a machine built within the game minecraft has been viewed a little over million times . i think the internet gave rube a whole new meaning , a whole new life , jennifer george , rube goldberg s granddaughter told me . any rube goldberg machine worth its salt goes viral . to qualify for the rube goldberg machine contest college nationals , teams must first compete at regionals . the rules are simple machines must be composed of a minimum of steps and a maximum of , and they must complete their run in under two minutes . teams are permitted to use no more than two air compressors , power cords , or water hoses . elements of the machine may not travel beyond its square foot footprint , and machines can be no more than feet tall . the earliest iteration of the rube goldberg machine contest took place for a few years in the early s between two engineering fraternities at purdue . the trophy from that competition ended up with the theta tau fraternity until , when a pledge named lonnie oxley , who was tasked with dusting it off , was inspired to bring the event back to life . reviving the competition took some work the most critical thing , oxley told me over the phone , was getting a second machine . wouldn t be much of a contest with just one machine . the second year , the competition was sponsored by pepsi the task was to pour the soda into a cup . one of the teams , oxley said , built a sign advertising pepsi into their machine . this year , purdue s regional competition was sponsored by general motors and nucor steel . in the late s , rube goldberg s son , george w . george , created a company called rube goldberg , inc . to manage registrations , trademarks , and licenses . eight years ago , jennifer george , rube s granddaughter , took over the family business and decided to grow it from a hodgepodge of events and trinkets to a full fledged enterprise . my father , he was happy to just give the plant enough water so it didn t die , jennifer told me . i am intent on fertilizing this plant , and putting it in the sun , and making sure it s watered every day . somebody asked me last year , where do you see yourself in years ? i said , waiting in line for the rube goldberg roller coaster . that s how i see this thing . i think it s giant . the relevance and appeal of rube goldberg machines today , george told me , is in what it reveals about how technology and the way we live with it has changed . this is a very complex machine , george said , holding up her phone . but is it a rube goldberg ? no . she added , when your phone doesn t work can you fix it ? rube goldberg machines remind us of a time when we could see how the machines around us worked you could pop the hood of your car and theoretically at least fix it , or learn how to . now , you pop the hood of your car and there s a computer inside . a week before the nationals , i visited penn state to meet the society of engineering scientists team and see their machine . the penn state ses team has previously participated in regional rube goldberg machine contests , but they ve never qualified for nationals before . last year , the team didn t compete at all this year s team is full of novices , and they re scrappy . they picked up tricks from watching videos of purdue machines from years past , and they built their machine in an empty office of a labyrinthine engineering building . an engineer is supposed to look at a complicated problem and come up with a simple solution , said freshman rebecca terosky , the team s wide eyed co captain . this , she said , referring to rube goldberg machines , is the opposite of what an engineer is supposed to do . you re using everyday materials , making it whimsical . you don t feel like you re working , you feel like you re playing with toys . on my visit , the team was building a key component that involved a ball falling off a table onto a button , which triggered a wind up car . the members of ses were relaxed someone would hammer in a step and then stop to talk about a chemistry quiz or gossip about a professor with a massage chair in his office before debating the best way to cut foam . the team has a sponsor , however , who is more serious minded about the competition an engineer and penn state alumnus named glen chatfield . chatfield offered the team funds for supplies and travel with the stipulation that they had to take a measured , analytical approach to designing and building their machine . our sponsor wanted to see math in addition to guess and check , terosky said . if someone s giving you money , you want to make them proud . speaking over the phone , chatfield sounded as much like a businessman as an engineer . chatfield said that the kind of cobble it together , craftsman approach to building rube goldberg machines was outdated . the more modern approach is more process oriented , he said . engineering s all about numbers what are the numbers , what do the numbers mean . any product that you design that s done in that brutal way is just not competitive in the marketplace . and that s not the skill that you want your engineers to really have . humor can be a design objective , chatfield told me . but , i mean , how do you quantify humor ? the ses team devised a machine that illustrates a school calendar . the team broke into four groups , each responsible for designing and building separate sections that roughly correspond to the seasons and come together to navigate the viewer through the school year . holidays and changes in the weather are dramatized a santa dumps presents down a chimney for christmas water , signifying spring rain , pours through a tap into a bucket . much to everyone s surprise including their own ses took first place at regionals . we did not expect to win , terosky said . we were just hoping not to embarrass ourselves . by winning , they qualified for nationals by qualifying for nationals , they found themselves facing a new set of problems . our machine is not very durable , terosky said . the drive to the hotel where regionals took place was only minutes , and even in that time parts broke . before making a basic frame , we had to recognize that this has to come apart and go somewhere else . this is a real engineering problem , when you re making airplanes or amusement park rides . it s the most applicable to the real world of engineering , the biggest challenge of the whole competition , she conceded . by saturday morning , the day of the nationals , ses has set up and tested their machine . the space begins to fill up with a crowd of three or four hundred people , many of them children . a cherry picker in the middle of the room is rigged with a camera during the judging process , video of the machines is streamed and projected onto an overwhelmingly large screen over the stage , where , afterwards , awards are presented . ses are set up right next to last year s champions from purdue . rube goldberg machines are fickle by design , and one errant step can derail the best laid machine . the champions first test run of the day fails almost immediately . first question , someone from pspe asks . is it plugged in ? it s not . someone jumps up , plugs it in , and the machine ampnbspruns without issue , telling the story of rube looking for a comic he d drawn , and lost . the machine moves through steps in less than a minute , suggesting a desperate search by rube as he upends his house looking for the comic . at one point , a ball drops , and a mechanized dog springs out of his house to grab it . the machine finishes the cartoon was in a cupboard and dexys midnight runners come on , eileen plays . the name of the machine , i learn , is eileen . i feel like everyone involved in rube goldberg nowadays is really looking to push the limits in terms of engineering feats , junior and team president jordan vallejo told me when i spoke to her on the phone before the competition . she was on the team last year , too , and appeared with them on jimmy kimmel . it s becoming harder to make these machines humorous and playful , but it s important to try , she said . a lot of people think of engineering as a very serious career . which it is ! but it s important to take things lightly , to laugh , to learn from mistakes . on the other side of ses sits the iowa state team . the eye is drawn to this machine in a way that it is not with the others , which are spiky and chaotic and sort of hard to look at . when iowa state arrived the night before , other teams stopped and stared even the champions from purdue sat up a little bit straighter . the machine is detailed and precise , like the others , but without appearing precarious or spindly . as they assembled it , rube goldberg s granddaughter , jennifer george , raised her eyebrows . i ll be interested to see if it works , she said . it s becoming harder to make these machines humorous and playful , but it s important to try . on saturday morning , iowa state is having difficulties . their machine is designed to resemble a big screen television , divided into boxes that contain iconic scenes from movies that the contraption will enact , one after another a movie marathon machine , for watching a dozen movies in three minutes . to everyone s frustration , the truck from the dark knight won t flip . the machine was built , feet above sea level lower than columbus in an uninsulated shed colder than columbus . the team says the condition changes are preventing the air compression device meant to flip the truck from generating sufficient force . after a half dozen incremental pressure increases , the truck is flipping properly but then , something starts smoking . it s an effect , one team member jokes while another scrambles up a ladder to fan away the haze . it s a really good effect . late in the morning , judging begins . surrounded by a crowd of the teams families , visitors , and lots of children , the judges move counterclockwise around the room . before each run , teams have three minutes to introduce and narrate the scenarios their machines depict crews are judged here on their showmanship and storytelling ability . a team from penn state s harrisburg campus is decked out in star wars and star trek costumes as they present their machine , out of this world tale of an outer space pinball . it s hard to follow what is happening in this machine many of the steps are small , move too quickly , or are hidden behind other , more prominent elements . apparently , buried somewhere in the machine , there is a miniature gauss cannon , which one of the judges will later describe as basically a railgun , it s pretty cool . the university of wisconsin barron county s machine is a saccharine , barely functioning tribute to a retiring engineering professor . then come the purdue champions . pspe s experience as engineers and storytellers is evident their speaker is comfortable describing eileen to the growing crowd . during deliberations , one judge would describe the machine itself as the year s most rube goldberg ian . the mechanized dog fetching a dropped ball is a big hit . ses follows purdue . terosky is nervous as she describes their machine , but she is funny and entertaining the calendar machine , working its way through the year in a matter of seconds , doesn t have a narrative story , exactly , so much as an amusing description of one event after another . the machine s first run is perfect the machine doesn t stop once an intervention is necessary on the second run , however i m trying not to be disappointed , just because other people are , terosky tells me . gotta keep morale up . the crowd , which includes or elementary school aged children , cheers when an eraser finally wipes the board clean . after ses , the judges and crowd turn to iowa state . its first run on saturday morning in front of the judges is the first time that the team has tried to run the machine from start to finish . steps start triggering out of order and then the whole thing which , it turns out , is essentially a very long and elaborate marble run sets off all at once . one iowa state team member has to get up and move the marble along with his finger , ushering it through one scene after another . it comes as no surprise when pspe repeats as champions , taking home both the first place prize as well as the prize for funniest step . second place goes to another team from purdue , the american society of mechanical engineers , whose machine a haunted classroom subverts the task by pouring slime over a chalkboard . penn state ses , with their rickety , mostly cardboard machine , takes third . iowa state is awarded best design , even though it didn t really work that well , and it wasn t really a rube goldberg machine , jennifer george said as she presented the award . a year after her father died in , jennifer george attended the rube goldberg competition for the first time . showing up as rube s granddaughter , you re kind of like this strange mascot , she told me . it s like being mother to many , many children . what she saw there upset her . some of those machines were so spectacularly beautiful , but beautiful in a way that a car is a beautiful machine , george recalled . the winning machine was basically a glorified marble run , she said , repeating her criticism of iowa s machine . a beautiful , precision marble run . but it was not a rube goldberg machine . there was nothing about it that was a rube goldberg machine . a week after the competition , i spoke to iowa state senior brendan favo , who designed his school s mechanical movie watching contraption . had our machine worked , we would have been in contention , he said . we were trying to make a machine that was interesting visually , to push what rube goldberg means . maybe maybe not . the team worked on their device every saturday and sunday from the beginning of january up until the competition , with some weeknights thrown in as well . i hate to tell you this , but i don t really know why i did it , favo told me when i asked why he d spent three long months working on the machine . at no time while doing it did i question why it was fun . but there s no great explanation why i built the machine . he added , i just saw it as an opportunity to build something . almost a century old , rube goldberg machines retain their appeal there s something in our brains that likes to see cause and effect played out , to see it in a way that we can understand , joseph herscher , the brooklyn based artist , told me . herscher has judged at the past three college national competitions but was absent this year . most of the technology we live with is designed to be invisible , he said . a computer is the ultimate example it s so advanced , so sophisticated , and yet it s not interesting to watch it run whatsoever . when we watch the movements of a rube goldberg machine , it s our world that we re seeing , and it makes us appreciate our world . you don t see that nowadays . meanwhile , most of goldberg s comics seem dated the jokes don t make sense or are lame , and cultural references fall flat . but some feel as relevant ever , and maybe that s because the technical absurdities that the cartoonist parodied are still very real . our modern era is riddled with machines doing ever less consequential tasks in ever more complex ways . the machines are digital , not mechanical , but the difference between the maximalism of the rube goldberg machine and the minimalism of the iphone is perhaps not so great after all . there are apps that seemingly accomplish the simplest thing hailing a cab in the simplest way a push of a button . but that simple task is the work of thousands of lines of code , hundreds of developers , a billion dollars , and drivers that have gone into making that button do what it does . the mechanisms of our world are not necessarily any more efficient than they ve ever been they re just more obscure , hidden in the invisible digital distance behind our screens . and just like in goldberg s cartoons , there are living things human beings , even caught up in the machine , carrying out their tasks in chain reaction , their movements as sure as gravity itself . all rube goldberg cartoons are copyright heirs of rube goldberg , video by john lagomarsino , ryan manning , and jimmy sheltonillustrations by hallie batemanedited by michael zelenko	 it s a little after midday on a recent saturday in los angeles , and i m escorting the reigning queen of astrology past a veritable throng of adoring subjects . she s just finished a minute lecture or perhaps more accurately , a motivational speech at the conscious life expo , a three day jamboree of workshops and lectures whose guests run the gamut from sound healers to ancient alien experts . susan miller , your internet bffhow the star astrologer built a very digital , very personal empireby devon maloney it s a little after midday on a recent saturday in los angeles , and i m escorting the reigning queen of astrology past a veritable throng of adoring subjects . she s just finished a minute lecture or perhaps more accurately , a motivational speech at the conscious life expo , a three day jamboree of workshops and lectures whose guests run the gamut from sound healers to ancient alien experts . we d spoken on the phone a few times before this , but within seconds of our meeting in person ampnbspwith fans still trying to reach past her publicist to give her gifts and tell her just how much she means to them ampnbspmiller takes off her designer heels , clutches the crook of my arm like a prom date , and says , cheerfully , walk with me . together with her publicist and an expo handler carving the path , our royal cabal weaves slowly , delicately , shuffling our way through maybe people , many of whom susan attempts to stop and chat with inviting several to join her the next morning for breakfast , a meal we d already planned as our interview time . they ve all stayed behind in an attempt to connect with their idol , the celebrity astrologer whose public persona has become as much about the susan miller mythos as her frequently uncanny predictions . attendees of the conscious life expo paid to hear miller speak , but the bulk of the astrologer s empire still rests on the , some odd words she churns out every month for free doggedly , some might say obsessively meeting her readers where they are on social media . with the launch of a brand new online tv show and the ever multiplying host of outlets on which she peddles her cosmic insight , miller has become a self styled internet celebrity and a personal adviser to millions of intensely dedicated online fans . i do have a lot of irons in the fire , but i m disciplined , she tells me a few weeks later from the hospital more on that later . it s just that i m launching so much , and everybody wants me to do their project first . do me , do me ! i feel like a mother with a lot of children , and they re all tugging at my apron . if i see a bus coming at you , i have to push you out of the way . she pauses for a moment . but you know what the old saying is a change is as good as a rest , she says , her voice crinkling into an audible smile , the same way it does on stage when she s telling one of her many autobiographical anecdotes . you can t pick when life is going to give you opportunities . sometimes nothing happens , so you have to kind of run with it when you can . much has been made over the past few years of the astrologer s meteoric rise to fame , thanks to among other things her ardent fashion world coterie and all the press that comes with it . her horoscopes not only those notoriously prolific monthly essays for her own website , astrologyzone . com , but now also for other international fashion magazines , from elle to vogue japan offer intimate , personalized readings while still pulling millions of eyeballs . at this point , her chatty , practical delivery is just as important as the forecasts themselves . the resulting readership is an often rabid crowd that boasts vips like gloria vanderbilt , rihanna stylist adam selman , and even will . i . am . she s quick to stress , in person and at every appearance she makes , that astrology is not fortune telling . in fact , her approach is far more like that of an empathetic life coach than a psychic . one could argue that the practical rationality she brings to an otherwise ambiguous practice is what makes her so successful . i have to have faith that i m telling millions of people the right thing , she tells me over lunch at the hotel restaurant the afternoon after her expo appearance . true to form , we have to reschedule that breakfast meeting so she can meet with those fans ampnbspthey ve come to la from overseas to hear her speak . it s all my math , but if you don t do anything , nothing will happen . and that s where people get confused i don t know if you re going to get hit by a bus . are you watching where you re going ? i can tell you that it s probably not a good idea to bungee jump on a certain couple of days but it s up to you , maybe if you take care , it ll be okay . i m your friend , and if i see a bus coming at you , i have to push you out of the way . compared to the rest of the conscious life attendees , who meander through the hotel s adjacent , bustling lobby on their way to the exhibit hall as we dine , miller is a wall street analyst among renaissance faire cosplayers . though her warmth keeps her audience s attention , it s pretty safe to say her international following wouldn t be half as devoted or widespread if it weren t for her intuitive , if unfussy relationship with the internet . she launched astrologyzone . com in for years , she says , she wrote her tailored horoscopes faithfully on the side , often with little public validation . but in the s , when astrology made its way back into the young , pop lexicon , all her work paid off . since then , she s developed a massive , highly engaged twitter following written nine books and negotiated and launched a subscription based app . today she continues to accept countless editor pitches and on air appearance requests in addition to her regular monthly astrologyzone tomes ampnbspand now monthly tv show tapings out here in los angeles . it s a good thing i only need to sleep four hours a night , she tells me proudly . it s hard to believe this woman is a creature of the digital erayet in person , it s hard to believe this woman is a creature of the digital era she s so analog , addressing you whether you re a journalist , a high fashion exec , or just a fan directly , like a girlfriend or neighbor , in a manner that suggests she s too social to have time for online habits . but at the same time , she can spin a garrulous interview so lively and astutely talking points y that it makes perfect sense how she s able to churn out , plus blog words every month in a matter of days . look , i m concentrating , miller says now , leaning toward me , showing me her empty hands . i m one of these people who don t look at my phone every five minutes . i m really with you . i think the nicest thing , the best gift you can give someone is your attention . it s that sort of direct sincerity that , her producers say , will make for great television . susan has grown a huge , huge juggernaut of traffic without ever sounding like she s lost her voice or doing the awful corporate sell out , says paul duddridge , the producer and director of the new astrology zone with susan miller , which is hosted by online streaming production company and hulu partner television four . she says she originally developed a pilot with lorne michaels broadway video , ampnbspbut those plans had fizzled it was only recently that she met duddridge and the tv crew . what she has on her website is a complete , direct relationship with her readers , from day one . that is what we can do with new media . since the beginning of new media , she has had that . there s almost no way to have a conversation with susan miller that does not include a detailed account of at least part of her life story . in a way , these picturesque yarns are inextricable from her reputation the daughter of a specialty grocery store owner and a reader amateur astrologist , miller grew up learning natal charts from her mother and business strategies from watching her father do inventory in the press and on her site , she frequently credits her success to her little mom s pragmatic yet romantic faith in the future , both in the stars and in her daughter s professional life . my mother always told me that i must go to the highest technology , she says , and that i would start my career by writing . i said , nobody writes in our family . she said , i know , but we re gonna work on your grammar . and when you get older , some newly invented form of communication , so new that we don t know the name of it yet , will change the way you work and be the channel in which you make your ultimate contribution to the world . i never forgot it . miller spent years working on the business side of magazines and as a commercial photography agent a job that would lead her to the media execs who gave her her first ever online astrology columns . in , she bought the astrologyzone domain to write her own horoscopes , all of them multiple times the length allotted by established publications . she s remained a relatively early adopter since then in , she joined twitter , where she regularly interacts with followers who tweet at her frantically , seeking love and career advice . in , she and games developer phunware launched her daily horoscope app . she considered youtube videos at one time , but she says she need s beautiful lighting , and besides , i had to be paid for my tv ampnbspi have overhead and need to pay for my crack habit ampnbspmy all free website with other jobs . she genuinely loves what she does and believes in it . even though astrologyzone has barely seen a redesign since it first donned its mid s angelfire chic , the fruit of miller s forays into new media is apparent in every fan she speaks to from the general admission spiritual crowd at conscious life to a room full of young , moneyed creative types in plush armchairs at west hollywood s members only soho house , her acolytes reference her past posts and explanations of different celestial concepts , audibly murmuring their appreciation , often in unison , whenever she shares a particularly astute reading . susan s success when i met her was based on the same thing as her success now she genuinely loves what she does and believes in it , and also genuinely loves people , says cindi leive , the editor in chief of glamour , via email . leive , a self described horoscope skeptic , met miller when she edited her at self magazine . today , she oversees the astrologist s glamourscopes online video series , sort of mini versions of her new show . miller counts leive among her closest friends . her secret has nothing to do with astrology and everything to do with susan herself and her contagious enthusiasm . susan is super intelligent and just gets it , says mickey boardman , editorial director of paper magazine and self professed susan miller ampnbspstan . boardman , initially a friend of miller s daughter chrissie , bonded with the astrologer via twitter before meeting her at a dinner a few years ago since then , miller s own byline has appeared in paper , with natal chart analyses written for the characters of mad men . she is able to speak to creative types in a way that we really understand , and she s great about moving with the times . her drive to provide tailored experiences for a diverse audience is a business strategy , of course , but it s also something like a compulsion . she tells me fashion magazine editors from new york to milan are regularly banging down her door with a never ending queue of assignments , and she s only turned down one or two . despite her wall to wall schedule , she insists i text her directly instead of setting anything up with her publicist . at every turn , she seems to be gobbling up another opportunityshe also continues to accept interviews with reporters , even when they consistently write things that she says have wounded her so badly . this applies to her fans , too in an age where online writers are urged not to read the comments , she reads every tweet , every reader quoted in a news story , every comment on her videos . somehow she still refuses to meet their criticism with anything less than understanding i keep reminding myself it s not me they re mad at , she told the new york post last december . and she s not just being polite when she invites persistent , almost intrusive expo goers to breakfast with her she means she wants to have breakfast with them or at least feels duty bound to grant them that smartphone free attention . if you , susan miller fan , want it and can pay for it , she will literally write you an entire book about your horoscope . ampnbspat every turn , she seems to be gobbling up another opportunity , overflowing docket be damned , nearly incapable or at least unwilling ampnbspto say no . on the west coast , when you say , you re laid back , they take it as a compliment , she says , laughing . in new york , we hit you ! oh my god , the biggest insult you can give a new yorker is that you re laid back ! trying to be in all places at once can , however , come with some serious consequences . since birth , the petite astrologer has combated a so rare it doesn t have a name autoimmune disease that has become almost as famous as the horoscopes themselves . while most of the time all it does is limit her energy , sometimes , like this past week , it completely levels her in , three years before she founded astrologyzone , she says she bled nearly to death in surgery , after which she says she had near death aftershock hallucinations for weeks in , a broken left leg the fourth break waylaid her for months and this past december , a hellish colonic infection cold cocked her for several weeks during which the new york post ran that story quoting a few fuming fans that , as miller says , gave the haters energy enough to tank the star ratings on her app . she rattles off the exorbitant costs of her medications and horror stories about insurance companies cutting off coverage mid treatment for a disease that , in their opinion , technically doesn t exist , while repeating the same thing she s told many reporters before me , just as casually one dog bite to this leg , and i m dead . so periodically , her reports go up a few days after the first of the month . this , as many outlets have doggedly reported , ampnbsphas been viewed by some vocal fans as completely unacceptable . they lose their damn minds across the internet , both outraged and straight up panicked without her guidance , around which many say they plan their daily lives ampnbsp perhaps with good reason ampnbspaccording to a new york magazine profile , ampnbspher advice once won a friend a porsche . at her conscious life lecture , she boasts to the crowd that , against the advice of her accountant , she insisted upon buying stock in apple back when it was valued at cents a share . i don t think anybody just complains to complain , she says , again defending even those who consider her work a public service to which they are uniformly entitled . when my readers are angry , i think they may have been hoping i may have something to say that would trigger a creative idea , and now they don t have it . the dichotomies of susan miller the effusive celestial medium and the shrewd new york businesswoman , the fashion conscious technophile and the interpersonally conscious family historian , the nonstop workaholic and the fragile house , m . d . case have helped inspire the cultish fascination that surrounds her . but that last one could also undo her at any moment . television remains one of miller s last unconquered frontiers , and she and duddridge say they have plans to eventually bring the web series to a wider audience , both via international streaming platforms and , ultimately , to mainstream cable . with susan , you ve got a built in audience , and if you do right by them , treat them with respect and actually tailor the project to them , you can take out that generalist cynicism with online broadcasting and let the audience have a direct relationship with the artist in question , says duddridge . up until now , this hardcore commercial juggernaut has been treated as a piece of frippery on mainstream tv , but astrology zone is proving what the grammar can be for a network . meanwhile , miller s eyes are on a far more elemental prize . i m just trying to keep my side of the sidewalk clean , do a good job , give people ideas so they can help themselves , she says , first to her lecture audience , and then later , again , to me . you walk through a bookstore , all those self help books ? they tell you what to do . i don t tell you what to do . i m not oprah i m not queen bey . i just want to be their friend . three weeks later ampnbspafter the expo , mere days before march horoscopes are supposed to drop ampnbspsusan is in the hospital . again . this illness is either you re wonderful , or you re crawling in the sahara desert , she tells me over the phone from her bed at new york presbyterian hospital . the horoscopes arrived today , on schedule , but instead of posting late this time , she s opted for word horoscopes , as opposed to the several thousand readers usually get . i feel these are really special , she explains in her preface , as i wrote them with all the love i have to give you . i m not going to make a habit of it , she explains . but i was so , so sick that i couldn t do more . i literally couldn t type . i was in bed and couldn t even lift my arm . despite having just given what sounds like an apology on behalf of her cardiovascular system miller isn t discouraged by the gossip she reads about her from fans on twitter . you can get ideas from even your most frustrated reader . you can get ideas from even your most frustrated reader , she says . in december i was so , so sick , and a whole bunch of twitter fans said , this month s horoscope isn t the real susan , she s not writing . her mother may have been writing the horoscopes all along , and that was hurtful . but i kept reading , as hard as it was , and then one of them said , the real susan would ve given us little stories and anecdotes or little asides . and i love writing those ! i wasn t putting them in lately , and i thought , oh , my goodness , they love that . she says she spoke to duddridge , who agreed that her anecdotes many of which you re liable to hear more than once if you follow her with any regularity worked for the show , and they made sure to keep the stories safe from the cutting room floor . sometimes the reader is so upset , they sound all tangled in wires , and you have to get to them , she says , but every once in a while something will pop through , and i m grateful to that reader . sometimes it s your critics that help you the most . illustrations by jude buffumedited by emily yoshida	 on thursday , april th , , a blast of dystopian satire hit the uk airwaves . max headroom minutes into the future was a snarky take on media and corporate greed , told through the eyes of investigative journalist edison carter matt frewer and his computer generated alter ego an artificial intelligence named max headroom . live and direct the definitive oral history of s digital icon max headroomby bryan bishop on thursday , april th , , a blast of dystopian satire hit the uk airwaves . max headroom minutes into the future was a snarky take on media and corporate greed , told through the eyes of investigative journalist edison carter matt frewer and his computer generated alter ego an artificial intelligence named max headroom . set in a near future where global corporations control all media and citizens are hopelessly addicted to dozens of tv channels , the movie follows carter working for the mysterious network as he discovers that network executives have created a form of subliminal advertising known as blipverts that can actually kill . while tracking the story , carter is flung into a barrier marked max . headroom . m . desperate to maintain ratings with its star reporter , the network enlists a young hacker to download carter s mind and create a virtual version of the journalist . but things don t go quite right . the result the stuttering , sarcastic max . minutes into the future kicked off an extensive franchise , and max became a singular s pop culture phenomenon that represented everything wonderful and horrible about the decade . max hosted music video shows max interviewed celebrities max hawked new coke max headroom became us network television s very first cyberpunk series . max was inescapable and then almost just as quickly as he had appeared , he was gone . thirty years after the premiere , i spoke with the writers , directors , producers , actors , make up artists , and network executives that helped bring max headroom to life . and it all began , like so many things in the s , with music videos . hello , world peter waggproducer i was working for a record label , chrysalis records . i was basically head of what they called , in those days , creative services . once mtv started , it totally revolutionized the dynamic of marketing and selling music music videos sort of becoming the most important part of our armory . fortunately , that fell under my wing . i went to andy park , a pal of mine who ran a commercial radio station and became commissioning editor for music at channel , which was a new embryonic tv channel in the uk . andy said , hey , what do you think about trying to develop a music video show for channel ? of course if you looked at mtv , it was a bunch of video jocks , real people , linking and introducing music videos . i thought to myself , well , alright , that s been done . so the starting point for the project was , we don t need a real person maybe it s animated maybe it s a character we can create that s some sort of hybrid mix that has a trans atlantic accent , that has certain visual attributes , if you like . it s like johnny carson meets terry wogan in england . so , the first person i enlisted was a guy called george stone . george stoneco creator writeri worked for an ad agency . i was a writer and radio producer and commercial maker , i suppose , and we had a number of clients that were record companies . i was interested in what we d call the landscape of television , if you like . we had the show title first max headroom . i mean , there was a list of about one of them was called the tube , i think . i did it one weekend , and max was the one that won . it s all sound , it s all vision , it s filling your head full of music and sound . peter waggproducer when i asked him , why max headroom ? he didn t really have an answer . so i said , well , i suppose it is maximum headroom . i mean , it s all sound , it s all vision , it s filling your head full of music and sound . george stoneco creator writer it s a joke that s very specific to britain , i think . there is a huge firm that specializes in car parks , and their height restriction notice is max . headroom , . feet , or whatever . from this single piece of signage , you had this title which everybody knew . as a consequence of max headroom , national car parks spent about million pounds changing all their signage to maximum height . peter waggproducer i started to look around at animation folk , and of course rocky and annabel and cucumber studios , at that time , for me , were the most cutting edge . rocky mortonco creator directorat the time , we were doing a lot of animation . you know , we did elvis costello s accidents will happen video and tom tom club s genius of love , and that sort of thing . elvis costello , accidents will happen tom tom club , genius of love annabel jankelco creator directorthe original idea that was pitched to us was to put graphics not computer graphics , because it was in the very early days but some kind of graphics between music videos to kind of jazz it up a bit and give some kind of backbone to what otherwise would just be a bunch of unrelated music videos . rocky mortonco creator director i said to her that , you know , this is a really boring idea . we re taking these music videos , which are really incredible , and then linking them together with stupid bits of graphics . it s just not interesting . i thought , maybe i should go with the whole idea of it being boring . what s the most boring thing i could do just to annoy everybody ? and the most boring thing that i could think of to do , which would really go against the grain for the mtv generation was a talking head a middle class white male in a suit , talking to them in a really boring way about music videos . and i thought , oh yeah , i m on to something here . this is really dull and uninteresting . george stoneco creator writer we were talking about it , and rocky said , i think he should be a man . and i think he should be computer generated . that set me off on the whole narrative network , minutes into the future , blipverts , and everything else . it all came from that moment . we thought , well why don t we , as a part of this show , produce every week a five minute kind of info burst drama , almost like a credit sequence , but which tells the story of how this computer generated character came to be . annabel jankelco creator director george came up with a great storyline with most if not all of the characters in place . nobody really knew what max would look like or how he would develop . we were talking about bell s theorem , action at a distance , artificial intelligence , and everything else . rocky mortonco creator director i came up with the idea that he already had a show as a real person . he was late for his show one night , and had an open top sports car . he went into the parking structure , went through the barrier , and hit his head on it , and he was basically knocked into a coma . in order to get him on air that night , they had to , sort of , download his brain , reconstitute him as a computer model of himself , and put him out on air . george stoneco creator writer so what you have in the character is a consciousness fully human , totally amnesiac whose first experience to the world is exposure to , simultaneous channels of television . that s where the character comes from . he is a fusion of every evangelist , every sports reporter , everything you see on tv . and from his perspective he sees no difference or distinction between them . annabel jankelco creator director peter wagg wasn t very interested in the idea of this talking , computer generated tv host . in fact , he was quite dismissive of it , saying that characters don t travel . i remember that specifically . george stoneco creator writer peter didn t understand any of it , really . we were talking about bell s theorem , action at a distance , consciousness , artificial intelligence , and everything else . and peter , for fuck s sake , is just an account man . i mean , it was a different language . he just wanted something easy that he could sell and make work . rocky mortonco creator director i pitched this to peter and chrysalis visual programming , and they didn t like the idea . they said , no . channel isn t going to like this . they re going to want , you know , these kind of little graphic y things to do it . so i said , well , let me pitch it anyway . george stoneco creator writer channel said , this is a good story , why don t we make a film of it ? and so the five minute episodes were strung together into a narrative . go to america , go and pitch this to hbo or cinemax . peter waggproducer so now i haven t got a half hour music video show anymore . i ve got a one hour movie of the week that sets up a part music video show . and nobody wanted to go back to the half hours anymore . the whole thing had just taken on a whole new level . but i only had enough money to do half hours from channel . annabel jankelco creator director the entire production , including the music video shows with max hosting them , was in the region of about million pounds . hbo , still in their infancy , had an arm called cinemax . we said to peter wagg , go to america , go and pitch this to hbo or cinemax . bridget potteroriginal programming vp , hbowe used the original programming in that era to try to help define the pay tv services . we were looking for something kind of edgy and unusual for cinemax , which was at that point just beginning to have some original programming . peter waggproducer i walk in , trying to pitch them something called max headroom . we ve got no idea what it is , we haven t got any visuals of what he looks like , so it s a bit of a stretch , right ? bridget potteroriginal programming vp , hbo first of all , i liked the idea . it just all seemed to work and we thought it was pretty interesting for cinemax . we wouldn t have thought of it for hbo because it was small and dangerous , in a certain kind of way . rocky mortonco creator director hbo said , listen , go back to your hotel room . don t leave , and we ll be back to you within hours . don t go to la . they came back and said , we want to do this . we re going to pay for the making of the origin film of how he got to be max headroom , and we want to be involved with channel , and we want to be part of this whole thing . minutes into the future with funding and commitments from hbo and channel in place , the project started moving forward in earnest . but for the core creative team of george stone , annabel jankel , and rocky morton , problems had already begun to surface . rocky mortonco creator director everybody got really excited . it came close to shooting the movie , and the producer , chrysalis visual programming , said , oh , i think i ve got a director that can direct this . and i said , what the fuck ? this is our project . annabel and myself are directing this . we said , well , okay . we re not going to make it then , because we own the idea . you have to go and do something else . finally we had to release the rights of our own creation to chrysalis visual programming . but we did get to make the film and direct it . peter waggproducer the difficulty then became trying to get a shootable script . the saddest part of the whole story for me was that i just couldn t get george to write me a script to shoot . and he is a genius . you ll always credit george , rocky , and annabel with the creative essence of what we came up with . but i had a producer s responsibility to channel and to hbo and to chrysalis co founder terry ellis . annabel jankelco creator director george had so many brilliant , genius ideas . a lot of it we would just compile and put into essentially a bible that i think made its way into the subsequent american tv series . but i don t know because i never saw the tv series . george stoneco creator writer i recall writing the last draft and being so angry i have a contract that s never been honored . i just met this very weird guy , a fellow called peter wagg , and he s got this very , very weird project . steve robertswriter my then agent in london and i were meeting over some other project , and she said , i just met this very weird guy , a fellow called peter wagg , and he s got this very , very weird project which he doesn t quite know what it is and what to do with it . and i couldn t understand a word he said , and i can usually never understand a word you say , and i thought i should put you both together so you can talk nonsense to each other . so i said , well , alright , which pub ? i arrived in my normal condition , which was jeans and a pullover , long hair and i think a ponytail in those days . he turned up in a suit . so we disliked each other absolutely instantaneously , but we had a pint and liked each other a bit more . and he said , well , we ve got this script from george , but unfortunately it all ends up with people shooting at each other with laser guns and deflecting the lasers with hubcaps it s not what we want , we want something else . we want to try and dig deeper and find out whether this idea has something else going for it . that s when i got excited , because i began to realize oh , this may be into the artificial intelligence area . peter waggproducer at the same time , we needed to try and find a max fellow . matt freweractori was over in england for years . this actor friend of mine auditioned for this thing called max headroom , and he very kindly said that he didn t think he was right for it , but he knew somebody who was . it was an incredible act of generosity on this actor s part , bill armstrong . i ve always been very grateful to him for that . he seemed like more of a weatherman or a newsman or something . annabel jankelco creator director the casting director does a precasting , and i believe he was in the slush pile . i noticed his polaroid and i thought , oh my god , this guy s got unbelievably well defined features . matt freweractori got called in to do this minute improvisation around six lines of what was then ostensibly max headroom dialogue . they just encouraged me to riff around , and it seemed like more of a weatherman or a newsman or something . john humphreysprosthetics designer all you could hear in the audition tape is rocky and annabel and peter wagg s laughter . and he just is max headroom , even from his audition tape he s perfect . he just is max headroom . . . he s perfect . image courtesy of john humphreys . with their lead in place , the team turned their attention to what would become the most important element of the entire phenomenon max s look . annabel jankelco creator director we actually did experiment , quite extensively , with computer graphics . it didn t take too long for us to realize that we had to fake this , because what we wanted was years down the line . explore our complete max headroom make up and design gallery rocky mortonco creator director i tinkered around with doing it like d , drawn animation , which didn t really work . then i tried a hand puppet . i molded a rubber head , and i put my hand inside and tried to manipulate it with my hand , and that didn t work . i remember i suddenly said to annabel , the face . the human face . we ll just use the actor s face and just make it appear as if it was computer generated by putting prosthetic make up on it , and then shooting it in a certain way we could make it look like it s computer generated . matt freweractor i gradually realized what i was getting into as plaster of paris head molds were made , and this prosthetics rubber make up business goo was happening . you suddenly realize that it s going to be a pretty arduous process creating the look for max . john humphreysprosthetics designer there was no specific design . they just wanted matt frewer to look like a computer generated tv presenter . you got to remember , in those days , what does a computer generated person actually look like ? there was nothing there . so we made a fairly simple make up really , we just changed his features a little bit , as if the computer generation hadn t quite got it right . but we wanted to keep as near to matt frewer as possible because he s a great actor . he s very animated , very expressive , so you don t want to hide all of that . you end up looking like this sort of jack in the box , squirming around . matt freweractor the max suit was in two fiberglass pieces , and they screw you into it . later on we had different versions of the suit . there was the tuxedo suit , there was a sort of golf suit , and then there was a white tuxedo all equally cumbersome , and they went right down to your elbows , and you couldn t move around . but in a way , you compensate , and it becomes even more computer generated looking , because you re sort of rocking back and forth to make up for the gestures that you can do with your arms or your feet or whatever . so you end up looking like this sort of jack in the box , squirming around . the tv gods giveth , and they taketh away . and what they tooketh away , i added . rocky mortonco creator director we d just made this commercial for a chocolate milk or flavored milk . and in this commercial , we had these moving , very primitive looking cgi linear backgrounds . what i basically did was stole that from the commercial , and just put it behind max . annabel jankelco creator director we then put him against blue screen . i remember this day particularly oh my god , were we relieved . we put him against blue screen , we lit him dramatically , with this one light source from one side , and we rotated him . . . we had our max . catch the wave production on minutes into the future got underway with steve roberts as the sole writer . the film is credited as being from an original idea by george stone , rocky morton , and annabel jankel . annabel jankelco creator director we shot it where stanley kubrick had shot full metal jacket , which was an abandoned gasworks called beckton gasworks which is big , like equivalent of the staples center . once we scouted that , we realized we had this perfect environment . you couldn t build that production design , and certainly in those days , we didn t have the funds to actually computer generate anything . rocky mortonco creator director it had this kind of dystopian , sort of futuristic kind of look to it . read steve roberts script for minutes into the future annabel jankelco creator director it was really part of the visual zeitgeist at the time , if you think about it . there was blade runner , there was brazil . there were a lot of dystopian landscapes out there . and it was post punk as well , remember , and it was still post war . london was pretty desolate then . peter waggproducer the launch was spectacular . we had the thursday night slot , which was channel s movie of the week slot , and the half hour episode on saturday . the way we started the half hour music video show , there were no opening titles . there were no credits for anybody . when it came to , it was just that satellite chssssssss , snow and buzz . and all of a sudden , max was there . like , bang ! and he s talking in german , and he s telling this joke about lederhosen all in german , he s roaring with laughter during the whole thing , and then the first music video we played was a german music video . and then max in english and this week s award for the worst tv commercial goes to . . . and a commercial break . we had no idea what the first commercial would be , but it already got the max headroom award for the worst commercial of the week . then at the end , it just went chssssssss and to static again . it was like you d woken up in eastern europe and turned the television on , and you re watching some weird station that you don t understand , and then it suddenly is cut off and gone . trailer for max headroom minutes into the futurerocky mortonco creator director we did about or of them and that really established the look and the feel of it . i started to do this kind of stuttering effect on video we were just looping . everybody was , like , okay , rocky . that s enough stuttering . i said , no . we got to take it so far that , like , the computer is jammed in this kind of in this freeze motion . peter waggproducer it just caught fire . we d doubled ratings within three weeks . we were renewed three weeks into the run . rocky mortonco creator director anybody under the age of just loved it . and anybody above that age was just completely confused . it was amazing , you know . it was a genuine phenomenon in its time . anybody under the age of just loved it . and anybody above that age was just completely confused . matt freweractor for a time it was . . . i won t say it was infuriating , but it was frustrating you wanted to go , that s me , that s me , it s not a computer generated man . but of course they wanted to swear me to secrecy because otherwise anybody could make a computer generated man if they knew that it was as easy as putting on all this make up . john humphreysprosthetics designeri have to say , it was being presented as computer graphics , and i had people even say to me , who worked in some big companies in britain , oh , you ll soon be out of a job , look at this , it s all done with computer graphics ! peter littenvisual effects artistit was very galling . it won a bafta for graphics , and of course other than a few lines , there weren t any graphics . a few wobbly lines . and they refused to enter us in the make up category because they didn t want anyone to know it was make up . i m trying to remember how long the make up took . probably four hours of make up ? when you get into the swing of it , we probably got it down to three hours or so in the end . i don t know if you ve ever had a lacerated cornea , but it s the worst pain i think i ve ever felt . image courtesy of john humphreysmatt freweractor over in london , we used , i think they re called haptic lenses , and they re hard lenses and quite a bit bigger than normal contact lenses . they were very painful to wear , and i ended up with severely lacerated corneas . i don t know if you ve ever had a lacerated cornea , but it s the worst pain i think i ve ever felt . i was popping painkillers , and it just wasn t working . annabel jankelco creator directorthat s why he then adopted ray bans for some of the shows , and when his eyes healed we could put back in the contacts . peter waggproducer we knew that there s only so long max in between music videos would last before it ran out of steam . so on the last show , we decided to do max interviewing somebody . i called around to all my mates at the record labels and said , what albums are you releasing around the air date that we had ? my pal at a ampm comes back and says well , sting s releasing his first solo album after the police . matt freweractor we introduced live guests into the proceedings , and it kind of evolved into this bizarre talk show format . it sort of became the rite of passage for various pop stars and film stars to come on and shill their latest project . but in turn they would get roasted by max . sting is interviewed on the max headroom show . the variety show version of the max headroom show complete with a live studio audience soon followed , with max facing off against the likes of michael caine , jack lemmon , and vidal sassoon . with two books , trading cards , and a legion of other merchandised tie ins , max was everywhere and every single item was copyright chrysalis visual media . around the same time , coca cola was looking for help as a reformulation of its flagship product , dubbed new coke , was flailing . explore the crazy world of max headroom merchandise peter waggproducer a guy at advertising agency bbdo in london saw the show , sent a video to bbdo new york , and it went to the creative department . arnie blum who was a group head at bbdo , was about to move to a different agency to be group head on coca cola . so he stuck the tape in his bag , and didn t tell anybody . he arrives at mccann erickson , he s on new coke that s dying , and his first job is how do we save new coke ? matt freweractor that was very exciting because we knew it had the potential to reach a global audience . peter waggproducer i got ridley scott to direct the commercials , which was a nice little circle . we did three years with coke . the ridley scott directed coke commercials featuring maxbridget potteroriginal programming vp , hbo that was just insane ! for cinemax , it was like the biggest thing that had ever happened , that a character that was on cinemax was on national television as the spokesperson for coca cola . we just couldn t believe our luck at that point . the catch the wave campaign garnered praise , national attention , and raised max s profile coca cola senior vice president john c . reid later told newsweek that coke s research revealed percent of all american teenagers knew max after the first series of ads . but it wasn t enough to save new coke s crashing sales . meanwhile , wagg lined up another business opportunity as max s popularity skyrocketed out of control . steve robertswriter stu bloomberg , who was head of development at abc television , happened to be in london the night minutes into the future aired . at the end of it , apparently he started phoning around and found out who the hell had made it and where they were . and the next morning we were invited to go and see him . peter waggproducer abc was , at that point , the third place network . like new coke , they needed to make statements , and they needed to try and do something a bit more dramatic to make a sea change . i went to see nbc , and to my great surprise they passed on the whole thing i went to cbs , and they ended up offering me a movie of the week . then i met with stu , and all i got out of stu was a pilot and six script order . but again , i thought let s back a guy i believe in , who s gonna champion the show on our behalf inside the network , and they need us more than we need them . that seemed like a good combination to me . one of the few max headroom commercials directed by rocky morton and annabel jankelmax crossed the atlantic , evolving from a niche cable character to a full blown , mainstream global phenomenon . but as the franchise developed , the remaining two members of the creative team that dreamed him up annabel jankel and rocky morton were left behind . rocky mortonco creator director they wanted somebody that was going to continue making this stuff , pumping it out , and playing the game . you know , somebody that they could parade around that would toe the corporate line . and we obviously weren t doing that . annabel jankelco creator director there was a lot at stake financially , and we were not well placed enough or well advised enough to be protected . all sorts of heavy hitters got involved . coca cola , bbdo , a big advertising agency . ridley scott had got himself involved . abc , chrysalis , the record company and it all kind of blew out of all proportion . rocky mortonco creator director we had lawyers , and we fought it . we tried to form a company with matt frewer to wrest control away from the producer , but then backdoor negotiations started to happen . we lost control , and it was costing us more and more money in lawyers fees . by the time it got to america , they made a fortune because they made this whole tv series without us . and they took our created by credit away on the american series . big time television abc went to work adapting minutes into the future into the first episode of the us series , blipverts . original cast members matt frewer , amanda pays theora , and william morgan sheppard blank reg joined the new show , while all other roles were recast . however , the first attempt at rewriting steve roberts script proved less than successful . michael cassuttwriterphil deguere jr . , the executive producer basically took it over . he simply went back to the original movie . i remember passing his office there was a video player with minutes into the future on the screen . it was kind of reverse engineering the original movie . steve robertswriter i finally get a phone call saying would i mind coming over to la for a few days to put it back the way it was before . during that time , waggie said , you know , they re asking me to provide a sample of what we would do as a second episode . so i vanished back to the hotel and spent two and a half days basically on room service and bottles of various encouraging fluids , and knocked out this page script . and i get a phone call from peter wagg saying , well , they ve just ordered a series of , mate . you re going to have to stay . what s my air date ? they said , march th . i said , you re shitting me . brian frankishproducer i went down there , and they went , we got to get going , we got to get going . what s my air date ? they said , march th . i said , you re shitting me . this is in december . how many scripts you got ? well , we got a pilot and one . oh , wow . you have zero data to start planning ahead with . but we had the english pilot to copy . and the conceptual work was fabulous . steve robertswriter my job was to find writers . i was stunned shitless because there weren t any . there are an awful lot of people who are very good at standard american television , but nobody who could really grasp this very wild , off the cuff idea . michael cassuttwriter september to october of i was working on the twilight zone , cbs revival , along with the obscure george r . r . martin . steve roberts was the original guy who came from england . everybody else was from twilight zone . honey , this is hollywood . we can do anything . brian frankishproducer richard lewis was hired as the production designer . there were some things wrong with the channel london thing . for instance , all of their wide shots of the environment were matte paintings . stuck out like a sore thumb . i went , ah , miniatures . and peter wagg went , can you do that ? honey , this is hollywood . we can do anything . i vanished to the hotel and spent two and a half days on room service and bottles of various encouraging fluids , and knocked out this page script . steve roberts in his la office . image courtesy of steve robertsmichael cassuttwriter the cast was fabulous . you could write for jeffrey tambor . you could write for amanda pays , george coe . i liked the look . i liked the action . it didn t feel chaotic when i saw it on screen , but it was a lot more challenging than standard television on its best day . image courtesy of shout factorybrian frankishproducer the playback environment was so complex . they had all those tv screens that max appears on . i went , gee , i can t do this with traditional post production . and how are we going to do the network boardroom with the big screen ? we found the ge light valve projector was the only thing that could project digital that big with that kind of clarity . that son of a bitch looked like a b when it rolled on the stage . and the expense was astronomical . it was something that nasa used . on the first six shows , i went million over budget , and nobody said no . annabel jankelco creator director one of the most bizarre things that ever happened was that rocky and i were in la , and the abc version of minutes into the future came on . we could not believe our eyes it was a shot by shot identical retelling , with american actors that kind of looked like the english actors . we were flabbergasted that they would do this . they would go to such lengths to recreate props that we d found in skips and we d found in old junk shops and things . neither blipverts , nor any subsequent episode of the abc series , bears any mention of george stone , rocky morton , annabel jankel , or the original idea credit . the show s quirky brand of cyberpunk struggled in its debut , coming in th for the night despite a strong lead in from moonlighting . but max continued to be a cultural juggernaut and the creative team took advantage , sharpening the tv industry satire with every episode . michael cassuttwriter in my mind it was on my birthday , or close to my birthday in , and there was max on the cover of newsweek . my episode was either airing that week or had aired the friday before . and foolishly i thought , hey , i m on my way to a real career in television ! not realizing that probably my acclaim peaked right then . matt freweractor at the time we thought we were the coolest kids on the block , and we were the hippest show in town , and they would never take us off the air . so we were kind of cockily trying to get away with things , slipping things past the censors and then just kind of boldly holding our middle finger up to the whole business . a commercial for abc s max headroompeter waggproducer every week , we d always deliver the scripts late a because we couldn t help it , but b because it gave them less time to read it , and c we d always throw in about six things we knew they d throw out immediately so that we could perhaps drift two or three others through that they d just missed because they went for the obvious . steve robertswriter it was vicious in its condemnation of the way television worked . if you were a fan in those days , you ll remember lines like , the ratings are plunging , we re down to million ! and the one says , well , we could go porno early . of course we absolutely were biting deep into the bones and ligaments of the hand that was feeding us . and i don t think they noticed , i truly don t think they bothered to look at it until somebody somewhere said , this is the fifth column , these are all probably communists or something . michael cassuttwriter i m not one of these people who s going to say they were too dumb to get it . i ve been in the network . there are some smart people there . as i said , stu bloomberg was one of the smartest people i ve ever run across at that level . he knew exactly what he was doing . in that world too , some of them were probably just secretly enjoying the tweaks because also it wasn t directed at abc specifically . we were tweaking the whole industry and any industry we saw coming . the problem was we never had a lot of pushback from the network on anything we were doing . let s face it , we were out there trying to do blade runner every seven or eight days . and for all my affection and respect for peter wagg and steve roberts , to some degree they were guys who not only had never done american network television i m not sure they ever actually watched it . there was a giant learning curve in terms of the pressures of schedule and money and production . see our behind the scenes gallery for abc s max headroom brian frankishproducer i was preparing an episode for shooting the next day , and o clock in the afternoon i called up to the writers , and i said , i need the script . i have no script for tomorrow s work . where is it ? and they said , we ll get back to you . i called them back at . i ve got the driver standing by , and the machine picked up . and then the machine picked up at , and the machine picked up at , and the machine picked up at . and my messages got , where s the stuff ? guys , i m really being pushed against it to holy shit , we re really fucked here in this situation . what are my actors going to do tomorrow morning ? to jesus christ , who are you guys ? don t you understand what i m doing ? and the last one was i don t give a shit anymore . i m lighting my first joint . hope you show up with the pages in the morning . and they played that someone s got that tape somewhere , and they played it at the wrap party . eager to capitalize on max s popularity , cinemax launched a third variety show anchored by the character in the summer of . the original max talking headroom show was shot in new york and featured max chatting it up with guests like penn and teller , dr . ruth , and william shatner . fears over max media saturation didn t stop the abc show from getting another season but there was a catch . peter waggproducer they moved us opposite miami vice and dallas at on a friday , which back in the day meant you were in a graveyard slot . michael cassuttwriter the moment we hit the air , the numbers were far less than they were , and you combine that with budget problems and just production problems it was not long for this earth . offline the second season of max headroom debuted on september th , . less than a month later , abc pulled the plug . peter waggproducerthe president of abc at the time was brandon stoddard . i m in the edit bay , editing a show , and i get this call , and they say , brandon stoddard s on the phone . and i m editing a sequence where george coe , who played the chairman of the board of network is saying , what the hell do they know about television ? it was like , i m about to get a call from the chairman of abc , to cancel the show . matt freweractorwe got called up on set , and there was supposed to be this big meeting with a producer . i remember going to jeff tambor , oh god , it looks like we re getting pulled off the air , just as a joke . and we were . image courtesy of shout factorysteve robertswriteri was on location on top of a building in the middle of la . it was a shot where a helicopter lands , and i think edison gets out and has a row with somebody . when suddenly , peter wagg walked across the roof . he was white as a sheet . and he just said , we ve got to stop everything , fellows , i m very sorry . brian frankishproduceri ll never forget the canceling . i turned to the a . d . and said , don t release anybody . keep them . nobody goes home today . we ll finish the day , and when we re all done , up on the next block is the player s club up on the th floor . they ve got a big , nice , s bar , and everybody meet me there for drinks . and everybody came up , and i told everybody we were canceled . i spent at the bar . michael cassuttwriterwe all showed up there and had the usual drinks . we still had at least one or two episodes yet to air . we kicked around the idea of giving max a little speech , which they were able to insert into the last episode . max s final speech from the episode lessons michael cassuttwriterwe had a completed script still in the works , as we couldn t do it right because it was a holiday thing . we had a christmas show , written by george r . r . martin , called xmas . what is a commercial holiday like in a world that makes a virtue of just rampant commercialism ? we came up with the holiday , xmas , in which everybody gathers around the tv and home shops . the person in the family or the community that home shops the most is the one who celebrates xmas the best . we had a christmas show , written by george r . r . martin , called xmas . brian frankishproducerthe writers and , actually , the people hiring the writers were not traditional thinkers . that s one of the reasons why i think we failed and one of the reasons why we were successful . michael cassutt and some of the other writers were really trying to throw exciting stuff together . but they didn t have enough time to really throw the ball and track it as it was flying to the catcher s mitt . steve robertswritermy private view is that capital cities , the outfit that ran this whole thing , was run out of new york . i think some top executive s wife rolled over one day and said to him , you know something ? this program is taking the piss out of the way you make your living . and he probably looked at max headroom for the very first time and said can it . we were believers . it was like a religion to us . we gave and we gave and we gave , and it was glorious , wonderful , and we loved what we were seeing . image courtesy of shout factorymatt freweractorthere was always this awareness that we were always kind of walking on eggshells , but it was kind of cool because we sort of put up on screen what we wanted to put up on screen without it being compromised , without it being homogenized , without it being diluted . we were able to walk away from it without it being packaged into something that they wanted it to be packaged into . brian frankishproducerwe were involved in the passion . we were believers . it was like a religion to us . we gave and we gave and we gave , and it was glorious , wonderful , and we loved what we were seeing . it was a unique time . everybody who worked on that show had an opportunity to be the best artists that they wanted to be at the time . and they really gave all of that . i was on the cover of newsweek , and then it disappeared . matt freweractorit was this bizarre , short , sharp shock over the course of four or five years , where the show seemed to be the biggest thing on the planet i was on the cover of newsweek , and then it disappeared . i remembered going to lorimar , the mgm studios . i think it was the day after we had the plug pulled . i saw the border security guy , and it was the strangest thing he pretended not to know me . because i was no longer worth knowing . i was persona non grata my parking space had been taken away . and my nameplate , which is the ultimate insult , of course . still in the air present a month after the cancellation , in november of , television viewers in chicago were hit by a broadcast signal intrusion when pirates broke into two local tv broadcasts with footage of a person in a max headroom mask . the culprits were never found . later that year , matt frewer told columnist marilyn beck about a max related film that was in development . the title ? max headroom for president . matt freweractor it was basically going to ride the coattails of the presidential campaign and do it as sort of a reality thing . there was an actor who was president why not a computer generated man ? like a lot of these things , it never made it to first base . one of the later max headroom coke commercialspeter waggproducerafter coke finished and the abc series finished and after hbo finished , there was still some heat . i remember still trying to sell a movie that we never managed to . i got interest , but i never was able to get it over the line , and then i just kind of moved on myself . two unaired episodes from the series premiered in , although the final episode , baby grobags , would never air on abc . one year later , back to the future part ii signaled the show s influence with a retro future arcade that included max inspired versions of michael jackson and ronald reagan , but aside from a few sporadic reruns on cable , the character largely went silent until . marty visits the cafe s in back to the future part iirocky mortonco creator directorchannel was switching over to percent digital broadcasts so they wanted to warn their audience , and they thought that max headroom ampnbspsomeone who was created for channel , originally ampnbspwould be the perfect spokesman to do that . matt freweractorthe idea being that he was older and grumpier looking , and was looking back on the good old days of pre digital . he had computer generated liver spots , and was this mean old bastard , really . when i was getting the make up on , i felt quite nervous . i was thinking , god , this is strange , because it had literally been years since i had put on the max make up . then as soon as the cameras rolled , i immediately got right back into it , it was the weirdest thing . rocky mortonco creator directorwe shot it in sort of a classic english retirement seaside town . we used the same process to create the same look , with the prosthetics , and then shot him a certain way and then , you know , sort of did the tweaks in the video edit . part of channel s digital switchover campaigntoday s cult shows live on thanks to the passion and dedication of their online fan bases . in many ways max headroom was the perfect candidate for that kind of following quirky and weird , with an unlikely underdog spirit . but while max lived in the future , his shows were confined by the pre internet era . james giffordcurator of maxheadroom . comthere was never much of an organized fan community . it was very , very scattered until the internet picked up the pieces . there was alt . fan . max headroom it was reasonably populated and vibrant in the usenet days . michael cassuttwriterthe property was tied up in litigation for , i don t know , years . that s the reason those shows were not available from basically until the shout factory did that dvd in . but every now and then somebody would talk to me or steve about reviving it . max headroom was judged to be more important than michael jackson . george stoneco creator writeri recall there was a documentary , a survey of the s that went out obviously at the end of the s , in which max headroom was judged to be more important than michael jackson . which was good . i think people got it that was the thing . max headroom was coming out of the air , really . and we were in the fortunate position that we were able to synthesize it . peter waggproducerit was such a moment in time , and it was the combination of so much talent from so many different disciplines and media that just coalesced into the perfect whole . and it predicted so much . eminem pays tribute to max in with his video for rap god bridget potteroriginal programming vp , hboit was way ahead of its time . peter was very lucky to have come in this door when he did with this project . because i don t know what else or where else anything that odd would have taken root . today , there d be a million places for max headroom . steve robertswriterwe had a laugh because we envisioned channels nobody could believe that there were channels . i mean , it was the highest number we could think of . now we ve got , and nothing but crap on most of them . michael cassuttwritermax is a character you can t beat . he s the clever innocent who keeps looking he s only a few hours old and so he has all this information , but he doesn t have any knowledge . that character is always fun and timeless . matt freweractoryou kind of go , well , it is a good time for a comeback , because the whole minutes into the future business we ve arrived . we re here now . and there was a certain kind of naive charm about making all this analog stuff look digital , but the amount of work that went into it nowadays any year old could throw it together on his laptop . and also the retro s thing . bring back the linda evans shoulder pads and the duran duran make up , i m all for that . you can t have enough hairspray and eye glitter . photo essay how make up brought max to lifebryan bishop photo essay the wildest max headroom merchandisebryan bishop photo essay behind the scenes of abc s weirdest showbryan bishop design by adam baumgartnerdevelopment by aidan feayeditorial assistance by chaim gartenbergedited by emily yoshida , michael zelenko lt ! try typekit . load catch e gt	 the world s most expensive supercars can hit miles per hour in less than three seconds . the fastest production car in the world , the hennessey venom gt , does it in . lamborghini s horsepower v powered hurac n has been unofficially clocked at . . if you were sitting in a hurac n right now , you could go from zero to in less time than it takes to read this sentence . but somewhere in a texas garage sits a strange car that s even quicker a mustang fastback known as the zombie , and it s entirely electric . dark horsethe story of a record shattering , all electric mustangby michael zelenko the world s most expensive supercars can hit miles per hour in less than three seconds . the fastest production car in the world , the hennessey venom gt , does it in . lamborghini s horsepower v powered hurac n has been unofficially clocked at . . if you were sitting in a hurac n right now , you could go from zero to in less time than it takes to read this sentence . but somewhere in a texas garage sits a strange car that s even quicker a mustang fastback known as the zombie , and it s entirely electric . tapping an array of giant motors , controllers , and batteries ampnbspcast in a fluorescent green with blue leds for effect ampnbspthe zombie produces over horsepower and a mind numbing , pounds of torque . those numbers translate into a time of just . seconds , a remarkable eighth mile time of . seconds at mph and an estimated quarter mile time of . seconds at mph . but forget numbers smash the accelerator of the zombie , and you can feel your internal organs abandon their rightful homes and fly against the back of your rib cage . that kind of acceleration will make a , pound cameraman giggle like a little boy riding his first roller coaster . that s not hyperbole i ve seen it happen . the zombie is the brainchild of mitch medford , a muscle car enthusiast who left a career in tech to launch bloodshed motors , a garage that offers an unusual service converting classic cars into high speed electric machines that can pummel the most powerful supercars in the world . the fastback is bloodshed s first and so far , only project . medford hopes that one day his four wheeled creatures will be roaming streets and highways around the world , but first , he has to prove what the zombie is made of . in late february , i traveled to austin , texas , to visit medford and the bloodshed team . it was unseasonably cold and wet , but medford had been tinkering at the garage since am . the zombie sat hunched in the middle of the shop , its menacing green and black paint job immaculate , every inch of chrome polished . medford was working feverishly to prepare for the texas mile , a bi annual racing event where he hoped to demonstrate the zombie s mettle by breaking two speed records . the event was exactly one month away . medford comes from a long line of mechanics and moonshinersmitch medford may as well have been born in an auto shop and delivered by a mechanic . he comes from a long line of mechanics and moonshiners in fact , he s named after robert mitchum , the producer , writer , and star of s thunder road , a seedy noir about a fast driving illegal booze runner . at , medford still has the good humored energy of a middle school class clown eager to tease friends , offer up a groan worthy joke , or riff on a plot for a fast and furious film starring himself and the zombie . he s also a born storyteller , peppering his anecdotes with expressions that reveal his roots in north carolina s blue ridge mountains an underpowered car , he ll tell you , can t pull a greasy string out of a cat s ass . medford s love for cars started in high school , when he salvaged his first ride a ford ltd galaxie with a tattered vinyl roof and wires snaking out of the tires and fixed it up with his dad . eventually , a policeman clocked the galaxie going , even though its speedometer only went up to . that car was woven into my high school years , medford says . it s a part of my memories of getting girlfriends and going to the drive in movies and trying to outrun my friends down the backside of the river it was the way we settled arguments . we d see who could lay down the most rubber in the parking lot , who had the loudest pipes putting on glasspacks , cherry bombs , straight pipes , cutouts . it was just seeped into my whole childhood . a policeman clocked medford s galaxie going , but its speedometer only went to medford s steel gray hair is trimmed with military precision , ampnbspa throwback to his time as a drill instructor . after the army , he turned to computer engineering , and made a successful career of it first at ibm , then heading startups . in june of last year , medford left his post as ceo of austin based rf code to build bloodshed motors . in its announcement of his departure , austin business journal said medford left to pursue personal business opportunities . but to medford , bloodshed was far more than that . after the galaxie , other cars had come and gone a cylinder mustang , a impala super sport , two toronados one with a mile wide set of horns fastened to the hood , a mercury cougar in which he first kissed his wife , a shelby gt all american gas guzzling classics , new and old . and then medford saw an episode of top gear that piqued his interest . in it , the puckish jeremy clarkson races a first generation tesla roadster against its more conventional twin , the lotus elise . as the tesla hurtles down the track , clarkson screams , , rpm i cannot believe this ! that s biblically quick ! the tesla left its sibling sucking ozone fumes . watching the clip , an idea banged around medford s head . he felt sure electric cars would transform the car industry , but he also wondered whether they could penetrate the restoration and modification car community , where wealthy buyers shell out tens of thousands to breathe new life into classic vehicles . so medford started doing his research , and that s when he stumbled onto john wayland and his white zombie . the white zombie , hitting miles per hour in a quarter mile drag race . on the outside , the white zombie is a humble datsun . but concealed beneath its milquetoast shell sit two inch electric motors , giving the white zombie enough power to hit mph in . seconds . it runs a quarter mile in . seconds almost a whole second quicker than a nissan gt r . the power and the numbers and performance that that car was putting out was almost unimaginable , medford recalls . a light bulb went off in his head and he sent john wayland an email outlining his vision beautifully restored , iconic vintage cars coupled with world class electric performance . he knew it d be a niche business and the creations wouldn t be cheap , and up but he felt confident the market was ripe . with tesla monopolizing the luxury electric car field , it was becoming harder for wealthy buyers to distinguish themselves from the crowd . bloodshed motors offered a solution top of the line electric performance in one of a kind packages . but weeks passed with no word from wayland . john wayland built his first electric car in with a proto tesla philosophy if electric cars have any hope of success , they needed to quicken a customer s pulse . electric cars were never going to take off if you tried to lay guilt trips on people about burning gasoline , he says . in , a local electric vehicle club hosted a drag race on the streets of portland to prove that electric cars weren t a complete bore . the problem is , they were nothing but dog slow and embarrassing , wayland recalls . so he built the white zombie . wayland procured seven helicopter batteries from an aircraft surplus outfit and stuffed them into the diminutive datsun . most of the batteries were in bad shape , but the car still laid rubber in all five gears , wayland says . i remember women and children running for cover as i was going sideways down the streets of portland . the white zombie . image courtesy of carrol brown in the two decades since , wayland added another motor and swapped out the nickel cadmium batteries for modern lithium manganese nickel cobalt polymer cells . but by the spring of , wayland had stopped tinkering with the car as much he d been devastated by the loss of his wife a few years prior and was keeping to himself . he remembers receiving mitch s email it was well written , intelligent he was very articulate , but it took him weeks to respond . the two hit if off as soon as they got on the phone it s a good thing we re not neighbors , wayland says , we d be in trouble constantly . the concept of an all electric muscle car wasn t new to wayland in the s , he d converted a mustang to run on lead acid batteries . it had a range of miles and a top speed of mph it was even featured in a issue of mustang illustrated magazine . wayland s late wife loved mustangs , and he thought medford s was the right project to get back in the game . it was a marriage meant to be , he says . medford knew from the start that bloodshed motors debut project had to be a first generation mustang . the mustang needs no introduction , but its significance in the saga of american motor history cannot be overstated . it was an instant classic after its introduction in , firmly woven into the cultural fabric of its era . if medford wanted to attract buyers with fat checkbooks , he d have to electrify the vehicle that stood at the very heart of american automotive culture , and the original pony car was it . to handle the kind of power medford was envisioning , he needed a rust free , wreck free small block fastback he was reticent to take a rarer big block off the market and found one in houston . in the meantime , he assembled the core bloodshed crew john wayland would act as mentor and guide jack lapenta , medford s longtime friend and colleague at ibm , would manage electronics and allen koester , an electrician by trade and a talented mechanic , would be in charge of everything else . early last summer , wayland and his partner mark mongillo drove down from oregon , and the team spent a month tearing out the mustang s internal combustion engine , replacing it with dual inch electric motors and two controllers to manage the battery packs the in zombie stands for two engines , two controllers , and too damn fast . for koester the mechanic , that meant fabricating sturdier motor mounts and installing frame rails to keep the car s body from twisting under the strain of , pounds of torque . for lapenta the electrician , it meant figuring out a way to monitor , regulate , and care for a system that could safely harness enough energy to briefly power a few hundred homes . the zombie s first incarnation was massively overpowered . through an acquaintance , the team got hold of drag racing legend don big daddy garlits battery pack . garlits made a name for himself breaking miles per hour on a quarter mile strip in . now in his s , garlits wants to be the first to do the same in an electric powered dragster . accordingly , his battery pack produces . megawatts , equivalent to roughly , horsepower . i m not easily scared in a car , and it was one of the scariest rides i ve ever done . that s enough electric muscle to trigger what lapenta calls a catastrophic event . if something goes wrong , lapenta says , it doesn t just burn things , it vaporizes them instantly . to avert disaster , the team installed what it calls the oh shit lever , which instantly disconnects the battery from the drivetrain . after multiple all nighters , the crew finally had the zombie in one piece and trucked it down to a san antonio drag strip for a terrifying round of tests . medford asked wayland to take the wheel for the first drive . i m not easily scared in a car , wayland recalls , and it was one of the scariest rides i ve ever done . as soon as wayland punched the accelerator , the zombie s front end leapt into the air . it came down , but bucked again at miles per hour . it had a buttload of power , but it wasn t properly set up , wayland remembers . in their rush , the team had neglected to fasten critical components or align the steering . a second run was equally treacherous . we proved it had a lot of power it excited the crowd it excited everybody , wayland says . but i probably should ve worn a set of depends on the two runs . every friday afternoon , a few miles down the road from bloodshed motors , sandeez hamburger hut hosts an impromptu classic car meet up . on the morning of my visit , medford offered to check it out , so we hopped in the zombie . the car had come a long way since the san antonio runs the steering system was honed , and medford has installed the first of two overdrives , which will extend his top speed in theory to roughly miles per hour . the zombie is high tech , but it s not a refined driving experience it lacks the silken comfort of a tesla or the luxury you d expect from a car with its price tag . the racing battery pack currently installed had a charge time of minutes , and only offered a mile range . there s no power steering , and the brakes are heavy . the car feels stiff , tense with power . at high speeds or tight turns , the steady whine of the electric engine is joined by wind noise and creaks from the frame . but the zombie was built for performance , not promenades . drop your foot on the pedal , and the car transforms into a missile drop your foot on the pedal , and the car transforms into a missile . power flows to the drivetrain effortlessly , and the car jumps from mph to as gracefully as from to . this car is the most exciting thing i ve ever driven in my life , says medford . it s literally like crack cocaine . as we turned onto the highway toward sandeez , mitch leaves six foot long tire tracks . apart from a lonely silver chevrolet ssr , the parking lot around sandeez on that bone chillingly cold morning was largely devoid of interesting cars . medford popped the zombie s hood and trunk , revealing the motor and battery pack , and stepped inside the restaurant . he d baited the trap and watched as passersby craned their necks to figure out just what it was they were looking at . the driver of the ssr an older gentleman circled the zombie . he looked under the hood , sauntered to the back , and stared into the trunk . he considered the car a moment longer . finally , he shook his head , muttered , it s fucking cold , and headed inside . let s face it , medford told me later , growing up with muscle cars why did we make them loud ? to get attention . why did we try to make them faster ? to be the guy that wins and gets the attention . and with the zombie , medford built the ultimate conversation piece . sometimes he says he sticks gopros in the engine bay , props open the hood , and leaves the zombie at a home depot parking lot . then , he watches people s faces as they crane their heads over the electric motors . to be totally candid , he says , it s an amazingly addictive feeling . but admiration won t pay the bills . medford will need customers , and to attract them he needs to establish bloodshed as a business . that s why he s headed to the texas mile , a biannual event where drivers are invited to hurtle their machines down a runway to see just how fast they can go . the texas mile draws million dollar vehicles , big buyers , and thousands of spectators . if we re going to focus on building a brand that represents extremely high performance electric vehicle conversions of classic iconic cars , we ve got to really prove it , medford told me . to do that , he aims to break two records the first is for fastest electric street car at the texas mile . john metric , the president of the national electric drag racing association , currently holds that record at miles per hour for a run he did in in his highly modified pontiac fiero . the second record is unofficial , but for medford , it carries greater personal significance . in , carroll shelby an icon of american muscle as big as the mustang itself was invited by goodyear to its san angelo , texas testing facility to demonstrate the durability of their new thunderbolt tires . shelby took the opportunity to outfit what was already a very quick pony the shelby gt with a race ready big block engine and christen it the super snake . the day of the run , shelby s car ran miles at an average speed of miles per hour . at one point , the story goes , the super snake hit , making it the fastest first generation mustang in the world . footage from shelby s run at goodyear s san angelo facilityfor medford , shelby is an inspiration as much for his racing prowess as his business acumen . in a way he was ahead of the whole world in the resto mod business , medford said . think about his business he aligned himself with ford , took their products , and made them better than they ever would be , and still got them repaired and warrantied by ford . that s inspiration . and like medford , shelby knew marketing was key in the s , shelby allegedly repainted his only cobra different colors in order to fool the world into thinking he had a full inventory . the man , the legend has shown it s possible , said medford . if you want to say that you re going to put the ultimate muscle in a muscle car , you better be able to outdo the man who represented ultimate muscle . but medford knew was a reach the fastest he d gone was somewhere in the s . he had no idea what would happen when he pushed a year old car beyond its limits . i m gonna hold that pedal down until my nut sack pops , he shrugged . you may watch me die down there , he added , half jokingly . just take care of my wife . twice a year , the town of beeville population , welcomes the texas mile and the fleet of high performance cars and motorcycles that come with it . the three day event takes place on a one and a half mile runway located on the decommissioned chase naval airfield , surrounded by wide open country on one side and the garza east unit correctional facility on the other . the prison is close enough that guards can watch and inmates can hear cars howling down the drag strip . and it s a true texan affair . we always say our event is in honor of god and country , says shannon matus , co founder and owner of the event , when we sit down to talk in her trailer . matus has the robust mane and warm smile of a classic country singer . each daily driver meeting starts with a prayer , she tells me , and a couple dozen members of the christian motorcyclist association volunteer their time here every year . i always tell them , you re here to provide direction , matus says . and hopefully the opportunity comes up where you can provide the real important direction . wayland was derailed by an emergency repair on michael jordan s high performance electric golf cartapart from john wayland whose plans were derailed by an emergency repair on michael jordan s high performance electric golf cart somewhere in las vegas the entire bloodshed crew showed up for the mile . as shelbys , lamborghinis , ferraris , porsches , camaros , ford gts , and nissan gt rs roll by the zombie s trailer on their way to the track , drivers poked their heads out to see what the ever constant crowd was gawking at . there are other classic cars here , but nothing even remotely resembles the zombie . medford was less jovial than he d been a month ago , and the zombie was meaner than ever the sideview mirrors and windshield wipers were gone , an aluminum plate hid the grill and headlights , two blowers were installed to cool the engine , and a wing had been attached to keep the car grounded . power came from a . megawatt battery pack , capable of producing , horsepower . the two records medford wanted to beat and had become a rallying point for his team , gathering gravity and significance over the last month . the team knew the car had enough brute force to hit , but they were concerned about its aerodynamics . if supercars have anything in common , it s that they re wedge shaped to slice through wind . a mustang has the aerodynamics of a cinder block . at high speeds , that profile can be dangerous enough lift can levitate the front of the car , causing the driver to lose all control . and there are other dangers , too . as john wayland put it , hitting or even is dependent on a lot of ifs if the motors don t fireball if the brushes don t melt if we don t break a rear end if we don t go sideways . i m rooting for him percent . i m not saying he won t do all i m saying is that it s a lofty goal . medford offered the crowd a glorious , white , cotton candy thick burnoutbut medford was ready . the texas mile is a first come , first serve , one car at a time event it can be a three hour wait between runs . at am on friday morning the sun still inching over the horizon dozens of cars were already lined up . medford pulled the zombie into line . there s a rhythm here as one car screams down the runway , the next burns out , warming up its tires and getting them sticky for better traction . a speed board instantaneously illustrates a car s half mile and full mile speeds . in a herd of cars that belch , rumble , and moan at the start line there s a misconception here , matus told me , that the louder a car is , the faster it goes the zombie stood out for its silence . when the time came , medford slid the car into position and offered the crowd a glorious , white , cotton candy thick burnout . and then , with little fanfare and only the sound of the vehicle tearing through the wind , medford was off on his first run . he hit a top speed of . , only a tenth of a mile slower than metric s record . now i know we re going to break it , medford said after the run . now , ? i don t know . the team felt confident enough in the car s geometry to take the wing off and up the voltage from to . on his second run , medford hit . , breezing through metric s record but just short of the all important figure . medford was ready to call it a day and save challenging shelby for the next two days but his team was wired . by the time he rolled the car back to the trailer , allen koester had the generator prepped to charge . the crew bumped the voltage up again , this time to the battery pack s limit of volts . as the day drew to a close , medford pulled up to the start line for one final run . if this isn t the ultimate muscle in a muscle car , then what is ? medford gripped the wheel and tore down the line , the accelerator pressed flat . the electric motors spun furiously he later told me the noxious odor of charred ozone filled the cabin . but he didn t let up . by the time he hit the half mile mark , the zombie was flying at . miles per hour . from where i stood at the start line , the car turned into a black speck , and then vanished . moments later , a magical number flashed across the speed board exactly one mile from the start line , the zombie hit . miles per hour . just like that , almost a year of hard work had paid off bloodshed motors had created what may be the fastest fastback mustang ever , electric or otherwise . back at the trailer , the team was abuzz with high fives and congratulations . as medford pulled up , koester and lapenta leaned into the car , clasping him by the shoulders . medford was giddy again , as lighthearted as i d seen him on my visit to austin . i m ecstatic , i m proud , he said beaming . i m grateful for everything , i m grateful for these guys , he pointed back to the crew . if this doesn t sell the vision of ultrahigh performance vintage cars that are all electric , what will ? medford asked me , still clutching the official speed ticket in his hand . if this isn t the ultimate muscle in a muscle car , then what is ? within minutes of breaking shelby s record , medford s mind was already racing with possibilities . we re so close to , he said laughing , and once you get to , then it s . by saturday morning , medford had decided that at this october s texas mile , he intended to take the zombie to miles per hour . from left to right jack lapenta , andrew graham , mitch medford , allen koester , joseph mannthe zombie is a singular accomplishment , but bloodshed isn t one car it s a company , and it still has something to prove . despite the team s success at the track , a , plus electric muscle car with limited range , no matter how fast it is , still feels like a tough sell or maybe the perfect car , but for an exceptionally small market . that doesn t bother medford . i m still looking for my first customer , medford told me , pointing across the landscape of trailers , many with six figure cars inside . and there s a lot of money at this track . when most of the crew drove back to austin , medford stayed to tell anyone who would listen about the zombie to talk watts and voltage with gearheads accustomed to discussing carburetors and transmissions . on the last day of the texas mile , medford texted me more good news the zombie had won hottest car of the texas mile and most exotic car of the texas mile . i was fact checking some figures , so i took the opportunity to verify his estimated quarter mile time . we d used the same calculator , but had come up with different results . we had a brief back and forth , but in the end , he said he didn t much care what time i used . doesn t matter , he wrote , go with whatever you want . we re going to break it soon . edited by chris zieglervideo by jordan oplinger , jimmy sheltonphotography by marc morrison	 terminator resurrectedon set with arnold for what could be the best terminator in decadesby jacob kastrenakes arnold schwarzenegger is walking up a flight of stairs toward a time machine , located on a large metal platform high above my head . he s banged up , with a bullet hole in the back of his jacket ampnbsp ampnbspa leather jacket , of course and a bright green blob along his right cheek that looks like it s eating through his face . it all looks strange , but then you begin to see it with some movie magic , you can imagine the green mark warping into a gory wound , with bits of muscle and metal stretching out across it . with another stretch of the imagination , the entire room morphs into a futuristic laboratory , occupied by a version of schwarzenegger that s more recognizable than any other the terminator . it s the middle of july , and i m down in new orleans inside an enormous , white nasa warehouse . from the outside , it s nondescript enough that one might assume some strange government research is happening inside . nasa once worked on the space shuttle here , but these days it s regularly rented out by film crews transforming it into other worlds . today that world is a high tech laboratory built for the film terminator genisys . the terminator franchise has been around since james cameron s the terminator back in , but compared to today s franchises say , anything marvel , star wars , or transformers ampnbspterminator films are few and far between . genisys , which comes out this summer , is only the series fifth film , a full three decades after the first installment . compared to today s franchises , terminator films are few and far betweenthat may be because things haven t gone so well without cameron . cameron s terminator , in , duplicated the success of the original by shifting its unique mixture of sci fi , action , horror and yes relationships onto a mostly new set of characters . but from there , the series went downhill . terminator , released in , wasn t a hit with critics or at the box office . the tv show that followed in was cancelled after two seasons . then came s widely panned terminator salvation , which ampnbsproger ebert described as being so filled with action scenes that it may as well have been a video game that you don t get to play and you know how ebert feels about video games . salvation also did poorly at the box office , which is likely why the series rights went up for sale shortly thereafter . ultimately , the franchise ended up in the hands of producers david ellison and dana goldberg , a duo behind a number of recent blockbusters , including star trek into darkness and world war z , which they executive produced . ellison and goldberg recognize that breathing life back into this flagging franchise won t be easy . schwarzenegger is attempting to ampnbspmake a sequel that s actually goodbut the team is committed . that s why schwarzenegger is in this warehouse and back in his old costume . he and everyone else here are attempting to make terminator feel fresh again or , more succinctly , ampnbsptrying make a sequel that s actually good . joining him are emilia clarke , better known as daenerys in game of thrones , and jai courtney , who played bruce willis son in a good day to die hard . clarke and courtney flank schwarzenegger as he walks toward the time machine take after take after take . just about every role has been recast for this movie , with young actors taking over as better looking versions of terminator s classic characters clarke is the increasingly tough sarah connor , and courtney is the hapless kyle reese . only schwarzenegger is returning for the reboot . while some might wonder why he s still here and still playing the powerhouse role at years old , the answer is obvious it s a terminator film . of course he s here . and with schwarzenegger on board , everyone in this weird hangar minutes from the city center is actually excited . they all think this new film is going to succeed , and they re eager to have people forget about the franchise s missteps . even director alan taylor , whose last film was s thor the dark world , points to the first two terminator films as inspiration , politely ignoring the slow train wreck that followed . that voluntary amnesia goes double for schwarzenegger , who isn t just peeved about the quality of salvation , but seems to be annoyed that they made it without him . with genisys , schwarzenegger says , the screenwriters really figured out a way of continuing on the story and kind of ignoring the last one . it s been over a decade since schwarzenegger last touched the franchise during much of the time since , he served as governor of california but when asked , he admits to still feeling protective over the terminator . the trailer for the original terminatorellison and goldberg , the producers , also express a deep commitment to the quality of the franchise . while cameras are being moved around during a break in the action , the two drop by where i m standing , smiling and walking beside one another an inseparable pair . both producers are understandably jumpy about rebooting the series mostly out of excitement , but maybe it s their nerves , as well . they want to update terminator for modern times , allowing it to reflect our new technology and fears . both believe now is the moment to hit the reset button . whenever you remake a movie there has to be a reason for doing it , says ellison , who , with his gently spiked hair , looks like a startup founder unsurprisingly , as he is the son of oracle founder larry ellison . you have to find a way to update it and adjust and deviate , otherwise you re simply just recreating what james cameron did . the original terminator movies were about nuclear war and the opposition of man and machine , all backed by a military ai called skynet bent on exterminating humanity . to ellison , that ai is starting to look less and less fictional technology integrating itself into our lives and sneaking into our pockets is the reality many of us live in . we ve invited skynet into our homes , ellison says . we line up in front of apple stores to buy these things . the singularity is very much in the near future . the bond of man and machine is just around the corner . we ve invited skynet into our homes . we line up in front of apple stores to buy these things . the singularity a term that generally refers to the emergence of hyper intelligent ai or the merging of man and machine is said to be a major theme in this movie . ellison says that we re already moving in that direction with procedures like ocular implants , but even our reliance on smartphones is enough of a symbol for him and goldberg to riff on . terminator was a cautionary tale about the amount that you put your trust into a machine and technology , goldberg says . look at the world we live in . you can sit in a restaurant , and literally , people aren t speaking to one another because everybody is doing this , she says , putting her hands out as though she were firing off a text message . it sort of has skynet written all over it . it was sort of asking for a remake . it s even more pressing now , director alan taylor says , when he comes over during a camera movement . science fiction is fun because it s reaching so far into the future . right now , that stuff is around us all the time . one of the challenges was that now we have a different set of fears than the kind of paranoia used in terminator , taylor says . technology is scary to us in a different way . most people aren t lying awake at night worrying about nuclear threat , but we are unnerved by a lot of how technology is moving into our lives and starting to infuse our lives . we the filmmakers question whether that s a good thing or a bad thing . it s hard to imagine a new terminator film actually getting that thoughtful after all , these movies are really about running away from handsome robots . and with an initial trailer for genisys showing more ludicrous action than in any prior terminator film , it s becoming even harder to see how carefully these ideas will fit in . still , people are thinking about these things on set , and that should leave some hope that they ll make it into the actual picture . and you should hope that the production knows what it s doing , because there s possibly a lot more terminator to come . ellison s sister , megan ellison of annapurna pictures , won a bid for rights to the terminator series back in . she s since passed the rights to her brother david s production house , skydance , which plans to take advantage of the next few years in a big way . genisys , as its name implies , is the start of something a brand new trilogy . assuming that this first one s successful , a second and third film will shoot back to back . their plots are already nailed down , but no details have been released publicly . in concept , this trilogy will coexist with the original set of terminator films thanks to some complicated time travel jiu jitsu . the mechanics sound fairly convoluted , but in short the new trilogy essentially takes place in an alternate terminator universe . schwarzenegger was sent back in time , but then something different happened the timelines split . a straight reboot might have been more elegant , but ellison and goldberg seem to care deeply about preserving the canon that s already been created . they re also huge time travel nerds . both of us have read just about every book you can on theatrical time travel , ellison says . goldberg confirms this . we have no lives . the plots of genisys sequels are already nailed down , but no details have been releasedgenisys will feature a lot of time travel , even beyond this splitting of the timelines . after watching a few more takes with schwarzenegger , a studio representative leads me out through a pair of doors and into a damp tunnel with cement bricks arching overhead . it s the dimly lit set of an empty sewer system , and at the center of it is yet another large platform housing a time machine . this one , meant to exist in the year , is in slight disrepair . beyond the sewer system , in another corner of the warehouse , is a final time machine , a far sleeker and more futuristic model , standing half constructed , having finished filming days ago . in the movie , it ll show up sometime in . on the way back to the original time machine , we pass about a dozen extras standing around in white labs suits , one of whom is smoking a long , silver e cig . it s a ridiculous sight , but it s also another reminder of the growing symbiosis between man and machine . not man and machinery not the large churning factory parts we saw at the end of the first terminator . skynet has manifested itself as an endless host of tiny , personal tools . they know us . and how we reach that point has always been part of what terminator explores . the rest of the day , i m whisked around through prop trailers and past catering tables , getting a look at everything from laser guns to chocolate covered pretzels . just before it s time to leave , schwarzenegger has finally finished walking up all the stairs . he heads over to the side of the warehouse and takes a seat in a tall director s chair . he s cooling off , taking a few minutes to chat as it begins to rain outside , breaking new orleans thick blanket of heat . intimidating as schwarzenegger is , he s remarkably friendly . he still carries himself like a politician and knows how to sound measured even when his passion for the series seems to make that difficult . finally , a reporter asks him whether he thinks this movie will actually be able to win over fans . schwarzenegger , still in costume with that green blob on his cheek , doesn t hesitate . i think actions speak louder than words , he says . when the movie s trailer comes out , i think that right away it will set the record straight . of course , a first trailer is already out there , and reactions are decidedly mixed . it s over the top , it s action packed , and it s deeply nostalgic ampnbspbut maybe that s where , for better or worse , this production hopes to succeed . when you see the first screenings out there , schwarzenegger adds , the buzz will take care of the rest . even if genisys is little more than a ridiculous pastiche of classic scenes that were well made the first time around , that at least means pieces of the movie are worth looking forward to . perhaps that s why schwarzenegger is so confident . i don t think that it s difficult to win the people over , because people are really excited about another terminator , he says . they re ready to see another one . illustrations by henry the worst 	 we start with shots of jameson at pm , because las vegas feels like a place to do shots . i move on to four roses on the rocks , while casey newton gets started on old fashioneds . my notes indicate a long and serious discussion about the attractiveness of jarvis cocker at pm , followed by casey stealing a colleague s drink at pm . i m not leaving this bar until your handwriting looks like you ve had a stroke , casey informs me around pm . you re just going to have to keep ordering those roses . i order my fourth drink immediately . by pm , casey and another colleague are deep in discussion regarding their romantic lives . then the notes get sparse . at am , i have the hiccups , but by am , i m cured . shortly after that , casey and i get in a cab headed back to our hotel . i suspect there was a minimum of roses between casey and me by the time the evening was out , plus another shot of jameson to send us into the cab , and then beers with the video crew when we got back to the hotel . i meant to keep track of how much i was drinking , but then i got drunk . ordinarily , i like a glass of wine with dinner , but that s about it . that night , though , i was actually looking to get hungover . i d heard about an iv hangover treatment and i wanted to see if it actually worked . i m not leaving this bar until your handwriting looks like you ve had a stroke . wait , but how do hangovers work ? even though about three quarters of people who drink experience at least one hangover a year , we don t really know how they work . which is strange , because hangovers contribute to workplace absenteeism , worsen job performance which matters a lot if you re , say , operating heavy machinery while hungover , impair memory and learning , and lead to what researchers refer to as a feeling of general misery . about percent of adults in the us . million workers are hungover on the job , a study found . here s what we do know if your bac gets above . , you re probably going to be hungover . you ll feel your worst when you get close to zero , about to hours later . the hangover happens when a person s blood alcohol concentration falls sharply the nadir of symptoms occurs when the bac is close to zero . the symptoms that clinically signify a hangover will be familiar thirst , dizziness , nausea , headache , concentration problems , and headache and i would experience them all the following morning . but no model exists for why these things happen in the first place . hangovers also affect the mood they make people anxious and depressed . this is what kingsley amis called the metaphysical hangover in everyday drinking when that ineffable compound of depression , sadness these two are not the same , anxiety , self hatred , sense of failure and fear for the future begins to steal over you , start telling yourself that what you have is a hangover , amis writes . you are not sickening for anything , you have not suffered a minor brain lesion , you are not all that bad at your job , your family and friends are not leagued in a conspiracy of barely maintained silence about what a shit you are , you have not come at last to see life as it really is . it is worth noting that amis family and friends were leagued in a barely maintained silence about what a shit he was amis was an alcoholic . a lot of people think dehydration causes hangovers . dehydration probably does have some effect alcohol does affect the levels of a hormone called vasopressin that regulates how the body retains water this is why people urinate more often while drinking . but the levels of minerals called electrolytes that help water function in the body don t differ between the hungover and the un hungover , which suggests dehydration isn t the primary cause . other theories for the origin of a hangover include low blood sugar and acetaldehyde , but there s not great evidence for them , either . there are a few other things that may affect how serious a hangover is , without necessarily causing the condition . sleeping badly probably doesn t cause hangovers , but it certainly doesn t help alcohol messes up most people s sleep patterns . there are also compounds called congeners , found in grains , wine skins , or casks used in making the beverages , that appear to make hangovers worse i drank bourbon with casey because it s tasty , but also because it was likely to give me a bad hangover whiskey has a lot of congeners . and while most booze we drink is composed of ethanol , traces of other kinds of alcohols slip into some drinks . one of those compounds , called methanol , metabolizes into formaldehyde and formic acid , neither of which are going to make someone feel good . the main suspect in causing a hangover is the immune systemand the main suspect in causing a hangover is the immune system . proteins called cytokines part of how the immune system talks to itself had already been identified as a likely cause by a overview paper on hangovers in the annals of internal medicine . cytokines also , as a special bonus , can make a person feel really bad . you know how miserable it is to have a cold ? that s not the virus s fault that s your immune system . in a recent study of men who got drunk and then had their blood tested while they were hungover , korean scientists found higher levels of cytokines associated with autoimmune disease . these included tumor necrosis factor alpha , which is also responsible for rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease . fortunately , if immune inflammation is the root cause of the hangover , the cure may be pretty simple anti inflammatories . some anti inflammatories are available over the counter , like aspirin , ibuprofen advil , or naproxen aleve . upon discovering researchers had made this connection , writer adam rogers whose excellent proof is a must read for alcohol loving nerds began dosing himself with ibuprofen after drinking , before going to bed . this is similar to what casey did he took aleve before bedtime . so , we don t know a lot about how hangovers work , which makes it very hard to design a good cure . there is no data on the usefulness of an iv in fixing a hangover . that s not to say it won t work it might . but i have no way of knowing in advance whether i ll be wasting my time and the verge s money at hangover heaven . my hangover goes to heaven i wake up around am after casey s and my rampage . it s a bad scene . the hotel room is too bright and smells like stale beer . my head hurts . my tongue is the texture , approximately , of felt . my eyeballs feel as though they d been pulled from my skull , rolled around in some grit , and ineptly replaced even my eyelids hurt . i fumble for my sunglasses and discover that very small porcupines had apparently crept down my gullet in my sleep they are now using my stomach as a bounce castle . i feel bad . i meet casey for breakfast , in the sense that i watch him eat his . for me , hot coffee is untenable . even the very bland oatmeal i ve chosen is too much for me . casey is in better shape , the shit . so then it s time . i take a cab to hangover heaven . the driver accelerates and brakes so sharply i am in danger of puking . i also manage to leave my phone in the back seat while i pay for the cab something i don t realize until about half an hour later . nausea , check . concentration problems , check . i feel badhangover heaven is located in an unpromising looking strip mall a van and what appears to be a decommissioned ambulance with the hangover heaven logo are parked outside . the clinic is run by jason burke , , an anesthesiologist who noticed that people who are recovering from anesthesia seem an awful lot like hungover people . basically , this started when i was working in a recovery room , burke says . i was seeing people in the recovery room with postoperative nausea and vomiting , headache , dizziness that type of thing . they re exactly the same ones people have with a hangover . so i thought , these same medications would work well for hangovers . jason burke of hangover heavenwhen we arrive for my am appointment , the place is mostly empty , and burke greets us warmly he speaks with a slight drawl . he has expensive looking teeth , which i see often , since he smiles readily and widely . his shoulder length brown hair is pulled into a ponytail . burke , who favors bordeaux and california cabernets , has the air of a surfer bro who just happens to have gone to medical school . i am steered into a dim room , where i sit down in a large leather recliner . i am asked to rate my symptoms nausea , headache , anxiety , and overall hangover severity on a scale from to the medics determine my hangover is severe enough to warrant the rapture package , the most expensive one on the menu . i am hooked up to an oxygen tank , and an iv is inserted into my right arm , where i receive an anti emetic to keep me from vomiting , an anti inflammatory ibuprofen in iv form , and heartburn medication . i m also getting alpha lipoic acid , an antioxidant that interacts with my blood sugar . the fluid from the iv makes my upper right arm cold . the medics determine my hangover is severe enough to warrant the rapture package after a trial run with volunteers , burke purchased a bus as a kind of soft opening for his business . real estate in las vegas often requires a five year lease , he says he didn t know if the business was going to work , and he didn t want to get stuck paying the lease if hangover heaven went bust . with a bus , if things didn t work out , he could just sell it . more than half of burke s clients never enter the clinic at allthings worked out burke leased the site where i was treated . hangover heaven treats , people a year . but more than half of burke s clients never enter the clinic at all for a fee , a physician or nurse practitioner will come to your hotel room . his clientele generally stay at high end casinos and are spending about a day on their vacation to miss a day of their vacation is a big issue , burke says . hangover heaven does its best business during convention season , march madness , and super bowl sunday . the treatments range in cost from for an iv plus vitamins , to the rapture package at . this seems expensive . on the other hand , i had actual drugs given to me by actual medical professionals . that s pretty much always expensive . burke views his work as a harm reduction strategy people are going to drink no matter what . he hopes to make them less miserable and turn a profit doing it . it s just the nature of las vegas , he says . people come here to drink . they want to blow off some steam . alcohol is part of that . the conference circuit can be particularly brutal some of burke s clientele are performers and executives who are puking their guts out just hours before they re due onstage for their keynote . partway through the interview with burke , a female nurse comes over and interrupts time for my vitamin b shot . we retire to the restroom , for privacy type reasons . as i slide my leggings down , i realize that getting a vitamin b shot in the ass is the closest i will ever come to being a kennedy . the shot is basically painless . i return to the recliner , wheeling my iv with me . burke chalks up some of the misery of hangovers to vitamin deficiency . from what i can tell in the research literature , a vitamin b analog called pyritinol does have positive effects on hangovers . there doesn t seem to be much else on the role of vitamins . burke s business hinges , in part , on selling vitamins his supplements , a packet of four , claim to prevent hangovers for one night of moderate drinking . he clearly believes in what he s selling , but the research i ve seen doesn t back it up . i email him after our meeting to ask if i ve missed anything he admits the science is scant . so little good science has been done on hangovers that extrapolation is necessary , he writes . by the end of the interview about minutes after i sit down i ve improved , though i m still a little queasy . i had been wondering , given the relative emptiness of hangover heaven , how this was a viable business . but just as i ve recovered , things start to get busy of course , am is a little early for the painfully hungover to heave themselves upright . burke walks me to the counter as a group of somethings come in . he greets them warmly hangover heaven has frequent fliers , and this crew had been in the day before . back at the hotel , the cabbie from the morning arrives to drop off my phone . i meet casey . i feel great , and i am ready to gloat about it . how s he doing ? oh , i feel fine , casey says . i took more aleve . i wish hangovers were taken more seriously by the research community . they re so common that knowing more about them would probably benefit most of the population . the relatively scant research into hangovers means that i can t say , conclusively , whether casey s method of handling his hangover was better than mine . it means i also can t tell whether jason burke is right about the role of vitamins and antioxidants in hangover recovery though anti hangover vitamin pills make me deeply suspicious . vitamin studies are notorious among the research community for being inconclusive . anyway , if you ve got the money , getting an iv and medical care probably can t hurt . but for the rest of us plebs , there s always painkillers and water . 	 after performing controversial memory experiments in the s and s , psychologist james v . mcconnell s reputation never recovered . his proposal that memories could live on outside the brain shook the foundations of biology and was widely discredited . but the researcher s ideas didn t quite disappear . in a laboratory at tufts university , a developmental biologist by the name of michael levin is injecting new life into one of mcconnell s most outrageous ideas . memory in the flesha radical s scientist suggested memories could survive outside the brain ampnbspand he may have been rightby arielle duhaime rossthe bomb was the size of a shoebox . the brown paper packaging that enveloped it was standard for us mail at the time , and its contents provided no indication no ticking clock , no lit fuse , no clicking sound of the explosion to come . resting on the kitchen counter that separated dr . james v . mcconnell from his graduate student assistant , nicklaus suino , it awakened no suspicions . even the bomb s trigger was subtle all it took was for suino to reach across the counter and touch the clear fiber tape that held it together . mcconnell was the target of the unabomber s th bombdespite their proximity to the explosion , both mcconnell and suino survived . the young graduate student suffered minor injuries and was kept at the local hospital overnight mcconnell experienced mild hearing loss . it was quite traumatic at the time , suino recalls . dr . mcconnell and i both developed shock reactions to loud noises afterward . mcconnell was the target of theodore the unabomber kaczynski s th bomb . why would kaczynski , a man obsessed by a quest to rid the world of threats from modern technology and science , go after a psychology professor at a michigan university ? some thought it had to do with a prediction mcconnell had made in the s , when he suggested that prisoners would one day be conditioned out of anti social behavior . but mcconnell was also famous for something else in the s and s , mcconnell had performed a series of memory experiments at the university of michigan while kaczynski was a student there experiments that earned him a reputation as a kooky , arrogant , and deeply misguided academic who challenged everything we think we know about memory . mcconnell s radical research suggested that memories could exist outside the brain and even be transferred between organisms . the conclusions were so outlandish and dystopian that some speculated they attracted kaczynski s ire . but james mcconnell may have been right . the flatworms used in michael levin s lab , dugesia japonicamcconnell s experiments have largely faded from scientific memory those that remember him tend to use him as a cautionary tale . but at the end of the s , mcconnell was a big deal his charismatic personality , combined with his controversial scientific accomplishments , landed him on tv more than once , notably on the steve allen show . instead of dazzling audiences with complicated science , mcconnell captivated them with awe inspiring concepts . in fact , the experiment that brought him his first taste of national fame was remarkably simple . in a study , mcconnell sought to demonstrate that memories could be stored in cells outside the brain . to do so , he enlisted the help of the common freshwater flatworm , dugesia dorotocephala . dr . james v . mcconnellflatworms were ideal because , like mammals and unlike , say , jellyfish , they have a centralized brain . they also have an exceptional ability to regenerate themselves from tiny morsels of flesh sever the tip of a flatworm s tail , and within days you ll have an entirely new specimen , fully equipped with a brand new brain . moreover , flatworms can be taught to perform certain behaviors . researchers can use electrical shocks to teach them to respond to lighting cues by moving to a particular part of a petri dish . that is , flatworms can be trained to remember a behavior and perform it on cue . if mcconnell demonstrated that the lowly flatworm could recall its training after its head had been cut off , and its brain had grown anew , the experiment would show that memories could live outside the brain . we didn t know what the tail would remember , if anything , for it had to grow an entirely new brain , new eyes , and almost an entire new nervous system , mcconnell wrote in a collection of science related articles entitled the worm re turns . but , according to mcconnell s study , they did remember . the regenerated worms were able to recall the behaviors they had learned to execute under certain lighting conditions . the tail regenerates , mcconnell wrote , and showed as good a memory of the original task as did the heads . published in the journal of comparative and physiological psychology , a highly regarded psychology journal , the study earned mcconnell a lot of press , with mentions in time , medical world news , newsweek , and fortune . almost at once the mail began to come in asking for details , mcconnell wrote . we didn t know what the tail would remember , if anything but the fantastic takeaway of mcconnell s study that cells other than neurons could store information caused many to question the study s methodology and conclusions . in , he published a second experiment , one that pushed his theories far beyond what anyone would have imagined . this one left the scientific community completely stumped . widely known as the cannibalism experiment , the study tested another mcconnell theory that memory could be transferred chemically from one flatworm to another through something called memory rna . memory rna , mcconnell suggested , was a special form of rna ampnbspthe intermediary form of genetic information that fills the gap between dna and proteins that could store long term memories outside the brain . his method was unorthodox , to say the least mcconnell fed bits of trained flatworms to their untrained brethren . as a result , mcconnell claimed , the untrained flatworms performed behaviors that the trained flatworms had previously learned . in short , the dead flatworms memories had found a new home . the inside cover of the worm re turns , featuring a crest mcconnell designed . the sr stand for stimulus response and the latin is said to roughly translates to , when i am done explaining this , you will understand even less . biologists and chemists said no way , recalls reeva kimble , who did undergraduate research for mcconnell in and . reeva later married daniel kimble , the student who gathered data for mcconnell s first regeneration experiment . mcconnell s opponents couldn t make sense of his findings . for them , there was no mechanism to understand his result , so it had to be hogwash , reeva says . mcconnell s cannibalism experiment was greeted with intense skepticism . groups of researchers at competing universities did their best to replicate his study in order to disprove his work if the study couldn t be replicated , it would be enough to expunge his ideas from scientific memory . some researchers reported obtaining similar results when recreating mcconnell s study , but many didn t . others rightly faulted him for his small sample size and because the effect he reported was , albeit significant , relatively weak . still , replicating work in which a human observes animal behavior precisely and manually is extremely difficult , and mcconnell s conclusion was never fully debunked . for his part , mcconnell insisted that other scientists failed to reproduce his findings because no one was able to fully recreate the conditions of his experiment . eventually , however , the psychologist s work was cast aside , or referred to as a failure . mcconnell s hobbies didn t do much to strengthen his scientific credibility . he liked writing , science and humor , so he combined them ampnbspin the worm runner s digest a scientific journal that he used to reach the masses following the publication of his flatworm study . the journal contained real studies , but they were featured alongside poems , cartoons , and humorous takes on scientific research penned by colleagues and students . as a result , outsiders complained that they couldn t tell the difference between the scientific subject matter and its more humorous content . we ve insisted that the digest be a mixture of fact and fun , for it seems to me that anyone who takes himself , or his work , too seriously is in a perilous state of mental health , mcconnell wrote in , in a compilation of the digest s articles . this attitude made him popular among his students , but failed to inspire confidence among his peers . he was very frustrated with people not taking him seriously , suino remembered during a conversation in . mcconnell was disappointed with the dismantling of his memory work , he said . i think that he felt that a lot of people who went into his research with a bias against it . lt ! var player var player function onyoutubeplayerapiready player new yt . player player , playervars autoplay , controls , autohide , wmode opaque , showinfo , loop , mute , playlist u u mmoetni , videoid u u mmoetni , events onready onplayerready player new yt . player player , playervars autoplay , controls , autohide , wmode opaque , showinfo , loop , mute , playlist gwlpqixinoy , videoid gwlpqixinoy , events onready onplayerready function onplayerready event event . target . mute function text . fadein jquery var inviewbottom new waypoint . inview element lower video , enter function direction player . playvideo , exited function direction player . pausevideo window . scroll function var ht . m video worms . height , ws this . scrolltop if ws gt ht player . pausevideo else player . playvideo gttwo headed flatworms grown in levin s lab . video courtesy of junji morokumawhy were mcconnell s ideas so unsettling ? what he was proposing the existence of a chemical memory trace that encodes training information in flatworms is nothing short of astounding . supposing that mcconnell was correct , it would mean that the flatworm brain is capable of storing information in chemical structures which can be transferred to other parts of the body . moreover , these chemical structures could form a language for memories that can cater to an infinite number of situations ampnbspand that other organisms can read . the chemical transfer theory goes against current and past conceptions of memory . aristotle , for example , likened memory to a wax tablet in the mind upon which a person imprints knowledge and recollection as time goes by . the impact of that explanation has been profound and long lasting many point to it as the source of the young , impressionable mind trope . science has since moved on from the wax tablet analogy , of course . currently , biologists believe that information is stored in neural networks in the brain , in the connections that allow information to be transmitted from one neuron to the next . that s as far as most researchers are willing to go when discussing the underpinnings of memory , however . press a scientist to tell you how memories are encoded and decoded in the brain , and you ll soon find that the scientific community doesn t have an answer . how do our brains represent memories like seeing x rays for the first time ? the question is so difficult to tackle that many researchers have chosen to focus on determining what sorts of modifications take place in the brain when memory is stored instead ampnbspchanges in neuron structure , for example in the hopes that they might reverse engineer memory formation . but looking at modifications in the brain isn t the same as figuring out how memory is encoded , or where it s stored . whoever finds the vault where we keep our memories is bound to go down in history . graduate student moran neuhof assists with flatworm research in one of michael levin s labsmichael levin doesn t recall the first time he encountered mcconnell s memory study , but he remembers his reaction to it . i came across a primary paper of mcconnell showing that memory can survive regeneration , and i thought , well this is extremely profound because it really speaks to the ability of all tissues those outside the head anyway to store memories . levin figured out how to grow a working eye on a tadpole s tail and backlevin , a developmental biologist at tufts university , is well known for his work on limb regeneration his studies have been featured in the journal of neuroscience and on the cover of cell . one of his most well known experiments demonstrated that it s possible to trigger limb growth in young frogs by giving them a drug cocktail . he s also recognized for figuring out how to grow a working tadpole eye in a location other than the head namely on the tail and back . he s really well known in the field of amphibian regeneration , says alejandro sanchez alvarado , a developmental biologist at stowers institute for medical research . i don t know of anybody doing work remotely similar to what mike is doing . but a few years ago , levin took on a side project . after stumbling upon mcconnell s work , he decided to take the basic principles behind the psychologist s first memory experiment and try it out for himself . after all , there were already vast amounts of literature on aneural organisms organisms that don t have a brain to begin with that can learn , so he thought mcconnell might have been at least partially right . everything from plants , to slime molds , to single cell organisms can learn , even sperm can learn to run mazes , levin says . but unlike those creatures , flatworms possess a true brain a centralized nervous system located in their triangle shaped heads . this makes them a lot more like humans than most of us are willing to admit . it took four years and over a million dollars to recreate and improve upon mcconnell s experiment . in an effort to sidestep the criticism his predecessor faced , levin developed a rigorously documented , replicable experimentation method . part of that was done by the invention of a machine , called the automatic training apparatus , that could train and track the movements of multiple flatworms without human intervention . the automatic training apparatus late last year , i traveled to medford , massachusetts just outside boston to visit levin in his lab at tufts university . simpsons figurines , mugs , and blankets dot his office a three eyed plastic fish watches over him from the bookshelf . word got around one day that the researcher liked the show . now the toys just keep coming in the students think it s funny . eventually , levin took me to a small room a few doors from his office to see the automatic training apparatus . there , i watched moran neuhof , a visiting student from israel , put petri dishes each filled with a flatworm into levin s machine . pointing to a computer screen , neuhof told me to observe an image of a worm as it moved inside a petri dish . red targets tracked the worms as they swam around an invisible grid helped translate their movement into time stamped coordinates along the way . this is how levin was able to objectively train the worms and record their behaviors , without ever having to be in the same room . designing the automatic training apparatus was a nightmare , levin says . flatworms are tiny and quick , and they love to hang off the sides of a petri dish instead of swimming at the bottom all of which makes them tough to track with a camera . the researcher collaborated with several engineering firms to make an apparatus capable of simultaneously , and autonomously , tracking and recording the movements of worms . minimizing human participation was critical a fully automated process was meant to protect levin s results from the scrutiny mcconnell faced . if you don t believe me , you can take the tracking data and the quicktime movies , levin says . analyze it yourself , and see what you think of whether they behaved correctly or not . then , levin and his team cut off their headsthe training protocol levin devised is simple , but elegant flatworms are cautious and like to explore their environment , so when they re introduced to food in a new location , they tend to circle it for a long time before feeding , levin says . this means that scientists can use latency of feeding the time the worms take to approach a food item as an indication of how well they remember a specific environment . if they remember that the environment is secure , or that it only contains one source of food , then they don t need to explore it they can go straight for the food . so , levin trained them to recognise the textured petri dishes . once the worms learned to recognize the rough floors of the dish , they started going for the food more quickly . then , levin and his team cut off their heads . two weeks later , the researchers re introduced the worms , now armed with new heads , into the dish , but only for a short period of of time . this shortened re introduction is meant to signal to the brain that the memory stored in the flatworm s trunk is still relevant , levin says . the next day , the worms were finally re tested . worms that had never before associated the roughness with the liver , took a long time to approach the food , and worms that had been trained went straight for the liver that s the difference , levin says . flatworms swim in a petri dish as observed and recorded by michael levin s automatic training apparatusthe tufts university researcher has yet to establish a mechanism to explain his findings , which he published in the journal of experimental biology in . he hypothesizes that memories could spread beyond the brain thanks to electrical charges generated by cells in the rest of the body . but until more research is conducted , it s hard to know what to make of his results . other mechanisms have been suggested . eva jablonka , a developmental biologist who studies the evolution of nervous systems at tel aviv university , thinks that small rnas might be involved . small rnas are short copies of dna that aren t translated into proteins . when the flatworm learns a behavior , the brain chemistry changes , and it s possible these changes alter small rnas , jablonka says . because these molecules can migrate between cells , altered small rnas could end up in stems cells that remain in the decapitated worm . when the worm s head grows back , the small rnas migrate back to the head , changing the brain s chemistry and allowing it to learn certain behaviors more quickly . if true , the memory that levin thinks is stored outside the brain wouldn t be memory at all . rather , the small rnas would allow the flatworms to recover a brain environment that helps them learn a specific behavior more quickly . but this scenario , jablonka says , is still imaginary . it s still possible that , like mcconnell s work , levin s study is flawed in some unidentified wayat this point , any attempt to explain levin s results is problematic . the truth is that we don t know if levin s conclusions are even remotely correct . it s still possible that , like mcconnell s work , levin s study is flawed in some unidentified way . it s also possible that the flatworm s unique regenerative abilities lie behind its ability to recall memories after growing a new brain . in that case , flatworms may be the only species with a central nervous system that can store memories outside of the brain . i find that highly unlikely , levin says , but it s a possibility . even if storing memory outside of the brain is universal among animals , that storage method might only work for simple pieces of information . complex memories like the significance of the word truth or caring might not have a place beyond the brain . but if there is a small chance that the experiment is reproducible , and that this isn t a trait reserved to some tiny insignificant worm , the impact could be revolutionary . i think this work will start a renaissance in human memory , says on pag n , a planarian expert and pharmacologist at west chester university . levin is one of the top researchers in developmental biology , so if anybody can pull it off , he can . complex memories like the significance of the word truth or caring might not have a place beyond the brainlevin s work could completely alter the way we think of memory , with real world applications , pag n says . the new flatworm studies could one day lead to novel alzheimer s disease treatments . in neurodegenerative diseases , there s a certain destruction of cellular structures that deal with memory , he says . so , if memory is stored outside the actual brain , that opens the door for people to potentially fully or partially recover those memories following stem cell therapies , for instance . studies of flatworm memory recall could also give rise to new architectures for storing data and biological memories in computers . if information can be stored in many different types of cells , for example , then creating a robotic prosthetic with parts that can perform as computational devices independently from others might be within reach . machines would be more robust , because a glitch in their central processors wouldn t necessarily lead to a complete loss of function other smart parts could pick up the slack , and maybe even help the robot fix itself . finally , levin s findings could one day help researchers activate limb regeneration and wound healing in humans . let s say that you lost a big part of your liver , jablonka says ampnbsp if we were able to introduce the kinds of molecules that will help your body regenerate this liver , that would be a great thing ! michael levin in his tufts university labas with mcconnell , the mass media has demonstrated intense interest in levin s study , with articles appearing in scientific american , national geographic , npr , wired uk , and here at the verge , to name a few . the worms memories were just as accurate as those worms who had never lost their heads , explained carrie arnold at national geographic . so these worms grew new heads with old memories , a remarkable finding , wrote robert krulwich at npr . levin s study showed that it s clear the action is happening somewhere outside of the brain , exclaimed wired uk s liat clark . but the scientific community s reaction to a revival of mcconnell s work has been mixed . i think it s a fine piece of work , alvarado says . the data that levin obtained seems like a reasonable consequence of his manipulation . jablonka also thinks levin s methodology is sound . he automatized the experiment so they can follow a lot of animals at once , she says . michael is a very original scientist . levin s study was done in such an exquisite way , pag n says . with appropriate controls and no human bias . and scott rawls , a pharmacologist who works with flatworms at temple university in philadelphia , agrees . from a mechanistic perspective , i think he covered the bases and did the experiment pretty well . the internal engineering of the automatic training apparatusothers are less enthusiastic . the paper from tufts might be right , but they still haven t quite done the experiment in a way that really convinces you , says robert kentridge , a psychologist at durham university in the uk . what levin has yet to do is show that the transfer is memory specific , he says . the effect of stress could have the same consequences as learning . what levin might have picked up on is behavior induced by a stress hormone , itself triggered by the texturized petri dishes levin used . a superior experiment would have eliminated that possibility by training flatworms to also recognize an un textured petri dish , he says . that would have shown that what s being transferred is quite specific and has nothing to do with a dish that might be stressful . kentridge isn t alone in thinking that the study could have been better designed . noelle l etoile , a cellular biologist and nematode researcher at uc san francisco , says that levin should have studied more variables and other forms of stimuli . the fact that the training protocol relied on a textured petri dish might have contributed to the results in ways that we don t yet understand , she says . the rough surface could have altered the neuron circuits that allow the worm to move , which would in turn help the worm get around more easily inside a petri dish . those altered circuits might also become more efficient after training , she ventures . it s crucial that other groups of researchers tackle this study , l etoile says . levin should give his machine , or the design for his machine , to other groups to see if they can reproduce the findings . if they can show that levin s results don t stem from a series of flukes , it would go a long way to support his contention that he has found something , she says . l etoile readily admits that mcconnell s failures continue to loom large over levin s study . it s a cautionary tale in the field of experimental biology one that comes with a lot of baggage , she says . the fact that so many research groups had trouble replicating flatworm training protocols in the s and s means that the bar to convince her has been set very high , she says . ampnbsp i think i have a great deal of skepticism about flatworm training . graduate student moran neuhof places a bit of organic beef liver in a petri dish for flatworm experimentsfive years after the unabomber attack , at the age of , james mcconnell suffered a heart attack , and passed away . an obituary printed in the new york times mentioned both his controversial experiments and the worm runner s digest , which the author said often needled his colleagues . neither suino nor the kimbles attended james mcconnell s funeral , but his friends and colleagues remember him still . he was the person who convinced me to go to graduate school , reeva kimble says . despite the criticism he faced , mcconnell s showmanship and larger than life ideas resonated with his students . he was the researcher who showed them that science could be light hearted and fun . he was also the researcher who didn t back down when he was challenged for making outlandish claims . mcconnell left with friends reeva and daniel kimble . all wear sweatshirts emblazoned with mcconnell s crest i think what mcconnell was right about is that one should pay attention to these unusual things on the fringes of science that can disrupt the current way of thinking , levin says . mcconnell s ideas were set aside , seemingly forgotten , for half a century . that s not unique scientific ideas are regularly abandoned , in favor of more sensible , simple proposals . but science has demonstrated more than once that what humans perceive as being simple isn t always biologically simple . our ideas are partly informed by culture a culture that , in this case , believes firmly in the brain as the center of our physiological and psychological universe . this is undoubtedly correct . but it might not be the whole story . like dormant memories , james mcconnell s ideas have resurfaced . what science does with them now will depend on levin and his peers , as they try to prove that the results are wrong in a counter intuitive effort to show that maybe mcconnell was right . should they succeed in poking holes in levin s study , mcconnell and his flatworms will likely remain a cautionary tale . but if they fail , james mcconnell will be remembered , forever , as a pioneer . photography by m . scott brauer	 on a crisp afternoon late last year , i made my way to manhattan s upper east side to meet edgar choueiri , a professor of mechanical and aerospace engineering at princeton university . choueiri also heads the school s d audio and applied acoustics lab , and over the last decade , he has dedicated his time to the development , application , and refinement of binaural recording systems a century old method of audio recording that captures lifelike d audio in picture perfect fidelity . in his warmly lit apartment , a pair of speakers loomed over me as i sank into a leather couch in the living room . sitting in an adjacent chair , choueiri swiped through his ipad to set up a binaural audio demonstration . moments later , amber rubarth s folksy voice filled the room as she sang an acoustic rendition of louis armstrong s a kiss to build a dream on . the room transformed into an intimate live music venue and the soundscape was vivid rubarth was positioned right in front of me , with her band members on either side . a cellist on the right plucked on the strings of the instrument . a couple of soulful verses later , a violinist on the left grabbed my attention . i instinctively turned to look in that direction . if only for a few split seconds , my brain was tricked into believing the performance was actually live , and not recorded . you can hear a bird flying over your head . you ll hear a whisper in one ear . it puts you in the exact sound field as originally intended , says choueiri of binaural recordings . you can hear a bird flying over your head . you ll hear a whisper in one ear . and if you record a band , you ll hear it exactly as the band was positioned when playing . for decades , binaural recording was a novelty , and overlooked for less technically demanding methods . but with the rise of virtual reality hardware like the oculus rift , sony s morpheus , and samsung s gear systems dependent on realistic d audio to fully immerse their users binaural audio is on the cusp of a renaissance . binaural recording systems are unique because they emulate the workings of the human head . the architecture of our anatomy dictates how we understand the sounds we hear with an ear on either side of a thick skull and spongy brain , we hear sounds enter our left and right ears at different times . if a dog barks by our left ear , it takes a few extra microseconds for the bark to reach the right ear the sound will also be louder in one ear than the other . in addition , sound waves interact with the physical constitution of the listener the pinna or outer ear , the head , and the torso and the surrounding space , creating listener specific variations otherwise known as head related transfer function . the brain scrutinizes these miniscule interaural differences of time and strength in order to localize sound with immaculate precision . experience binaural audio yourself lt ! new pym . parent binaural recording graphic , m snippet thin gttraditionally , recordings have been made using two methods mono and stereo . mono uses a single microphone to pick up sound , while stereo uses two , spaced apart from each other . binaural recording takes the stereo method one step further by placing two microphones in ear like cavities on either side of a stand or dummy head . because the dummy head recreates the density and shape of a human head , these microphones capture and process sound exactly as it would be heard by human ears , preserving interaural cues . the effect is best experienced over headphones , with a clear distinction between left and right perspectives . it s a simple concept , but when done with high quality microphones and played over equally high quality headphones , the effect is eerie it fools the brain into believing it s hearing the sounds firsthand . at ampt s oscar , an early binaural recording dummy . image via acta acustica . the illusion creates three dimensional audio , which is not to be confused with surround sound . interchanging those terms is the quickest way to amuse and sometimes annoy an acoustician . a surround sound system employs multiple speakers to create a degree field around the listener . say you re watching a film presented in surround sound you ll see an explosion on one side of the screen , and a speaker on the corresponding side of the theater will emit a barrage of sounds . a theater equipped with dolby atmos , the company s most recent iteration of the technology , effectively envelops the audience . but by recreating exactly what your ear hears in any given scenario , binaural audio accomplishes a far more natural d sound without a costly armada of speakers . the technique at the heart of binaural audio can be traced back to clement ader , a th century french engineer . in , ader devised the theatrophone , a telephonic system of transmission to broadcast a paris opera show . pairs of microphones were systematically spaced in front of the stage , covering the breadth from left to right . signals from the show were then transmitted via telephone receivers to listeners on the other end . with a pair of receivers , one mounted on each ear , listeners could hear the show from their designated suites at the gallery of palais de l industrie . oscar ii , a visible improvement over at ampt s first dummy . image via acta acustica . in , at ampt bell laboratories brought binaural audio to the chicago world s fair . the acoustics research department of the company created a mechanical dummy , which it named oscar , with microphones placed on its cheeks in front its ears . oscar sat in a glass room capturing sounds while visitors gathered outside used headphones to hear exactly what the dummy heard . the technique revised the experience introduced by ader , but both inventions offered poor sound quality . through world war ii and the decades that followed , progress in binaural faced significant obstacles primitive techniques failed to achieve accurate , high fidelity recordings . but in , neumann , a renowned german microphone company , introduced the breakthrough ku , a prototype binaural recording device . neumann s iteration consisted of a detached dummy head with microphones placed in the eardrums the position captured cues with more precision than any of its predecessors . three generations of dummy heads later , the ku , introduced in , featured omnidirectional microphones , expertly preserving the spatial cues and the overall quality of sound . it continues to be the go to dummy head for binaural recordings . binaural audio found a home in select audio recording communities the technology worked well for radio plays and experimental sound art . meanwhile , musicians like lou reed , thom yorke , and imogen heap have all experimented with binaural audio productions . most recently , the asmr autonomous sensory meridian response community has been employing binaural recordings to trigger physical responses that they believe can be soothing and calming . one of thousands of binaural asmr youtube videos promising healing and tension releasing properties . now , almost a century after the demise of the theatrophones , investors are starting to revisit d audio technology the prototype of sony s vr headset project morpheus includes a custom d audio binaural solution in its development kit . d audio adds to the feeling of presence that we strive so hard to achieve with the visuals in vr , says richard marks , senior director of research and development at sony computer entertainment america . when sound is perceived to come from the same direction as a visual stimulus , the credibility of the virtual experience is greatly increased . while purely visual vr experiences can be made , adding d audio greatly magnifies the impact and depth of a vr experience . d audio offers a more expansive experience than its visual counterpart . unlike with the visuals , d audio is not limited to the field of view of the display and can be rendered to give a complete degree experience , says marks . one of the biggest challenges for vr design is that the user can look in any direction , and may not even be looking when something momentous occurs . but using a d audio cue , it is possible to steer the user s attention to look in the direction of the sound , similar to techniques that are used in live theater . dio s omni binaural recording set up . image via futureofstorytellingvideo director chris milk who s previously done work for kanye west , u , and arcade fire has harnessed the immersive capabilities of binaural recording to bring concerts to the virtual arena . last year , he produced hello , again , a revolutionary vr film of a beck concert . to match the degree visual experience , milk developed a binaural system to produce directional sound . if we were going to let you look in every direction , a one directional sound source would not work , he says . you would look behind but you would still hear as if you were looking in front of you . so we needed something that would dynamically change based on where you were looking in the visual . he ingeniously devised a system that used an omni binaural head with eight ears , with four pairs of dio s free space microphones implanted at every degrees . he followed it up with a software that would process the sound from those ears to provide the effect necessary . viewed with a vr headset , the binaural sound on the headphones matched the visual illusion of the beck video every step of the way . jean pascal beaudoin , the director of apollo studios , stresses the importance of d audio for vr experiences . if a sound is clearly coming from your left , and you turn your head degrees to look in that direction , you now expect that sound to be located right in front of you , says beaudoin . if it isn t , and it s still at your left , chances are you ll be pulled out of the experience before you even realize it . beaudoin provides d sound for vr experiences produced by felix amp paul studios , the vr production company commissioned by samsung gear to produce a series of degree live action videos . i am most interested in the creative possibilities that d audio opens up in terms of storytelling , emotions , and interactivity , says beaudoin . we are barely scratching the surface of the merging vr medium , but with each project , we make progress in establishing a new grammar . thom yorke recording with a neumann dummy head . image via dead air space . despite its potential , binaural audio is not widespread within the vr content world yet . audio sometimes takes a back seat in content production , says adam somers , lead audio engineer at jaunt , a palo alto based developer and one stop shop for capturing and creating cinematic virtual reality . so much work goes into visual elements , whether it s a game or film , that sometimes audio is an afterthought . but talking about vr as a medium for content , it s really important that the medium has the capability of binaural audio built in from the beginning to make it easier for content creators to utilize binaural audio . jaunt ensures the presence of binaural audio in every piece of content created through their platform . back in manhattan , choueiri is considering another problem since the inception of the technology , binaural audio has been reserved for headphone listening . but choueiri wants to make the technology accessible over external speaker systems for a wider audience . the challenge is that with speakers , a right ear not only hears its respective cues , but also picks up information meant for the left ear . it messes up the cues , so instead of hearing d sound , the brain just locates the speakers , choueiri said . it s like watching d movies without the glasses on . slowly but surely , binaural is becoming a linchpin in virtual reality developmentfor decades , this confusing crosstalk between speakers has perplexed the audio community . but choueiri s bacch sp , a filter that enables a pair of speakers to retain the aural cues , creates the illusion of d audio for the listeners . jawbone has employed princeton university s algorithm over the last two years to create the liveaudio filter for its wireless bluetooth speaker , jambox . loading the mini speaker with the digital filter optimizes audio to create a three dimensional experience . while effective , the experience is limited to a sweet spot the device needs to be centered in relation to the listener . the illusion instantly collapses when the listener moves from the spot . choueiri says a version of that software , the bacch dsp app , coupled with a head tracking feature , can sustain the illusion irrespective of the listener s head movements . that app is scheduled to show up in the store for mac os soon , bringing d audio experiences to laptops . slowly but surely , binaural is becoming a linchpin in virtual reality development . oculus most recent prototype , crescent bay , unveiled at ces last month , integrates binaural technology with rift s head tracking for complete audio visual immersion . and while sony s project morpheus hasn t announced final specifications of the product yet , their emphasis on d audio is evident . as adam somers of jaunt put it , binaural audio is critical to an immersive experience within the context of vr . we consider audio to be percent of the immersive experience . 	 genius quietly laid off a bunch of its engineers now can it survive as a media company ? genius , which raised . million on the promise that it would one day annotate the entire internet , has been losing its minds . in january , the company quietly laid off a quarter of its staff , with the bulk of the cuts coming from the engineering department . in a post on the genius blog at the time , co founder tom lehman told employees that genius planned to shift its emphasis away from the annotation platform that once attracted top tier investors in favor of becoming a more video focused media company . after taking a careful look at the company and our priorities , lehman wrote , we ve had to make some tough decisions about how we want to spend our resources . and unfortunately this meant that today we laid off some very talented people . the company then took the unusual step of posting the genius usernames of those it had laid off full time and five part time employees . we needed to shift resources from capturing knowledge . . . toward packaging and distributing knowledge . at the same time , lehman noted that the company was continuing to hire for roles in video and sales . the company recently redesigned its homepage with expanded space for editorial content and advertising . it has also been deepening its behind the lyrics partnership with spotify , for which it contributes a mix of song lyrics and factoids that pop up in a slideshow format when you re listening to popular songs . the change we made in january was in recognition of the fact that we needed to shift resources from capturing knowledge which we ve been doing almost exclusively for the past five years toward packaging and distributing knowledge into easy to consume formats like video and spotify behind the lyrics , lehman told the verge . it s not unusual for tech companies to transform over time , though typically they are loath to lay off engineers . but genius shift is more dramatic than most going from all encompassing annotator of the internet to a more traditional media company model , chasing video views alongside an ever growing number of well capitalized competitors . the move illustrates the company s difficulty attracting contributors and an audience for their contributions particularly outside of the music world . in an interview last week , lehman said the company had turned to video in an effort to reach its core audience which continues to be rap fans , beyond its website and mobile apps . video makes it a little bit more accessible , he said . i love the genius website . one of my favorite websites . but it can be a little frustrating to use . you have to be really , really dedicated to learn everything about a song on genius . you ve got to be down to click and read a lot . genius videos to date have included interviews with artists about their craft , and a series where rappers perform original freestyle verses . one of lehman s favorite videos traces a whistle sample featured in a series of popular songs back to its origins in a quentin tarantino movie . last week , genius posted a video about rapper lil yachty learning how to make pizza . the company is also investing in original editorial content , aggregating news headlines , doing q ampampas with artists like the track burnaz , and writing short profiles . i love the genius website . one of my favorite websites . but it can be a little frustrating to use . lehman said the new focus is in keeping with genius original mission of helping people look deeper into popular culture . videos often contain information that came from user contributed annotations , lehman said , and the format is more popular than the plain text notes on which genius was founded . all of the knowledge in our videos is rooted in what the community is doing , he said . the shift is the latest chapter in a company that has spent several years setting outsized expectations . founded in october , genius joined the prestigious accelerator y combinator in . the accelerator had previously been responsible for growing dropbox , airbnb , and stripe , and genius arrived with large ambitions of its own . traffic to the website grew quickly in , and it became the default destination for anyone seeking song lyrics or their significance . the next year , silicon valley venture capital firm andreessen horowitz put million into the company , recognizing a more ambitious opportunity . it turns out that rap genius has a much bigger idea and a much broader mission than rap , the firm s co founder , marc andreessen , wrote at the time . which is generalize out to many other categories of text . . . annotate the world . . . be the knowledge about the knowledge . . . create the internet talmud . for andreessen , the mission was personal . before starting his venture capital firm with ben horowitz , andreessen had co invented mosaic , the first web browser . as he explained in a post on genius , it seemed obvious to us that users would want to annotate all text on the web our idea was that each web page would be a launchpad for insight and debate about its own contents . but the infrastructure of the web could not yet support such a system , and mosaic gave up on the effort . genius , then , represented a chance to make good on one of the earliest promises of the web . and as genius grew , so did its offerings news genius , poetry genius , and rock genius all followed . as it developed , the company suffered growing pains . it went years without licensing the lyrics it hosted , capitulating only after receiving a takedown notice from the national music publishers association . it later admitted to using unscrupulous search engine optimization tactics , leading google to temporarily demote it in search rankings . the founders developed a reputation for cocky posturing all three wore sunglasses onstage during their talk at techcrunch disrupt in and continued to describe the site in the loftiest of terms . rap genius is going be the fabric of the internet , co founder mahbod moghadam said in rap genius is going be the fabric of the internet , co founder mahbod moghadam said in . we re going to have annotations on other sites , so every other site in the world like the wall street journal and the new york times are going be genius powered and they re going to have our annotations on them . and then the genius platform will take over the internet everyone s most important statistic that they have in life is their genius iq . moghadam resigned two months later for annotations he made on the manifesto of elliot rodger , who shot and killed six people and injured others in isla vista , california . soon after , genius made a definitive push to realize andreessen s vision . by , genius claimed million visitors to its website a month , million of whom had annotated a post . eminem , producer rick rubin , and the novelist junot diaz were among those who had contributed annotations . in january of that year , the company began testing a tool called the web annotator , which allowed anyone to add genius . it before any url and then highlight and annotate text . the web annotator was the centerpiece of the company s efforts to become a kind of universal comments section for the internet . but it faced a storm of criticism last year after some writers complained the tool was being used to harass them . the annotator also raised concerns that it could have been used to inject malicious code onto visitors computers , though it s since been tweaked to address that vulnerability . but the biggest problem with the annotator from genius perspective is that few individuals are using it . after more than two years of development , the chrome extension has only , users . it was last updated in june . after more than two years of development , the chrome extension has only , usersa separate effort to encourage people to annotate political speeches and other current events content at news genius faced hurdles of its own . an editor hired to evangelize for the platform left after seven months , and was not replaced . promised partnerships with major news media organizations never materialized , except in the case of the washington post s fix blog , which still occasionally uses the platform to annotate the news . one former employee said the company had never put enough resources into the project . news genius always seemed really remedial , the employee said . about , people visit news genius a month , lehman said , a figure that had grown times since before president donald trump was inaugurated . and the number of people who annotate a post on genius each month is now at , , up percent from the start of the year . more people are using news genius now than ever , lehman said . meanwhile , overall traffic to the website and apps has grown to million a month . lehman says the la times , the boston globe , and univision are news genius users . but the organizations appear to have used the tool only sporadically over the past year and rarely since the election , when calls for more context around the daily news began to intensify . the company has been largely absent from the debate around fake news , even though news genius was intended to push back against dubious claims . one of the times political reporters has used the tool just two times . it depends on how you define active , but we do continue to use genius , a times spokeswoman said , noting that reporters use the tool to mark up major political speeches . the company has been largely absent from the debate around fake news , even though news genius was intended to push back against dubious claimsthe company partnered with gq in october to annotate the magazine s interview with kendrick lamar . this was a rare win for the web annotator , one former employee said . meanwhile , few new publishers appear to be signing up to use the tool , giving genius fewer big channels with which to promote its use for current events . and other news organizations are building similar features of their own . npr has created an annotator that places notes in the body of the text and the la times has considered using that tool as well , a spokeswoman said . the nonprofit organization opennews has built an open source tool of its own for newsrooms to use . toward the end of , at least some employees began to wonder whether genius was breaking through to the mainstream . neither andreessen nor his co founder ben horowitz , has contributed an annotation since . a spokeswoman said horowitz , who sits on the genius board , was not available for comment . according to company legend , the rapper asap rocky once threw up in their offices but maybe now genius has lost some of its cultural edge . no one seemed to interact with genius independently of me throwing a link at them and saying , click on this , one former employee said . it seemed like a lot of the user base was white kids in australia . the company also seems to be restructuring its revenue model . though the genius has had a chief revenue officer and a vice president of partnerships , it only recently announced its first jobs in sales . it s unclear what the sales process was or is , one former employee said . basically , it s a skeletal staff , whose ad revenue appears to not be able to keep up with company expenses . asked whether the company would continue trying to build a massive tech platform , lehman said genius vision remains as large as ever but that it s narrowing the scope of its editorial ambitions , and leaning on tried and true media formats to reach its audience . genius has hired seven people since the layoffs , lehman said , mostly in video . we have so many near term opportunities with music that we don t want to let them slip through our fingers , he said . and as for the asap rocky vomiting episode ? lehman declined to address that matter directly , although he did seem to acknowledge the possibility . it is , he said , a great office to throw up in . correction , p . m . this post has been updated to reflect that the number of people laid off at genius represented a quarter of the staff , not a third . 	 oh my goodness , nbc football analyst cris collinsworth shouts into his headset mic over the roar of the metlife stadium crowd . this is sick . put this to music . i don t think he stepped out , either . that may be the greatest catch i ve ever seen . you have to be kidding me . that is impossible . that is absolutely impossible what he just did . all sports everythinginside the studio where espn is betting billions on the future of sportsby david pierce oh my goodness , nbc football analyst cris collinsworth shouts into his headset mic over the roar of the metlife stadium crowd . this is sick . put this to music . i don t think he stepped out , either . that may be the greatest catch i ve ever seen . you have to be kidding me . that is impossible . that is absolutely impossible what he just did . it s sunday night on the weekend before thanksgiving , and odell beckham jr . has just given his new york giants a big lead on their arch rival dallas cowboys in the beginning of the second quarter . he lies on the turf , briefly savoring the yard touchdown pass he s just caught . it was an unbelievable , once in a career catch . he d leapt backwards , stretching the length of his body and snaring the football with two fingers and his thumb . despite an illegal hit by cowboys defensive back brandon carr , he d held on , giants . beckham s team will ultimately lose , but it s the catch that everyone will remember . beckham gets up , tosses the ball into the air , and struts through the end zone with his arms outstretched as the , fans in attendance roar in appreciation . in an otherwise unremarkable game , beckham has made an utterly remarkable play a play that will be seen around the world . photos of the catch flood twitter instantly . most depict paused tvs showing the replay , the tivo interface visible everywhere . a minute or two later , a vine appears in everyone s timeline six seconds of the catch , recorded by a user named chipper with a dog for an account photo . to date , the vine has been viewed nearly million times . while beckham is still celebrating , the espnnfl account tweets holy cow odell beckham ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! that s exclamation points . but it takes a full minutes before espn shares a picture on its sportscenter twitter account , with the caption catch . of . the . year . sctop . the account s . million followers go rabid the tweet is shared and fav d upwards of , times . such is espn s power that it can show up late to the party and still dominate the scene . under president john skipper and the disney umbrella , espn has spent the last decade amassing an untouchably large amount of live sports programming . the network s empire extends from football and basketball to auto sports and the x games to ultimate frisbee , poker , and bowling . it broadcasts the world cup and the masters , monday night football and the nba playoffs . by any measure it s the most popular cable channel by a mile it commands a per subscriber fee from cable companies equal to the next five most expensive combined it s valued at more than billion , times as much as disney owned abc espn is the country s most powerful media company . the calculus is as simple as it is devastatingly effective sports is practically the only tv that millions of people still insist on watching live , and espn owns almost all the sports . espn s selection of live programming is utterly unequaledbut it may not stay that way for long . when espn launched in , the company competed for attention with tv , radio , and newspapers . but in sports fans have online fantasy teams and prop bets they re on twitter , vine , snapchat , and facebook they re watching games on their phones , their tablets , and their laptops . they want to read about sports , talk about sports , and watch sports while they watch other sports . if espn doesn t provide those services , someone else will . espn s long stated mission is to meet sports fans wherever they are . and so the company is embarking on a sweeping mission to expand its dominion beyond cable tv to whatever comes next even if it s not sure what that will be . in short espn s not okay with chipper winning the vine battle anymore . hannah storm and kevin negandhi at the sportscenter desk photo by joe faraoni espn images sportscenter is the most important property at espn . it s live hours each day , beginning with the am show . it was the first show to air when espn switched on its satellites on september th , the second was a slow pitch softball game and has been the network s flagship brand ever since . during that first broadcast , lee leonard , sitting in front of an impressionistic montage of sports figures , told viewers espn would be where viewers could come find where all the sports action is , as of right now . as the camera zoomed in on leonard s enormous glasses and beige suit which matched the wall a little too well , he introduced sportscenter now here s another innovation on espn , and it s going to be a big part of our future the sportscenter with george grande . he ll have the latest on what s happening all around . and indeed , for over three decades and more than , episodes , sportscenter was the place you went for dispatches from every corner of the sports world . there was no twitter , no vine , no youtube for sports fans , there was only sportscenter . the very first sportscenter , in in , sportscenter is different . it s glossier , more personal a good morning america for sports fans . it s still a water cooler of sorts , designed to fill you in on things you missed and tell you everything you need to know about them . but now its vaunted top segment shows more niche sports , more viral videos its anchors spend more time on news and analysis and far less on showing the games themselves . like every other show on the network , it s been forced to adapt to a new audience the relentless consumer , the one who s already seen the plays of the day and tunes into sportscenter to see what they missed and , just as importantly , how they re supposed to feel about it . when everyone gets the news from twitter , sportscenter has to be something differentthe morning after beckham s catch , i m standing just off camera in the sportscenter studio , in sleepy bristol , connecticut . you can hardly make a left turn in bristol , a town of , , without ending up on espn s sprawling campus . outside , it s a dark and dreary monday . but sportscenter s updated set , which debuted in june and looks a bit like the bridge of star trek s enterprise only bigger and with more buttons is buzzing . while an army of producers and camera operators gathers around a desk in the center of the room , co anchor kevin negandhi paces the catwalk yes , there s a catwalk , about inches off the ground , perfecting his blocking with a cameraman . behind him , an enormous screen displays a photo of odell beckham jr . , his outstretched right hand completing last night s catch . negandhi , who s anchored the show since , checks his tie clip in the camera s reflection and asks if he s in the right spot . to his right are dozens of screens to his left , more screens , in all . over the next hour , the screens will work individually and in tandem as they re moved constantly around the set , broadcasting tweets and videos as negandhi and co anchor hannah storm show athletes responding to beckham s catch , talk about its place in nfl history , and later dissect breaking baseball news . after sportscenter wrapped for the morning , i sat down with negandhi and storm on comfortable orange chairs inside the stunning new digital center , where the show is taped . dc , as it s widely known , is the th building on espn s campus . it s an immaculate , slightly sterile new production facility that was under construction for more than three years before opening its doors last summer . it is , square feet of technological progress , from the studios and the suite of editing rooms to the energy efficient server rooms and the social media lounge upstairs . every corner of dc is a reminder of the intersection of sports and technology the lobby is outfitted with large vertical screens , one showing every single this is sportscenter ad ever made . walk further and you ll see a gigantic ticker on the wall scrolling news and scores . as you walk up the stairs to the studio , there s a wired cablecam floating above you , ominously watching . the new sportscenter set is the crown jewel of the building , square feet of space that will be used to broadcast the show on espn s mass of channels . the revamped set was designed to make sportscenter more personal , to show anchors moving around and interacting , but also to help the show move at the speed of the internet . espn has long been criticized for allowing news to break overnight while it ran repeats of the previous day s shows now the premier show in sports can update and broadcast in real time . tv still matters at espn , and in every way dc is wired for the future of tv . it s capable of broadcasting in k and k , and if by some miracle d actually takes off , espn will be ready for that , too . tv is still where the network makes most of its money , and it will be for the foreseeable future . but when not if , but when that changes , espn says it will be ready . it has moved staff , built buildings , and overhauled how the company operates to make sure of that . building , transmission , and the satellite farm photo by joe faraoni espn images the strategy to keep espn on top breaks down along two broad lines . the first is an adjustment in how espn sees itself the company has reorganized to promote more sharing across platforms , even launching the buzzword friendly content sharing initiative . espn the tv network , espn the radio provider , espn the magazine , espn the instagram account , and espn the app maker are all becoming one . that s rob king s project . king is the senior vice president of news and sportscenter , which means he oversees everything from the flagship show to its apps and twitter handles . in his previous role , he oversaw a merging of espn s digital and print operations into a single publication . he s also combined the company s many disparate breaking news and highlights teams into cross company groups , which funnel information and assets to every espn outpost on any platform . whatever platform fans are using , he says , whatever time of day it is , however they re connecting with their friends , we need to be there because that s holding up our end of the relationship . espn sportszone , circa holding up its end has meant a complete overhaul and upgrade of espn s technology to make it faster , more efficient , and more capable than before . espn has a track record of success when it comes to capitalizing on new technology espnet sportszone , a primitive website , built a huge early internet audience in in , watchespn let you watch live cable tv on a mobile device for the first time in history . the company has even won accolades for seemingly simple tv innovations , like putting a yellow line on the screen to indicate the first down line or a square around the plate for the strike zone . in sports tv , most of what s now ubiquitous began with espn . this time , the biggest change is one viewers don t see the , miles of fiber optic cable wired throughout dc . fiber replaces the copper wire used elsewhere throughout espn and has fundamentally changed the speed at which the network can operate . a single fiber cable can carry times as many signals more than times farther than copper that upgrade makes it possible for espn to have more footage at its disposal at all times . years ago , joe sack remembers , it was all done on videotape . you can only do one thing at one time with one tape . right ? so if you want to do two things live , you ve got to record it twice . if you want to do three things , you ve got to record it three times . that led to confusion and clutter and slowed every process down . copper cabling sped up the process , but even that only moved one signal at a time . during that era , espn had to build huge , impossibly complicated facilities that couldn t grow or adapt to new uses . today espn is struggling to keep up with the speed of mobile and social audiences . and speed is everything . joe sack at the dc fiber cutting ceremony photo by rich arden espn images if you are slow , says anthony mormile , espn s vp of digital video , and want to make it beautiful , you can t live in the twitter space . because some guy just held his phone up to his tv and put it up on twitter , or some guy just gif d it , or some guy made a vine and got the whole play up , and here we come eight minutes after it happened with a ta da ! look at this beautiful opening . and we ve got music and natural sound ! and you re like we already saw it , dude . espn s brand has long gone beyond tv , but the shift is accelerating . there are still a number of people on this campus who are shocked when you give them an all in report , he says . they say whoa , more people watched my video on twitter than ever saw it on sportscenter ? and you re like , that s the power of social . to do its job properly now , espn needs to optimize sports for every platform at once and the list keeps growing . we even have gas station tv now , says mormile , so when you re filling up at the pump you have espn content . and the platforms keep changing , whether it s apple tv or roku or you re trying to make it prepared for snapchat or instagram . rob king , svp of sportscenter and news photo by rich arden espn images if you re slow , and want to make it beautiful , you can t live in the twitter space that development is on display at building of the bristol campus , known to employees as transmission . as many as streams can be captured at once here , either via the satellites or through the fiber network , and all are stored on a set of servers . even as footage is recording , it s available to be immediately cut and clipped . that means espn is now able to take a single stream of a game , and in real time make it available absolutely everywhere for espn s producers and for fans around the world . when something huge happens odell beckham makes an earth shattering catch , usain bolt breaks another world record , a minor league hockey fight breaks out while the players are all wearing batman costumes the sportscenter team can cut highlights while the mobile team grabs the play that matters and sends it to your phone with a push alert . meanwhile , the espn . com crew can put together a clip of the five best catches of all time , while the social media team is making gifs . this is espn at its best and most internet native everything in its right place , and everything in real time . espn can capture a game , and make it available everywhere in real timemuch of espn s historical success is rooted in the fact that covering sports is predictable business . in most organizations , says rob king , you can t plan for big events other than elections and hurricane season . but in our world , you can say , this will be a big game . that means much of espn s planning is done weeks and months in advance . on this monday morning , the digital team is already sussing out angles for this weekend s packers patriots game , and they re thinking about ranking all players who will make the playoffs two months from now . an employee works in the espn transmission department photo by joe faraoni espn images but in the age of twitter , viewers are hungry for off the cuff , unexpected viral moments that no one plans for . the best part , king says , and the most fun , is when odell beckham does something you ve never seen before . and that s when it s like alright , where is everybody ? and what is this like ? and how does this show up in the social space ? and how can we compare it to other catches ? and , you know , we ve got the espys coming up in july , how do we make sure that that s going to be a play of the year nominee ? this is the tension , king says the best time to be a sports fan is when the crazy things happen . but that s when it s also hardest to be a sports network . welcome to my nightmare , says mormile when i bring up beckham s catch . moments after beckham landed on his back , mormile s team sprung to action . so now everybody goes i didn t see the catch ! i heard there was a sick catch last night . so i turn around and i say , how do i get that catch to mobile fans ? catch . of . the . year . sctop pic . twitter . com ecvft zuyq sportscenter sportscenter november , it s a race , one espn is investing heavily in winning . the fans , mormile tells me , just want to see the play . they don t care that you ripped it off the tv with your cellphone . so for us , we made a concerted effort to be even faster , and because espn technology is just amazing at what they do , we now have essentially real time plays . and the real time plays have all but eliminated the piracy . so we get a play up , maybe it s on a social platform to seconds after it happens , and there s no need for anybody to copy . there was only one problem in the beckham example , mormile tells me with a smirk no video on mobile . espn doesn t own the rights to nfl highlights on mobile platforms for now , so they have to develop workarounds . we get real creative with a still shot , and analysis of is it the greatest catch of all time ? even without video , the tweet went viral . the sanyo mvpon mormile s desk sits a sanyo mvp , the black , espn branded flip phone released in . it represented the beginning of a company wide effort to bring sports content to cellphones . this was two years before the iphone and android , and there was no useful way to get sports news and scores to the growing mobile market . so espn announced it was becoming a cellphone provider and would be making devices for sports fans . the mvp shipped with a simple java app that delivered real time scores often ahead of the tv broadcast and text message alerts whenever your team scored . mobile espn , as it was originally called , failed . spectacularly . the phone was big , slow , and expensive , and it was useless for anything but getting sports news . steve jobs famously called mobile espn the dumbest fucking idea i have ever heard . seven months after launch , espn shuttered the project at a loss of million . but the mvp is surely part of why espn s mobile offering was more popular than its desktop website as long ago as . it s also why espn is a launch partner for snapchat discovery , the company s first tentative foray into professional content . the whole ethos here is to throw things at the wall and see what sticks . for all its faults , mobile espn helped the company see what works and what doesn t on phones . it may have been clunky , but it gave the company a huge head start on mobile that s still paying dividends now . the set of monday night countdown photo by joe faraoni espn images long term , espn s future will have to exist somewhere in the massively distributed content landscape . but for now , it s still mostly a tv network . and inside dc , a floor below the sportscenter studio , there s another show to plan for . the monday night countdown stars sit around a table with the show s producers , debating the merit of beckham s catch . keyshawn johnson and cris carter , two hall of fame caliber wide receivers turned monday night countdown analysts , practice for the show carter talks about clearing your shoulders to make a catch , twisting his body to demonstrate . new gloves , he says , make difficult catches easier than they once were . johnson says he made a catch similar to beckham s when played for the jets , but decides not to mention it on air when he laughingly remembers the pass wasn t actually intended for him at all . they work on transitions and monologues , making sure their analysis is interesting and distinct . then each makes his pick for the evening s two games and talks about who s going to win the afc west . four analysts , four strongly worded and radically different opinions . the group breaks , off to prepare and change before the show starts at pm . keyshawn johnson bounds up the stairs to the studio two at a time , and cris carter ties his scarf back on , whistling oh christmas tree to himself . mike ditka , who is referred to exclusively as coach , ambles off without a word . tom jackson stays to chat with producers about the rundown . by the time the games start on monday evening , almost everyone on the espn campus will have gone home . covering the game is the easy part , they all tell me . it s what espn has done for decades , and does better than anyone . espn s concern is making great television . and , increasingly , with making great snapchat , and great instagram , and great twitter , and great xbox . the mission statement to serve sports fans wherever sports are watched , listened to , discussed , debated , read about or played it all comes back to the company motto , which i first saw in giant letters hanging outside the building , facing the parking lot to serve sports fans wherever sports are watched , listened to , discussed , debated , read about or played . all over espn , people recite the motto to me and to each other , and they consider the question it poses how do you do that in , when the number of channels starts to lurch toward infinity ? espn has a lot of answers , and a lot of technology to throw at those answers , but the questions come up more and more frequently . it s been a long monday , and a chaotic one , but it feels like everyone at espn is hoping something crazy happens tonight that someone makes another internet shaking catch , or breaks a record , or says something so outrageous that sports fans across the planet snap to attention and look to espn for coverage . and as i stand in transmission , where hundreds of screens capture hundreds of games and prepare them for immediate broadcast to every platform you use and a half dozen you don t , i get the sense espn loves the opportunity to prove what it can do . anthony mormile certainly does . as we talk in the afternoon , he runs through the day two high profile baseball players traded to the same team , two important football games , and that odell beckham catch . he riles himself up just talking about it . this is an amazing sports day . then he pauses . actually , mondays are already pretty fun days for us . note piece has been updated to more accurately reflect rob king s role , and that the cowboys and giants played at metlife stadium , not in dallas . video by jimmy shelton and jordan oplinger , audio mixing by john lagomarsino design by dylan lathroplead photo by allen kee espn images	 how a brutal government used cutting edge spyware to hijack one activist s life a spy in the machinehow a brutal government used cutting edge spyware to hijack one activist s lifeby amar toor amp russell brandomin november , during the dead of night , five black cars pulled up in front of the home of moosa abd ali ali . the doors opened , and a group of men stepped out . they could ve been officers , or maybe they were just hired muscle such distinctions aren t always clear in bahrain . but moosa knew they were sent by the government , and they had come for him . moosa was just at the time , but he had already become a prominent anti government activist within the small kingdom of bahrain . he d spent years protesting for equal employment rights and had been jailed and tortured on several occasions . when the cars pulled up outside his home that night , he had just served a nine month prison sentence on charges that were never revealed to him . the men barged into moosa s house and dragged him out into the streets of al akar , the seaside village where he lived with his wife and young son . they took him to a quiet , darkened alleyway and took turns beating him . then they raped him . if he didn t stop his activism , they told him , they would do the same to his family . moosa didn t leave his house for a week after the assault . on december st , , he fled for london , after narrowly sliding by bahraini security forces at the airport . if i stayed in bahrain i would have died in prison , he says . i am sure of it . he hasn t been home since . his torturers were now thousands of miles away . or so he thoughtmoosa became an activist at the age of , when he saw one of his favorite teachers being carried away in handcuffs by a group of policemen . he was politically naive at the time , but the teacher s arrest lit a fire . days later , he joined his very first protest an act for which he was held at gunpoint in his home and sent to jail for five months . now , moosa has spent most of his life campaigning for democracy and equal rights in bahrain , a middle east island nation of . million that has been ruled by the khalifa family dynasty for more than years . he s been jailed seven times not a small number , he says and has endured brutal torture and assault at the hand of bahraini officials . bahrain s government has a long and dubious human rights record , especially when it comes to free speech . even the smallest forms of dissent are regularly met with severe punishment , and the crackdown has only intensified following the arab spring uprisings of . this month , a prominent activist was sentenced to six months in prison over tweets that were critical of the country s defense and interior ministries . bahrain has also been a longtime ally of the united states and particularly the uk , a relationship the kingdom has maintained despite ongoing unrest . that s why moosa fled to london . if he couldn t continue fighting from within bahrain , he could at least do it from bahrain s closest and historically most important global partner . bahrain was effectively a british protectorate until . he was granted asylum in , his wife and child joined him a year later , and for a while , it seemed as if he was finally safe . he found a job as a cameraman for a bahraini news agency and embedded himself within london s community of exiled activists . he was definitely still on the bahraini government s radar his high profile demonstrations and sizable social media following made sure of it but he was finally free to protest , and his torturers were now thousands of miles away . or so he thought . one day in , moosa opened the facebook messenger app on his iphone . what he saw was chilling someone else typing under his name to an activist friend of his in bahrain . whoever it was kept posing personal questions prodding for information , and moosa watched unfold right before eyes . he panicked . it was like , what s going on ? what s happening ? he recalls . he changed his password , alerted his friend , and stopped using facebook messenger but the intrusions kept coming . in another instance , moosa noticed that someone posing as him solicited his female facebook friends for sex part of an effort , it seemed , to blackmail or perhaps defame him in bahrain s conservative media . facebook was only the beginning . unbeknownst to him , moosa s phone and computer had been infected with a highly sophisticated piece of spyware , built and sold in secret . the implant effectively commandeered his digital existence , collecting everything he did or said online . the implant effectively commandeered his digital existenceupon his arrival in london , moosa had become an unofficial archivist for his activist community , obsessively documenting every protest and broadcasting his videos to a large group of youtube followers . whenever something happened back in bahrain , he d receive a flurry of images and video footage from contacts and disseminate the content online and to media outlets . now , whoever was behind the hack had access to all of his accounts , emails , documents , and a massive trove of videos . they could even control his computer s webcam and microphone . an investigation would later reveal that moosa s online life was hijacked for eight months . all signs pointed to bahrain as the culprit , and finfisher , a mysterious spyware for hire tool , as the weapon of choice . it was may of when morgan marquis boire first got the package from bahrain . he was working on google s incident response team at the time , protecting high risk users from state sponsored attackers . he has since become security director for first look media . along the way , he d seen a lot of spyware being sent after protesters during the arab spring . most of the implants he ran into were easy to spot and remove . but this one , arriving in a protected attachment from bahrainwatch , seemed more complicated . following standard procedure , marquis boire set the program running in a virtual machine , essentially a fish tank where he could watch the virus at work . he watched the virtual machine s working memory , keeping his eye on the software as it stretched its legs in the new environment . holy shit , i think this is finfisher ! then , without warning , the implant disappeared . that got marquis boire s attention . i thought , oh we have a player here , he recalls . it was a sign of a more sophisticated author at work . the implant used a technique called process hollowing injecting its own code into a program that s still running in order to use the legitimate program as cover . digging through the working memory , marquis boire found the implant hiding in winlogon . exe , and he could see the new files that had rushed in to replace the old ones . one line of code stuck out , left over from a file path on the implant developer s computer y lsvn branches finspyv . finspyv src libs libgmp mpn tdiv qr . c i thought , finspy , that rings some bells , marquis boire recalls . holy shit , i think this is finfisher ! finfisher had become a kind of bogeyman in the security community since brochures advertising the software s capabilities popped up in a wikileaks drop in december of . finfisher could purportedly empower its owner with the kinds of advanced intrusion techniques usually reserved for the nsa . there was a certain amount of interest just because no one had seen it , marquis boire says . all we had were these leaked documents . the cover page of a finfisher document released by wikileaks . finfisher was created and sold by gamma international , an international surveillance company with offices in london and frankfurt . the gamma brochures promised remote monitoring and keylogging they even said they could listen in on a target s skype calls in real time . it s the kind of technology that could be subject to international export restrictions like the wassenaar arrangement , so finding it in the hands of the bahraini government would have major diplomatic consequences . but so far , no one had been able to pin down the program in action . when arab spring protestors found evidence of finfisher use by the mubarak government in egypt , gamma simply said the software had been stolen . no one was ever able to prove otherwise . but now marquis boire had caught a finfisher sample in the wild , and thanks to the leaked brochures , he had a roadmap of everything the implant could do . the implant divided its tasks between different modules , like a crew of bank robbers one module would break through a device s security and then deploy another module to log keystrokes , collecting the target s passwords . a third module took screenshots of the desktop , catching anything the subject might be looking at . a fourth module encrypted the data into a unique file format , so anyone looking through a hard drive wouldn t notice the device was recording anything . once the data was safely encrypted , the implant would send the file back home to its command server in this case , a server at bahrain s national telecom . marquis boire enlisted the aid of claudio guarnieri , a researcher at security firm rapid , to further explore the software . the two uncovered a mobile version of the implant , which came in different versions for ios , android , and even symbian , like a hot startup trying to cover as much of the market as possible . the new platform enabled dangerous new features like tracking targets through gps and pulling contacts directly from the phone s memory . there were specific modules for popular chat and voip apps like whatsapp and viber , in case you tried to escape by running to a third party service . it could even activate the on board microphone to listen in from your pocket . once the implant was installed , your phone effectively became an enemy agent . i d be working at my computer and start squinting at my phone , thinking , maybe i should turn that off , marquis boire says . it produced this weird dissonance between me and this device that i carry around all the time . the implant divided its tasks between different modules like a crew of bank robbersthen there were the command servers themselves . after studying the implant , marquis boire and the others were able to recreate the fingerprint it used when it phoned home to the command server , which gave them a new way to catch finfisher in the act . why not send the ping into the wild and see how many servers answered ? if it worked , it would show them all the finfisher installations running on the open web . but finding that out meant sending out a ping to billions of ip addresses at once which also meant finding an extremely understanding traffic provider . i remember telling providers , i want a big box with a lot of bandwidth , marquis boire says . most assumed he wanted it for criminal purposes , rather than to catch hackers in the act . we finally found a provider that i was able to explain it to , and they still accidentally shut down the box halfway through . after a few false starts , the pings finally went out and the team waited to see what would come back . instead of a few outposts , they found an army . finfisher s agents were everywhere japan , germany , india , serbia , mongolia there were even servers in the us . it was an atlas of personal invasions . all told , countries hosted a server of some kind , each hired out to a different regime and pointing the x ray at a different enemy of the state . but while he could see finfisher s control servers , marquis boire still couldn t see who they were working for . one server was on the official government grid of turkmenistan , which made it easy enough to guess who put it there but who was behind the for hire servers in the us ? when they listened in , who did they hear ? the web is a busy place , and it keeps many secrets . a scan can t dig up all of them . gamma s advertised capabilities , from gammagroup . commarquis boire published the work in a series of three landmark papers from july to march of , each titled with a cheeky bond pun like the smartphone who loved me ampnbspor you only click twice . ampnbspthe papers laid out everything he knew about finfisher s network , revealing a global surveillance network that was being hired out to some of the world s most repressive governments . targeted exploits weren t just for the nsa anymore . they were available to anyone who could pay for them . once the papers were published , finfisher went back underground . the coders behind the program began to change its routines and filenames enough to let it slip by unnoticed . soon , the servers weren t responding to the same call marquis boire had sent out . they had new procedures now , new passwords , and they knew they were being watched . marquis boire had gotten his glimpse of the network , but then it knew it had been spotted and sank back into the shadows . still , marquis boire s investigation had dug up enough for a definitive case that finfisher had been used against bahraini activists in london . that left two awkward possibilities either the british government had approved finfisher for export , or gamma never reported the sale . the first option would mean messy publicity for uk officials , revealing that the government had facilitated the ongoing persecution of refugees . the second could be even worse , putting finfisher and other programs directly in the crosshairs of british trade enforcers . and if gamma violated the uk s hacking laws , the fallout could be even greater . in august , the humanitarian rights group bahrain watch published new evidence suggesting that the bahraini government had been using finfisher to conduct surveillance on prominent bahraini lawyers , activists , and politicians , both in bahrain and abroad . according to information from a massive data leak , gamma not only sold finfisher to the bahraini government , but actively worked with the regime to remotely access and monitor the computers and smartphones of opposition activists . gamma did not respond to multiple requests for comment . in the uk , moosa abd ali ali was one of three bahraini exiles allegedly targeted by the government , together with jaffar al hasabi , , and saeed al shehabi , . the devices of all three men were infected in , but the extent of the breach didn t become apparent until recently . gamma actively worked with the regime to access and monitor the activity of opposition activistsmoosa , jaffar , and saeed represent three different generations of bahraini activism , but they re all fighting the same fight . jaffar , tall and soft spoken , has devoted his life to campaigning against the widely documented human rights violations committed by the bahraini government , and has been living in exile in london since the mid s . saeed , a london educated engineer and prominent opposition figure , acts as the elder statesmen of the group , professorial and eloquent with thinning gray hair . all three have been imprisoned and tortured in bahrain jaffar as recently as and all three have had their bahraini citizenship revoked . in london , they re part of a tight knit community of bahraini activists who orchestrate protests , petitions , and other events to raise awareness about the ruling family s abuses and what they see as tacit complicity on the part of the british government . even in the uk , moosa and his compatriots are physically harassed by groups they believe are connected to the bahraini regime . the three were attacked in an alleyway following a demonstration in , the same year that arsonists laid siege to saeed s house in the dead of night . but they never thought that a uk firm would actively work with the bahraini government to monitor them in a country that was supposed to keep them safe . what we didn t expect is that they would go that far by really intruding into our private lives , saeed says over tea at an islamic charity he runs in central london . wary of endangering their families or other activists in bahrain , the men have learned to keep politics out of their conversations and have curtailed their social media activity to varying degrees . we feel that we are not safe , jaffar adds . it limits how we talk and what we can say . using finfisher , the bahraini government effectively undermined the asylum moosa and his compatriots were granted in the uk the kind of cautionary tale of corporate state surveillance that has become increasingly common in recent years . ultimately , the men were lucky . finfisher was detected and wiped from their devices , and a watchdog is pushing for an investigation on their behalf . but while moosa and his friends recover , finfisher is gathering new targets in new countries . many of them may not be as lucky as moosa . one , two , three , four , al asoud , no more ! five , six , seven , eight , saudi is a terror state ! moosa s voice bellows across the leafy streets of central london on a crisp november afternoon . his calls are echoed by saeed , jaffar , and three other bahraini activists , all men . they ve come here to the upscale , commercial district of mayfair to protest directly in front of the saudi arabian embassy , as they do every wednesday afternoon between and pm . saeed and moosa each hold up two large banners urging the british government to stop supporting bahrain s torturers and calling for saudi troops to leave the island nation that they invaded following the arab spring . jaffar patrols the sidewalk , handing out flyers with soft greetings . the demonstration is short and non eventful . louis vuitton clad women politely decline or outright ignore jaffar s extended hand , and the banners draw little more than passing interest and a few iphone clicks . at precisely pm , they pack up their things , under the watchful gaze of embassy guards across the street , and load them into a car with perfunctory swiftness . after the protest , the three men go their separate ways . the sun is weakening and traffic is snarling , but moosa doesn t seem to be in much of a rush , munching potato chips in the back of a car as we lurch closer to his office near the king s cross train station . short and burly with a small mullet , moosa has the build of a guy who carries heavy equipment all day . he s quiet and warm in person , but his friends describe him as a tour de force in london s activist community , his quick smile and soft dark eyes masking years of suffering . i was looking for someone to punch . in my opinion he s one of the bravest people , says sayed ahmed , director of advocacy at the london ngo bahrain institute for rights and democracy bird , and a longtime friend of moosa . most victims , they want to forget what has happened to them , but moosa is the kind of person after what he went through , he only wanted to challenge it , to fight against it . he s so determined . of the three london activists implicated by finfisher , moosa is likely the one with the most to lose . his work revolves around the flow of information and media . his whatsapp conversations update faster than most people s twitter feeds . seated in front of an imac in his agency s king s cross office a converted residence and occasional islamic daycare that also houses bird he eagerly clicks through the vast library of video footage he s collected over the years , stored across six different hard drives protests , official bahraini visits , parliamentary events . if there s a bahrain related happening in the uk , moosa is there , camera in tow . moosa was furious when he first realized his privacy had been compromised i was looking for someone to punch but he s not worried about the government meddling with his videos . he stores them on hard drives and immediately uploads footage to the web once he receives it . if anything , the finfisher saga seems to have emboldened him . a video of moosa confronting tariq alhasan , the official spokesperson of bahrain s ministry of interior , and the rest of the ministry s delegation in geneva on june th , . he s now begun conducting his own form of surveillance , obsessively tracking the online itineraries of bahraini authorities in the hopes of upstaging their events with high profile demonstrations . he s shouted at ambassadors , waved banners in front of dignitaries , and even staged a demonstration directly in front of a seated queen elizabeth ii all in an effort to send a message to his compatriots back home . when you shout at them here , they feel small , moosa says . when they are in bahrain , they are bigger . if anyone talks to them , they are behind bars . but here in the uk , they can t arrest me . when you shout at them here , they feel small . there s no indication that bahraini authorities have used information gleaned from the activists computers against anyone in their network back home , but the possibility weighs heavily . in private , with my family , i speak freely because i don t involve them with politics , jaffar says . but the other friends in bahrain , we are afraid that they would be harmed or jailed . because many people who had been in contact with us are in jail right now , and we fear for the safety of the others . there are many in bahrain right now who are hiding , because they are wanted by the government . their primary concern stems not from what effect finfisher could have on their activism , but from the specter of having their personal lives invaded the same fundamental privacy concern behind much of the nsa surveillance controversies in the us . there are already signs that the bahraini government has sought to discredit the activists online . in , a link to a pornographic website appeared in saeed s twitter feed . he didn t post it and immediately deleted it , but the incident underscores a familiar tactic used to smear opposition figures . mohamed altajer , a bahraini human rights lawyer who was also targeted by finfisher , was blackmailed in with a video of him and his wife having sex . he received the video on the same day that authorities infected his computer , along with a threat to make it public unless he stopped defending activists . in october , a london based watchdog group called privacy international filed a formal complaint with the uk s national crime agency against gamma group . the case was simple a company had violated british hacking laws , breaking into phones and hijacking accounts . what was the government doing about it ? the organization was joined in the suit by moosa , jaffar and saeed , each man testifying to his own experience with digital tracking . they brought evidence marquis boire s report showed how gamma s malware had infiltrated the trio s phones , piping data back to bahrain . new reports from bahrain watch and wikileaks showed gamma employees providing active technical support to bahrain officials . it was easy to connect the dots from moosa to gamma to the bahraini regime . the new complaint just made it official , charging the bahraini government with violating uk hacking law and naming gamma as an accessory . the case was simple a company had violated british hacking lawsbut the international nature of the hack makes it legally complex british german software , sold to bahraini police , who used it to spy on bahraini exiles in london . it s too broad for local law enforcement and too small to warrant an international incident . in the past , gamma has deflected legal action , either by claiming it had nothing to do with finfisher s installation or that the software had been pirated . this time , those denials won t work . but it s still unclear if , or how , british government will respond . the commercial surveillance industry continues to operate with impunity and little moral responsibility , carly nyst , legal director for privacy international , said in an email . it is time for companies like gamma to face the consequences of enabling repressive regimes through the sale of their technology . bill marczak , a research fellow at citizenlab and the co founder of bahrain watch , calls finfisher just the latest step in productized surveillance , an approach pioneered by companies like gamma and milan based hacking team that aims to make digital intrusion as easy and full service as any other government technology package . they actually have a system that the government buys , and they get the whole package , marczak says . it s not just the code itself , it s the administration , the analysis , the support the whole framework is provided . that turns the same surveillance conducted by the nsa or gchq into a market product , available to the highest bidder with no questions asked . the value proposition is essentially activists in your country are giving you trouble ? well here s a product that will allow you to turn their cellphone or computer into basically a wiretap , a surveillance tool , and you can spy on everything they do , marczak says . and i think governments are very attracted to that . the eu added intrusion software to its list of export controlled goods alongside nuclear reactors and anthrax sporesas for finfisher , citizenlab s research shows that the spyware is being used in new countries , suggesting that demand is growing . the organization regularly conducts probes for new finfisher servers , and the latest results , to be released in a few months , will likely paint a sobering picture . it s hard to say whether the total number of customers has gone up , but my suspicion is yes , this has continued to spread , marczak adds . more and more governments are seeking out this technology and using it . this past november , the eu added intrusion software like finfisher to its list of explicitly export controlled goods , alongside nuclear reactors and anthrax spores . but it s still unclear if the new measures will limit the program s dissemination . in the meantime , moosa and his compatriots say they ll continue fighting for change in bahrain , even if that means having to look over their shoulder a few extra times . they ve been beaten , tortured , and terrorized by the country they still call home , but they remain undeterred , buoyed by the belief that a better bahrain is always just around the corner . one day , when the revolution is over and the khalifas are gone , i will take you to bahrain , and i will show you where i worked and how to fish in bahrain , moosa said over the phone last month . it was the evening of december st , eight years to the day since he fled his home for the uk and he was reminiscing about the time he spent working in fish markets as a young man . the memories are distant now , buried by the years of struggle , but in his mind the bahrain of his youth is as vivid as ever . it is so , so lovely , he said of the country that continues to haunt him . the sea is so nice . photography by hal shinnie	 deer are invading new york city , and we don t know how to stop them out of the wilddeer are invading new york city , and we don t know how to stop themby brendan o connor just before christmas of last year , john caminiti , who lives in staten island , new york city s least populated borough , watched traffic come to a standstill outside the staten island mall . it got quiet all of a sudden , caminiti told me . i look around , and there was a big buck , standing right on the fringe of the wilderness and the mall . a calm came over people . staten island is located a half hour by ferry off the southern tip of manhattan , and the caminitis have lived here for almost a century . my grandmother was a baby when my great grandfather brought her over here , he said . at that time , the island had practically no deer . then the island had a few deer . now there are a lot of deer , and they are everywhere . nobody really knows where the herds came from . the staten island advance reported sightings as far back as according to the new york times , deer began appearing with some frequency around . in , the new york department of environmental conservation conducted a survey of staten island s deer population . the biologist who searched the woods estimated there were approximately white tailed deer in the borough . last winter , the new york city parks department conducted an aerial , infrared survey of the island and found individuals an apparent , percent increase in just six years . an apparent , percent increase in the deer population in just six yearsdeer on the island have gone from a rarity to a delight to a problem with no immediate solution . i never saw a deer until i went away to college , sam immo , a year old staten island native , told me . when my friends and i were learning to drive , driving at night was a non issue , she said . the first time i almost hit a deer , i was flabbergasted . the consequences of white tailed deer overabundance extend beyond trampled gardens , the spread of tick borne disease , or even car collisions . the department of sanitation had a contractor remove large dead deer ampnbspfrom staten island s roads in . too many deer will ruin an ecosystem for years to come , leaving forests barren eventually , the deer s insatiable appetite will lead to its own starvation . while staten island , new york city s greenest borough , hasn t quite reached that point , without management efforts in place , the island will get there soon enough . under favorable conditions , deer populations can double every two to three years . staten island an area just shy of square miles might expect its deer population to reach , by . it s a pattern that has unfolded across the american northeast and midwest over the past years . white tailed deer once on the brink of extirpation in the united states find refuge in the parks , backyards , and golf courses of suburban and exurban america . humans are largely at fault the way we develop things , with our fondness for cultivated , abrupt treelines , wide open soccer fields , and the absence of hunters and predators are ideal for deer . as far as they are concerned , staten island best views of the manhattan skyline in the tri state metropolitan area ! is as nice a place to live as any . unmanaged , however , the population will become an increasingly expensive problem , with any semblance of balance difficult to restore . that one of new york city s five boroughs will soon be overrun with hundred pound pests some with horns , at this point , seems inevitable . three times larger than manhattan , staten island is home to less than a third as many people just over , , according to the last census . the island is densely built up at its hilly northeastern end , where commuters board ferries bound for downtown new york city , a few miles away . but away from the city , sloping southwest towards new jersey and southeast towards the atlantic , the island becomes increasingly depopulated a landscape of gutted factories , empty prisons , and parks . nothing down here but the deer , john caminiti told me as we drove in his car . caminiti and his friends feed the deer at staten island s charleston cemetery . sometimes , he said , they eat out of his hand . nothing down here but the deer . charleston cemetery sits along the side of arthur kill road at the southern end of staten island just about as far from manhattan you can get while still remaining within the confines of the five boroughs . staten island has some of the oldest cemeteries in new york state legendary new yorker writer joseph mitchell even wrote a story about them . the south shore is the most rural part of the island , he wrote in , and all these cemeteries are bordered on at least two sides by woods . today those woods and cemeteries are full of deer during my visit at charleston , a small fawn scampered toward a doe at the sight of me . arthur kill road swings out and around the bottom of the island to the water of the arthur kill a tidal strait separating staten island from new jersey . kill being a dutch word for a stream or a creek or other such flowing body of water . many suspect that this is ground zero for the island s exploding deer population deer have been videotaped swimming across the arthur kill toward staten island from new jersey towns like rahway , carteret , and perth amboy places where sprawling industrial campuses , many abandoned , sit adjacent to marshes , forests , and swamps . a video of deer swimming across arthur kill toward staten island , uploaded in . about a half mile south of the giant mound of the freshkills landfill , the coast is littered with scuttled ships , earning it the name staten island ship graveyard . at low tide , i walked across the flats scattered oysters sticking up out of the mud , rusting hulls sticking up out of the water a little further out to a heavily wooded peninsula that sticks out towards jersey . the trek was not very rigorous , but it smelled bad . i saw no deer , but i saw deer shit . a lot of deer shit . mike feller , the recently retired chief naturalist for the parks department , told me that a large part of his mission as a nature advocate is to foster connections between green spaces that would otherwise be fragmented or , as he put it , ameliorating island biogeography . the arthur kills area is a good illustration , feller said , of that project finding success a glorious , contiguous system of forests , marshes , and edges . this is exactly the kind of habitat that white tailed deer enjoy . according to caminiti , a deer or a person would be able to travel from the northernmost tip of the island to the southernmost without crossing more than four or five roads . trying to make things more connected has a lot of benefits , but also a lot of liabilities . you can t filter out the species you may not want , feller told me . before , maybe there were outliers , stragglers , but no herds , he said . a new york times article from tells the story of a staten island farmer being gored by one such buck . there was a time it seemed like the deer just showed up . after leaving arthur kill , i drove back to the cemetery in hopes of catching one more glimpse of a deer before the sunset . sure enough , there she was , a doe , staring me down from between the mossy headstones . and then she turned , bounding away unhurriedly into the dim evening woods . white tailed deer are not particularly large animals , but they are muscular and athletic , some reportedly able to jump over fences feet high . the tails from which they derive their name stick up jauntily over their rears as they run away from you . before european colonization , north america was home to somewhere between and million white tailed deer , most widely distributed east of the rocky mountains . in the following centuries , that population was destroyed first by traders operating out of coastal cities , making deals with native americans for pelts then by settlers moving out west . deer died by the hundreds of thousands as the market grew for their meat and hides . but it was the the second half of the th century that truly decimated animal populations across the united states . in his book nature wars , wildlife historian , journalist , and hunter jim sterba writes , all wildlife suffered , from bison to songbirds . demand for wild products soared as immigrants poured in and the us population grew to million . any wild species with any value was killed for meat , fur , or feathers . the white tailed population plummeted to an estimated low of , animals in . according to serba , by the end of the th century white tailed deer were so scarce that market hunters no longer bothered with them . by the end of the th century white tailed deer were so scarce that market hunters no longer bothered with them . then , thanks to a set of concepts and policies referred to as the north american model of wildlife conservation , the deer made a tremendous comeback . the model , encouraged by a rising american bourgeoisie that yearned for recreational hunting , established a series of principles to promote rebounding deer populations create protected green spaces where commercial hunting was banned foster safe and abundant spaces for regulated , recreational hunting and further discourage predator species that had essentially already been eradicated . the logic was simple you can t hunt the deer if all the deer are already dead . as a result , the united states now has over million white tailed deer , much more densely populated than they ever were before europeans arrived . unchecked by wolves , cougars , and bears , the herds wreak havoc a rutgers university study alleges that white tailed deer are responsible for most of the . billion worth of crops that us agriculture loses to wildlife annually they account for three to four thousand car collisions a day . new jersey alone had , deer collisions from to . unchecked by predators or hunters , only starvation will limit population growth . to bring a native species back from the brink of eradication should be cause for celebration in this respect , the revival of white tailed deer is one of the conservation movement s finest accomplishments . but our understanding of what is best for the deer , for people , and for the wider ecosystem is , perhaps , changing . and success is starting to resemble failure . to combat staten island s deer , new york city has pulled together people into a newly organized nyc interagency deer management task force . representatives from the environmental conservation are present , but so are employees of the department of transportation , sanitation , emergency management , nypd , usda , and others . the task force , chaired by the parks department s director of conservation kevin heatley , had its first official meeting this past december . there , the team came to two conclusions the deer are a problem . the city needs to do something about the deer . it s not the number of deer , it s the density , heatley told me . at deer per square mile of staten island , he said , the numbers are four times as high as we d like them to be . the task force will aim to lower that density to fewer than animals per square mile . but no one can agree on when this will happen , or how . the task force has three priorities monitor the animals and their impact educate the public about deer behavior and manage the population . it is this last goal that s the most difficult and controversial . communities like staten island largely developed , if not entirely urban , with plenty of green space have essentially four primary management methods available to them two lethal and two non lethal . lethal methods include regulated culls i . e . hiring government sharpshooters and recreational hunting . non lethal methods include the application of a contraceptive and surgical sterilization . the fifth option which isn t really an option but rather the current state of affairs is to do nothing at all . pursuing , shooting , killing , or capturing as well as disturbing , harrying , or worrying wildlife is prohibited in all five boroughs of new york city and carries a penalty of a year in jail , a , fine , or both . that hasn t stopped some in , the new york times reported hunters roaming staten island s clay pit pond state park . to just come up and start killing them seems cruel . they re innocent they don t know . margherita grancio rubertone lives near freshkills park , across the street from a cemetery where a deer was once found impaled on the fence the victim of an unfortunate jumping accident . it s not a good idea , hunting , she told me . to just come up and start killing them seems cruel . they re innocent they don t know . the relative density of staten island would also make hunting difficult , or at least uncomfortable . it would be pretty dangerous , with the deer right across from your house , grancio rubertone said . god forbid , whatever might happen . in february of , a staten island advance reporter asked republican mayoral candidate joe lhota , a former head of the metropolitan transportation authority who hunts deer in upstate new york , what he made of the growing deer sightings on staten island . lhota was in town to pick up an assemblyman s endorsement . the next mayor is going to have to figure out how hunting is going to work , lhota said , adding that if hunting were to be permitted on the island , it would have to be bowhunting . not everybody believes in hunting , lhota said . so we need to have a public debate . lhota later denied making the comments the advance reporter stuck by his story , and the paper ended up running an editorial condemning the idea of allowing hunting in the borough anyway . the task force does not consider hunting to be a viable option for staten island , and just as well recreational hunting on its own has been found to be an insufficient means of population control . one study even found that bowhunters in new jersey and pennsylvania who were permitted unlimited tags , could shoot deer over bait , and were working during extended seasons still could not reduce the size of deer herds to sustainable levels . an accident report showing a driver hitting two parked cars in order to avoid a deer collision on staten island . credit silive . com one of the study s co authors was anthony denicola , founder of a non profit called white buffalo , which provides wildlife control services using lethal and nonlethal methods . denicola s doctoral dissertation at purdue university was on deer contraceptives he claims to have killed more than , deer since he founded white buffalo in . people have a hard time accepting responsibility for taking an animal s life , but at what cost to the animal s quality of life ? he asked when we spoke . communities hire white buffalo to manage their wildlife when that wildlife has run amok . denicola is not optimistic that the residents of staten island or legislators in a city like new york are going to accept widespread lethal deer culls . when you re dealing with people who live in the new york metropolitan area , they have no day to day exposure to nature , to living with nature . the idea of killing animals like deer has a very visceral impact , denicola said . given the degree of urbanization , your ability to educate , to sway public perception becomes very hard to get people to understand the need to cull ? good luck . ideally , you d pursue an integrated solution a mix of lethal and non lethal methods . practically ? not . gonna . happen . white buffalo has experimented with surgical sterilization , which denicola believes will play a greater role in deer management as time goes on . most locations that have deer problems have firearm restrictions , he observed . the data keep reinforcing that sterilization may have some utility . but labor intensive sterilization is an expensive proposition you have to catch the deer , and you need someone who is competent in the surgical sterilization process available to perform the act the bill comes out to around , per doe . tony s been doing a lot of the surgical sterilization work , and he has a great team to do that , allen rutberg , director of tufts university s center for animals and public policy , told me . i just don t think that his team can be replicated in an efficient manner . the mayor , his wife , and their child all contracted deer borne lyme diseaserutberg is researching a different non lethal method of deer management immunocontraception , or birth control . last year , he and his team began an experiment with this method in the town of hastings on hudson , just north of new york city in westchester county . hastings , a two square mile area , is estimated to be home to around deer there were car collisions involving deer here in , and the mayor , his wife , and their child all contracted deer borne lyme disease . rutberg s method involves tranquilizing , tagging , and applying the vaccine to each deer once every two years similar experiments on fire island reduced deer populations in some areas by as much as percent . rutberg s contraceptive method costs around per deer , though he argues that if government regulations requiring him to tag each deer were lifted , he could bring that cost down to . one of the things we like about the sort of contraception that we do is that it seems to be a sort of comfortable , consensus solution , rutberg said . it doesn t involve killing anything , it s not too invasive , we don t have to do surgery on the animals , but at the same time it keeps the problem under control . it seems like a nice compromise between treating them as pests and treating them as pets and treating them as nature s gift . but building a consensus in any community can be a laborious process , especially in a place with as many stakeholders and interest groups as new york city . a consensus based approach is never going to work on a controversial issue , denicola told me . you can try educating , but in the time it takes to do that you ll have deer up to your eyeballs . the best case scenario for staten island , he said , is that five years from now a management method will be agreed on . meanwhile , the forest is denuded , lyme disease spreads , and collisions increase , he said . the deer are happy ! but as for the city ? they are well on their way to a major headache . heatley , the head of the nyc interagency deer management task force , shares denicola s concern whatever method the city decides on , time is of the essence if staten island is going to solve its deer problem . when your house is on fire , you go get a bucket . you don t measure the temperature of the flames , he told me . the deer situation is a wildfire . deer aren t the only animals adapting and flourishing in the landscapes we ve created in , only pairs of peregrine falcons were left in all of north america . today they thrive in cities , whose skylines imitate the falcon s ancestral habitats along cliffs and canyons the new york state dec reports that peregrine falcons nest on every bridge over the hudson river south of albany . the world s largest urban bat colony numbering around . million is located underneath downtown austin s congress avenue bridge . a wolf coyote hybrid is spreading through the northeast from above the great lakes , via the appalachians its size and weight making it a more fearsome predator than its pure coyote predecessors . some , coyotes have moved from the suburbs around chicago into the city s downtown , and coyotes from westchester county just north of manhattan have made it as far south as tribeca . just a few days ago , one was caught on the upper west side . the distinction between nature and civilization has always been a delusional abstraction at best , and a justification for the exploitation of natural resources at worst . we are , at all times , amongst nature , and it is amongst us whether we see it or not . and now the deer , the coyotes , and others are coming back to remind us of the fact . humans have forgotten that they have a role in nature , the department of agriculture forest service s thomas rawinski told me . we have to take responsibility for the problem , we have to look at ourselves as part of this ecosystem . human beings shattered the landscape of this continent , only to decide that we preferred it the other way . but putting the puzzle back together is proving to be harder than we imagined . on staten island , that shattered landscape isn t just made up of deer the island is also struggling with a flock of wild turkeys . for the past years , the birds have made the campus of the south beach psychiatric center their home . it all started with nine captive bred birds that were released onto hospital grounds in . since then , the flock has grown . meanwhile , the turkey s fecal matter is tracked into the hospital buildings , ben rosen , a spokesperson for the office of mental health , told me . the birds are obstructing emergency vehicles making their way in and out of the hospital . in august , several turkeys were captured by hand and with nets , placed into crates , and shipped to a state approved processing facility , according to a statement given at the time by a usda spokesperson to the staten island advance . their meat was to be frozen and its suitability for human consumption tested . but the cull sparked a public outrage and was officially halted in september an estimated turkeys remained on the psych ward grounds . the dec made accommodations for of the birds to be transported to an enclosed space at the catskill environmental sanctuary instead . the usda , which is now handling the relocation process , is employing several different capture methodologies pre baited walk in traps , weighted nets that are launched over turkeys by air cannons , and hand nets over short periods of time to prevent the turkeys from catching on and finding other places to roost . it s taken new york city years to address the chaos caused by nine turkeys . one shudders to think how long it will take the city to tackle a population of furiously procreating deer . denicola laughed when i told him about the island s turkey troubles . getting rid of turkeys is easy , he scoffed . deer are another case altogether . you re not gonna relocate deer , he told me with a smirk in his voice . you re stuck with the deer . you handle them there . photography by andrew white correction the territory of staten island encompasses less than square miles , not . that makes it the third largest borough in new york city . 	 how the colombian army sent a hidden messag to hostages using a pop song the code a declassified and unbelievable hostage rescue storyhow the colombian army sent a hidden message to hostages using a pop songby jeff maysh colonel jose espejo was a man with a problem . as the colombian army s communications expert watched the grainy video again , he saw kidnapped soldiers chained up inside barbed wire pens in a hostage camp deep in the jungle , guarded by armed farc guerillas . some had been hostages for more than years , and many suffered from a grim , flesh eating disease caused by insect bites . it was , and the straight talking espejo was close to retirement after years of military service . but he couldn t stand the thought of quitting with men left behind enemy lines . he needed an idea , and when he needed an idea , he always went to one man . juan carlos ortiz was dunking his kids in the pool at his home in coconut grove , miami , when he got the call from colonel espejo . with his easy charm and seemingly natural talent for creating clever commercials , the year old advertising executive had earned himself a don draper like reputation in colombia . the ambitious ortiz had shot to fame at the colombian office of leo burnett the legendary ad agency behind tony the tiger where he created an anti drug tv spot for the colombian president s office . the ad showed an addict on a bus mistaking a fellow passenger s dandruff for cocaine and snorting it up his nose . it made ortiz the first colombian to win a gold lion at cannes , the advertising industry s oscars . he returned to bogot a national hero and received a commendation from the nation s first lady . ortiz s anti cocaine spotthe success of his ad also brought threats from farc guerillas , who relied , in part , on the cocaine market to fund their decades old campaign against the government . i had gone against their objectives with my anti cocaine commercial , he remembers . they offered me the opportunity of paying them in exchange for my life . deeply concerned by threatening letters and phone calls , ortiz bought a bulletproof car for his family , and even assisted police in a sting operation to catch his blackmailers . but the threats persisted , and fearing for his safety , his employer urgently transferred ortiz to its new york office . he took his family with him . a high profile move to rival ad agency ddb in miami followed , but ortiz could never forget his enmity toward the farc . he became the go to guy for the colombian army s more bizarre requests in their battle against the guerillas . on the telephone , colonel espejo explained that he urgently needed to get a message to the captured colombian soldiers help was coming . daring commando missions were taking place throughout the region , including operation chameleon a sixth month operation that involved government soldiers and secret raids . because the farc shoots hostages dead at the first sight of a military invasion , espejo had to convey to the captives to be ready to escape . how do you reach soldiers held under hour armed guard in deeply rural territory ? juan carlos ortiz s mind raced between ideas sky writing ? aid parcels containing secret messages ? the army air dropped million pacifiers into the jungle with a message encouraging rebels to return to civilizationortiz had designed unorthodox campaigns to battle the farc before . in , he dreamed up an operation to persuade pregnant female guerrillas to defect the army air dropped million pacifiers into the jungle with a message encouraging rebels to return to civilization . the operation involved seven helicopters , three airplanes , flight hours , , gallons of fuel , and soldiers flying twice a week for four months . during the holidays , the army illuminated giant christmas trees across the jungle to remind guerrillas what they were missing . they also wrote messages promoting peace on soccer balls and floated them down the river toward the rebel encampments . but this operation would be far more challenging . they had to create a message that could be understood by the hostages , but remain invisible to their captors . they needed to give the hostages hope , and encourage any soldiers harboring plans of escape that now was the time . ortiz agreed to participate , and boarded the next plane to bogot . the revolutionary armed forces of colombia , or farc , emerged in the s as a group of armed communist peasants opposing the government and demanding labor reforms . this followed a period in colombian history known as la violencia , when fighting between the liberal and conservative parties resulted in , deaths . driven deep into the jungle by a military bombing campaign , the farc built up their strength and numbers . by the farc had an estimated , to , members , according to the international crisis group . by the time that the farc and the colombian government announced a ceasefire at the end of last year , their civil war had become one of the longest running and bloodiest in the world . the farc , latin america s oldest surviving left wing insurgency , has been labeled a terrorist group by the us state department and has a long history of kidnapping to help finance its operations . in the past decade , , people have been snatched in colombia and held for ransom some for as long as years . five hundred of the hostages are either involved with the military or politics . while the farc prefer to kidnap americans for money , prominent colombian prisoners can be valuable political leverage . hostages accounts of their time in captivity are harrowing sgt . jose libardo forero was one of colombia s forgotten hostages , held by the farc for nearly years . after his release , forero spoke of relieving his mental anguish by bonding with jungle animals and one pet pig he called josefo , whom he got hooked on coffee . colombian politician ingrid betancourt , held for six years , recalled being chained to a tree by her neck . ortiz arrived at the bogot headquarters of the ddb advertising agency . the modern building features floor to ceiling windows that boast panoramic views of the traffic choked colombian capital , but keep out the symphony of car horns playing below . that day he was joined by his team of creative minds rodrigo bolivar , alfonso diaz , mario le n , and luis castilla , the leading lights of colombia s advertising industry . together with colonel espejo , they brainstormed ways to get a message to the hostages . sending messages directly to hostages is often impossible and not found in the guidebook of any law enforcement or military agency , says christopher voss , the fbi s lead international ampnbspkidnapping negotiator ampnbspfrom to . now the owner of the negotiation firm black swan group , voss says when you send a message to a hostage , you have to assume the hostage takers are seeing it too . gary noesher is a former chief negotiator for the fbi who spent years rescuing hostages and has dealt directly with the farc . he says that sending sensitive messages meant solely for hostages is incredibly risky . colonel espejo s case reminds him of a siege at the japanese ambassador s mansion in lima , peru , in december . noesher was on the team tasked with saving hostages . secret messages were transmitted through the garbage . we received word that terrorists played indoor soccer in the living room , and a bomb was placed underneath the room and detonated , noesher says . that is the only time i can remember covert messages sent to hostages . noesher won t say exactly how the messages were sent , but adds food and water were going into the embassy . all i can say is messages were transmitted . all of the militants were killed , along with two commandos and one hostage . sending messages directly to hostages is often impossiblecol . espejo ran the brainstorming session with the efficiency of a military operation . he explained that farc guerrillas usually allow hostages access to radios it relieves the tedium of long hikes through the colombian jungle and keeps their minds from escape . communicating with hostages via radio is a years old practice in colombia . the show voices of kidnapping on bogota s caracol radio is dedicated to victims families who send messages to their loved ones via special call ins . creator herbin hoyos medina came up with the idea in , after he was kidnapped for days . he now broadcasts the show from madrid , giving families second slots to send messages . ortiz considered hiding a message in a radio commercial , perhaps hidden in the fine print spoken quickly at the end . then diaz , the creative director , suggested using code . what about c digo morse , he said morse code . jeremiah andrew denton jr . blinking t o r t u r e in morse codeit wouldn t be the first time morse code was used in a hostage situation in , one of hostages held captive by south moluccan gunmen on a dutch train managed to transmit the message get us out of here , using sunlight and a hand mirror . then there was jeremiah andrew denton jr . , a united states navy rear admiral who spent almost eight years as a prisoner of war in vietnam , four of those in solitary confinement . in a forced north vietnamese television interview in , denton ingeniously used morse code to communicate with american intelligence by blinking his eyes to spell out t o r t u r e . it was a eureka moment ! we thought about hiding the morse code in an advert , says ortiz . then we thought , how about a song ? as a young man , ortiz was a musician , but his career never took off . the idea of producing a hit song appealed to him . ortiz pitched the colonel a plan as if he were pitching a commercial to heinz or coca cola . the colonel stroked his chin . espejo liked the code idea , because he knew that many soldiers especially in the communications departments were taught morse code in their basic training . furthermore , espejo reasoned , the farc were peasants from the fields , they wouldn t know morse . it was a longshot , but if the team could disguise the telltale dot dot dash signals in a song , there was a chance the soldiers would hear the message . radio bemba is a small recording studio with six electric guitars on the wall where musicians write catchy commercial jingles . if the ddb agency is in bogot s manhattan , radio bemba is in the city s brooklyn , sharing its front door with an architecture company in a year old building on an edgy street . word quickly got around the studio that the military wanted to produce a song so popular it would enterr the lista colombia s billboard charts . producer carlos portela , , thought they were nuts . but they were deadly serious , and explained it was a secret project , says portela , who wears an eyebrow ring and produces music for beer commercials . obviously we had never worked with morse code before . but they were very specific about what they wanted . they needed to know if we could hide their message in a song , so that nobody would detect it unless they knew morse code . the team began experimenting with morse code using various percussion instruments and a keyboard . they learned that operators skilled in morse code can often read the signals at a rate of words per minute but played that fast , the beat would sound like a european dance track . we discovered the magic number was , says portela . you can fit approximately morse code words into a piece of music the length of a chorus , and it sounds okay . you can fit approximately morse code words into . . . the length of a chorus , and it sounds okay . with the help of a military policeman skilled in morse , they coded the message people rescued . you are next . don t lose hope . it was a signal to boost morale and indicate that help was nearby . portela wrote the song and the lyrics with composer amaury hernandez , creating a thinly veiled ballad about life as a hostage in the middle of the night thinking about what i love the most i feel the need to sing about how much i miss them . he even added the lyric , listen to this message , brother , just before the coded message kicks in . the code sounds like a brief synth interlude just after the chorus . portela says they played with the morse code using reason software , which gives each audio channel or instrument its own dedicated track . with a separate visual lane for certain elements , it was possible to match the code to the beat of the song and , crucially , blend it in . hiding the morse code took weeks , with constant back and forth with col . espejo and the military to make sure their men could understand the message . it was difficult because morse code is not a musical beat . sometimes it was too obvious , says portela . other times the code was not understood . and we had to hide it three times in the song to make sure the message was received . finally , in september , the song was mastered . they titled it better days , performed by session artists natalia gutierrez y angelo , fairly anonymous background musicians who d worked on other jingles at the studio . ortiz thought it was a masterpiece . when i first listened , i thought it was a song of freedom , he says . with the song completed , they had to get it on the airwaves . commercial colombian stations largely only played hits by famous artists like coldplay and shakira . luckily , says col . espejo , in many of the jungle areas where the hostages were held , all the radio stations were controlled by the government . the hostages were listening to our own stations , so we made sure the song was played , he says . the code message said , you re next because the hostages thought if they ran away , they would die in the jungle . we let them know that our troops were nearby . at that time , active commando missions were underway , placing troops undercover in farc controlled areas . the song was played on over small stations and heard by million peopleformer hostage major general luis mendieta ovalle herlindo helped the operation by appearing on live television and making an appeal directly to the guerillas . herlindo , who escaped in one of the secretive commando led escapes during operation chameleon , said this message is for members of the farc . for those being held captive without a radio . please , give them radio . though it might seem that this gave the game away , to colombians it sounded like an appeal for hostages to be able to hear the voices of their families , who call in to radio shows . the song was played on over small stations and heard by million people . though most colombians in major cities would not even recognize the song , it became popular in the rural areas controlled by the farc . by december , better days was echoing across the jungle . and the plan worked . we know of hostages who heard the message and were able to escape and provide information that led to the release of more hostages , says colonel espejo . better days verse in the middle of the night thinking about what i love the most i feel the need to sing what my heart has to givei talk about those i love about how much i miss them i talk about pride and strength which beat inside my heart chorus a new dawn singing this message from my heart although i m tied up and alone i feel as if i m by your side listen to this message brother morse message people rescued . you re next . don t lose hope verse i want to keep on fighting for my friends , my family , my children we will soon see each other again i m sure better days are coming chorus x later in december , the farc announced its plans to release five more hostages as a humanitarian gesture , including a police major , two military service members , and two politicians two months later , major guillermo solorzano , , and corporal salin sanmiguel , , were released back to their families and in the spring of , the last police and military hostages some of whom had spent years in captivity were released and flown in a brazilian military helicopter to safety . colonel espejo watched the hostages on tv , waving and punching the air with delight as they stepped off a helicopter in villavicencio . at the country s presidential palace , the president , juan manuel santos , said welcome to liberty , soldiers and policemen of colombia . freedom has been very delayed , but now it is yours , to the delight of the whole country . one former hostage was able to confirm the song s effectiveness , according to col . espejo . he told ortiz of a clandestine operation that resulted in the release of private joshua alvarez . in his military psychological evaluation , col . espejo says that the soldier spoke of hearing the code hidden in the song , and revealed how the message was passed from soldier to soldier . the song was even enjoyed by the farc , who were oblivious to its secret message . back home in his village in western nari o , alvarez was greeted with a hero s welcome , including fireworks and banners . it makes me very happy to think of the hostages listening to our song , ortiz says . ortiz still keeps in touch with col . espejo , who retired from the military and now works as a journalist . col . espejo wrote the book el gran cartel , an investigation into the farc s finances . ortiz continues to travel between colombia , new york , and miami , where he has created commercials for rice krispies and volkswagen . he s earned a place in the american advertising federation s hall of fame , and on a top list of exceptional colombians . on the wall of ortiz s miami office there s a photo of him celebrating his gold lion for the dandruff cocaine ad in , wildly waving a colombian flag on stage . he recalls how he persuaded a local tailor in cannes to fashion him a colombian flag on the morning of the awards . receiving that award should have been the greatest moment of his life , he says , but that victory was marred by the farc and their threats . one moment , i was the king of the world , he says ruefully , the next just another colombian victim of the terrorists . being able to help the military with the code project was my way of helping them fight . the army agreed to declassify the code operation in and allowed the song to be entered into the cannes lions . better days earned ortiz his second gold lion . this time , he says , we enjoyed it . illustrations by allegra lockstadt	 to an unsuspecting eye , the torres family home is indistinguishable from the other bungalows that line a flat , treeless stretch of road somewhere off us route . under an unforgiving texas sun , the family amprsquos golden retriever runs in circles over a parched lawn , pausing for breath in the shadow of an suv parked out front . and inside , life appears perfectly normal . framed photos of rosie and le roy amprsquos wedding , and of their three teenaged children , line the mantle . tubs of peanut butter and jam sit open on a cluttered kitchen counter . the giggles of year old girls on summer vacation echo from down the hall . but upon closer inspection , it quickly becomes apparent that this is a family under siege . le roy amprsquos imposing physique still harkens back to his decades of law enforcement and military service , but his stature belies a profound physical frailty . one that becomes obvious the moment he speaks le roy amprsquos voice is meek and raspy , and his eyes water and hands shake as his ailing lungs strain to expel a single sentence . when he talks about what happened to him , that shaking speeds up . and when he amprsquos asked how his health problems have affected rosie and the kids , who amprsquove spent the past five years wondering if today was the day he amprsquod die , tears from those waterlogged eyes spill onto his cheeks . le roy , now , joined the army reserves at the age of ampmdash before even finishing high school . he was finally deployed overseas in , and served a one year tour as a battalion personnel officer stationed out of iraq amprsquos joint base balad . since then , he amprsquos become increasingly ill . first it was incessant coughing , shortness of breath , crushing chest pain . then came the headaches agony so intense that rosie would often drive le roy to the er , convinced he was dying . and finally the gastrointestinal trauma le roy recalls once passing a blood clot the size of a baseball in a rest area bathroom . i wondered all the time whether i would live to the next day , he says . because it just kept getting worse and worse . as le roy and rosie struggled to understand his symptoms , they also made a startling discovery as the two are now acutely aware , le roy isn amprsquot the only veteran of the wars in iraq and afghanistan to suffer from mysterious illnesses . thousands of others are complaining of breathing problems , gastrointestinal disorders , and even rare cancers . some have already died of these ailments . a handful of health experts are now convinced that today amprsquos veterans face an emerging epidemic , one threatening the lives of thousands of young men and women ampmdash but neither the department of defense dod nor the department of veterans affairs va concur . it amprsquos a conflict that amprsquos pitting le roy and rosie , along with a growing number of veterans , politicians , doctors , and scientists against the two biggest institutions in the us government . and it amprsquos all because of garbage . to an unsuspecting eye , the torres family home is indistinguishable from the other bungalows that line a flat , treeless stretch of road somewhere off us route . under an unforgiving texas sun , the family amprsquos golden retriever runs in circles around the parched lawn , pausing for breath in the shadow of an suv parked out front . and inside , life appears perfectly normal . framed photos of rosie and le roy amprsquos wedding and of their three teenaged children line the mantle . tubs of peanut butter and jam sit open on a cluttered kitchen counter . the giggles of year old girls on summer vacation echo from down the hall . but upon closer inspection , it quickly becomes apparent that this is a family under siege . le roy amprsquos imposing physique still harkens back to his decades of law enforcement and military service , but his stature belies a profound physical frailty . one that becomes obvious the moment he speaks le roy amprsquos voice is meek , and his eyes water and hands shake slightly as his ailing lungs strain to expel a single sentence . when he talks about what happened to him , the shaking speeds up . and when he amprsquos asked how his health problems have affected rosie and the kids , who amprsquove spent the past five years wondering if today was the day he amprsquod die , tears from those waterlogged eyes spill onto his cheeks . le roy , now , joined the army at the age of ampmdash before even finishing high school . after six years of active duty he enlisted in the reserves . but it wasn amprsquot until that he was finally deployed overseas and served a one year tour as a battalion personnel officer stationed out of iraq amprsquos joint base balad . since then , le roy has become increasingly ill . first it was incessant coughing , shortness of breath , crushing chest pain . then came the headaches agony so intense that rosie would often drive le roy to the er , convinced this was the end . and finally the gastrointestinal trauma le roy recalls once passing a blood clot the size of a golf ball in a rest area bathroom . i wondered all the time whether i would live to the next day , he says . because it just kept getting worse and worse . as le roy and rosie struggled to understand his symptoms they also made a startling discovery as the two are now acutely aware , le roy isn amprsquot the only veteran of the wars in iraq and afghanistan to suffer from mysterious illnesses . thousands of others are complaining of breathing problems , gastrointestinal disorders , and even rare cancers . some have already died of these ailments . a handful of health experts are now concerned that today amprsquos veterans face an emerging epidemic , one threatening the lives of thousands of men and women ampmdash but neither the department of defense dod nor the department of veterans affairs va concur . it amprsquos a conflict that amprsquos pitting le roy and rosie , along with a growing number of veterans , politicians , doctors , and scientists against some of the two biggest institutions in the us government . and it amprsquos all because of garbage . oneat the height of the war in iraq , us forces operated out of bases scattered across the country . joint base balad , a square mile outpost north of baghdad , was the second largest . home to , military personnel and contractors at its peak , the base was considered a vital hub for operations throughout iraq ampmdash largely thanks to two , foot runways and one of the best and biggest trauma centers in the region . balad also boasted a notorious array of amenities troops living in the makeshift mini city could dine on burger king or subway , play miniature golf or relax in an air conditioned movie theater , and browse for tvs or ipods at two different shopping centers . but when le roy arrived at balad in the summer of , the first thing he noticed was the smell . a noxious , overwhelming stench reminiscent of burning rubber . i was like , amplsquowow , that is something really bad , really really bad , amprsquo he recalls . soon , he also noticed the smoke plumes of it curling into the air at all hours of the day , sometimes lingering over the base as dark , foreboding clouds . that smoke , le roy soon learned , was coming from the same place as the stench that had first grabbed him balad amprsquos open air burn pit . plastic , styrofoam , electronics , metal cans , rubber tires , explosives , human feces , animal carcasses , asbestos insulation , and human body partsthe pit , a shallow excavation measuring a gargantuan acres , was used to incinerate every single piece of refuse generated by balad amprsquos thousands of residents . that meant seemingly innocuous items , like food scraps or paper . but it also meant plastic , styrofoam , electronics , metal cans , rubber tires , ammunition , explosives , human feces , animal carcasses , lithium batteries , asbestos insulation , and human body parts ampmdash all of it doused in jet fuel and lit on fire . the pit wasn amprsquot unique to balad open air burn pits , operated either by service members or contractors , were used to dispose of trash at bases all across iraq and afghanistan . i remember waking up with soot on me you amprsquod come out and barely see the sun because it was so dark from the smoke , says dan meyer , a year old air force veteran who lived adjacent to the burn pit at afghanistan amprsquos kandahar air base . meyer is now confined to a wheelchair because of inoperable tumors in his knees , and breathes using an oxygen tank due to an obstructive lung disease . it would just rain down on us . we always called it amplsquoblack snow . amprsquo it amprsquos no secret that open air burning poses health hazards . the environmental protection agency epa has long warned that burning waste ampmdash even organic refuse like brush or tree branches ampmdash is dangerous . burning items like plastic water bottles or computer parts is even worse . it amprsquos appalling , says anthony wexler , phd , director of the air quality research center at uc davis and the co author of a review of the military amprsquos air quality surveillance programs in iraq and afghanistan . from a health perspective , this kind of open pit burning , especially when you amprsquore burning everything under the sun , creates a real mess . that amprsquos because of both the size of the particulate matter emitted from the pits and its composition . smoke from any combustion process fills the air with what are known as fine particles or pm . . because they amprsquore so small ampmdash measuring . microns in diameter or less ampmdash these particles burrow more deeply into the lungs than larger airborne pollutants , and from there can leach into the bloodstream and circulate through the body . the military amprsquos burn pits emitted particulate matter laced with heavy metals and toxins ampmdash like sulfur dioxide , arsenic , dioxins , and hydrochloric acid ampmdash that are linked to serious health ailments . among them are chronic respiratory and cardiovascular problems , allergies , neurological conditions , several kinds of cancer , and weakened immune systems . le roy is convinced that burn pit exposure is behind his health problems , which he says first emerged a few weeks into that deployment . it started with a cough . i was coughing up this gunk stuff , like black phlegm that kept coming and coming , he says . the medical officer told me it was amplsquoiraqi crud amprsquo and it amprsquod go away in a few days . i thought , amplsquoi amprsquove been here a month , how much longer ? amprsquo the cough never improved , and upon his return to the us in , le roy found himself struggling to get answers from military physicians they brushed it off as bronchitis , asthma , even an anxiety disorder triggering physical symptoms . as a reservist , le roy also had a civilian job as a texas state trooper . but despite years in the role , his employers couldn amprsquot acquiesce to le roy amprsquos declining health he was put on leave from his job in september , two years after returning from iraq , for being unable to perform physically challenging tasks . map of joint base balad , iraqlater that same year , le roy was referred to dr . robert miller , a pulmonologist at vanderbilt university . dr . miller had met soldiers like le roy before ampmdash dozens of men and women with chronic respiratory problems following deployments to iraq or afghanistan ampmdash and he knew exactly what to do le roy soon underwent a lung biopsy , a procedure wherein surgeons make three incisions in the chest to remove tissue for examination . for le roy , much like dr . miller amprsquos other patients , the diagnosis was grim he suffered from constrictive bronchiolitis , an exceedingly rare , sometimes terminal lung disease . the military has long known , at least internally , that burn pits can harm human health . in a series of waste management guidelines published in , the dod cautioned that open air burning was not a safe option for waste disposal , and should only be used when there is no other alternative . there amprsquos no doubt that burn pits are an expedient , inexpensive way to dispose of trash ampmdash especially in the early phases of a conflict ampmdash but replacements like closed incinerators or landfills offer a longer term solution once a base is established . a few years into the wars in iraq and afghanistan , however , some military personnel warned that those replacements weren amprsquot being implemented . burn pits should only be used in the interim until other ways of disposal can be found , notes a memo from the now retired lt . colonel darrin curtis , then a bioenvironmental engineer with the air force . it is amazing that the burn pit at balad has been able to operate without restrictions over the past few years . another memo , this one from , warns of an increased risk of long term adverse health conditions caused by the burn pit at bagram air base in afghanistan . meanwhile , some civilian experts like dr . miller were seeing patients with worrisome medical problems . it began to look to me like a perfect storm , he recalls . we had one soldier after another , talented capable athletes , who couldn amprsquot pass their fitness tests anymore . but in , after he warned the military that dozens of his patients had constrictive bronchiolitis ampmdash which is almost always caused by toxic exposure in otherwise healthy people ampmdash a troubling thing happened physicians at fort campbell were directed to stop referring soldiers to dr . miller amprsquos nearby medical practice . they basically cut us off , he says . needless to say , it amprsquos clear that the dod hasn amprsquot embraced this as a significant problem . the dod doesn amprsquot see it that way . while representatives declined repeated requests for an in person interview , they did issue a written statement that reads , in part smoke exposure may cause acute symptoms in some people . most short term effects from exposure to particulate matter and burn pit smoke resolve after the individual leaves the deployed area . those conclusions are mostly based on air sampling tests , conducted by the military a handful of times in iraq and afghanistan . the most extensive survey , done by the army , collected hundreds of samples around balad in . study leaders concluded that airborne toxin levels were within acceptable standards and that no significant short or long term health risks and no elevated cancer risks are likely among personnel living near burn pits . the military has since repeatedly cited those conclusions in an effort to dismiss concerns about ailing soldiers . but the study amprsquos findings are essentially worthless , according to researchers with intimate knowledge of how they were reached . none of the sampling evaluated pm . , nor did it examine dust or ashes from in or around burn pits themselves . it amprsquos garbage in , garbage out , says dr . anthony szema , a pulmonologist at stony brook university who has treated soldiers and veterans who suspect they have burn pit related health woes . if you don amprsquot collect good data , it goes without saying that your results will be meaningless . and in a scathing senate hearing , lt . colonel curtis ampmdash who led the initial team behind the army study ampmdash admitted to serious flaws in both the sampling equipment and the study amprsquos techniques . i do not feel , he said , that the air samples reflected the true exposures that the service members had experienced . eventually , ongoing pleas from soldiers and doctors garnered attention from politicians and military leadership . in , the us government passed legislation to ban the open air burning of some trash , namely hazardous or biomedical waste , and us central command ordered the closure of burn pits on bases with more than soldiers , when the transition is practical . the military gradually replaced some burn pits with closed incinerators . but by many accounts , this didn amprsquot remedy the problem comprehensively or quickly enough . a report from the government accountability office found that some pits in iraq were still burning items , like plastics and styrofoam , banned by those new federal rules . and as recently as july of this year , four pits in afghanistan were still operating ampmdash even as closed incinerators built on two of those bases , at a cost of million , collect dust . i don amprsquot know how you can construct an argument that there amprsquos no reasonable alternative for the disposal of the waste when you have two unused incinerators on site , says representative tim bishop d ny , who has led congressional efforts to regulate burn pits . i simply don amprsquot know how you make that justification . other hazardsdust stormsfierce dust storms in iraq and afghanistan frequently swept through bases , littering everything in their wake with fine particulate matter . this microscopic dust acts as a scavenger , carrying an array of toxins picked up from various sources through the air . le roy has spent years asking himself that same question . he wants to think the best of the military he dreamt of serving since childhood , the military he enlisted in before even graduating from high school . but le roy can amprsquot shake the feeling that they let him , and his fellow soldiers , down . i took it personally , that they made a calculation about what was a cheaper and easier way to get rid of trash , versus the cost of someone amprsquos life , he says . here someone is worrying about mortars or ied attacks , and in the end , it was our own guys who got us . anatomy of a burn pitthroughout the wars in iraq and afghanistan , the us military often relied on burn pits to destroy the tons of trash generated at bases across both countries . these shallow excavations , sometimes several acres in size , emitted plumes of chemical laden smoke that some soldiers and veterans now blame for an array of health problems . on a day to day basis , each soldier in iraq and afghanistan generated around pounds of waste ampmdash which was often disposed of in burn pits . that trash included plastic water bottles , food scraps and packaging , paper , and clothing . beyond conventional trash , burn pits also disposed of equipment and gear unique to military bases . electronics , unspent munitions , rubber tires , batteries , paint and even entire humvees were all burned ampmdash usually with the help of jp jet fuel , which served as an accelerant . the byproducts of medical care , including needles , gloves , bandages , and pharmaceuticals , were reportedly burned in some pits . so too were human waste , dead animals , and according to some soldiers , even human body parts . based on what the pits burned , scientists deduce that they emitted toxins including hydrochloric acid , arsenic , formaldehyde , heavy metals , and dioxins . health effects associated with the inhalation of such substances include cancer , neurological defects , respiratory diseases , and organ degeneration . open air burn pits are much more hazardous than alternatives like closed incinerators or landfills . the pits tend to smolder at low temperatures over long periods , consistently releasing toxic plumes into the air . those plumes are comprised of fine particles that can travel over long distances and leech deeply into the lungs . twodaniel sullivan wasn amprsquot surprised when his younger brother decided to enlist in the marine corps . tom had always loved challenges , and in the marines he found a place where he could do that , daniel says . it was his calling . he loved it . but after tom returned from a deployment to iraq , the once hardy soldier soon faced a physical trial that proved insurmountable . tom amprsquos daily rectal bleeding , mysterious swelling , and spasms of agonizing pain grew progressively worse ampmdash and daniel became increasingly concerned that his brother amprsquos physicians weren amprsquot addressing the problems . he was right in , daniel found his year old brother lifeless in a chair , a bag of medical records at his side . tom would carry those records to every doctor amprsquos appointment , daniel recalls . because he just hoped that someone would finally look at them , and do something to make him better . but nobody did , despite the fact that tom was indeed suffering from a litany of serious health conditions an autopsy pinpointed bronchopneumonia as his official cause of death , though it was accompanied by widespread organ degeneration , along with colitis and cardiovascular disease . they basically said that amphellip if the pneumonia hadn amprsquot killed him , something else would have soon , daniel says . even more disturbing is that tom amprsquos death may have been preventable when daniel met with his brother amprsquos doctors , they admitted to brushing off tom amprsquos symptoms as being psychological in nature . this was a man at the pinnacle of health , whose body literally fell apart , daniel says . this should not have happened . the science is clear that toxins cause you to get sick . and there amprsquos a lot of people sick . tom amprsquos death instantly transformed daniel amprsquos life , turning him into a brash and outspoken advocate for the thousands of veterans he amprsquos convinced could face the same fate as his brother . in , after daniel amprsquos research revealed that other veterans who amprsquod deployed to the middle east suffered from similar symptoms to tom , he and his parents launched a nonprofit agency called the sergeant thomas joseph sullivan center . the organization is intent on promoting research and education about what soldiers were exposed to in iraq and afghanistan ampmdash including burn pit fumes , prevalent dust storms , toxic sand , and severe pollution ampmdash and ensuing ailments they refer to as post deployment illnesses . unraveling the impact of smoke exposure , which tom noted as a health concern on his post deployment survey , is now one of daniel amprsquos priorities . it amprsquos really only been over the past two years that i fully understood the health risks a burn pit could have , daniel says . but the science is clear that toxins cause you to get sick . and there amprsquos a lot of people sick . the sullivan center is headquartered in a windowless , one room office in washington , dc . for daniel , the center has become a full time job he dedicates his days to doing research , corresponding with civilian and governmental scientific experts , and trying to bring toxic exposures to the attention of members of congress and the general public . we need to acknowledge the toxic exposures in the middle east theater of operations , and that the diseases service members get afterwards are almost irrefutably connected to what they were exposed to , he says . if you were exposed to these chemicals , it amprsquos going to have an impact on your health , and it needs to be acknowledged , monitored , and treated . pushing for progress hasn amprsquot come easy . it can take dozens of phone calls for daniel to earn a single meeting with a congressional aide someone who , he hopes , will communicate his carefully prepared talking points back to their superior . correspondence with the military and the va can be even more frustrating email correspondences that first seem productive sometimes sour once daniel appeals for firmer answers and commitments . there are some roadblocks , but i like to think we have a dialogue , daniel says of his interactions with dod and va officials . you know , i like to keep that positive mindset . and already , the center counts one significant victory the helping veterans exposed to toxic chemicals act . having found political allies in representatives tim bishop and diana degette of colorado amprsquos first district , daniel and his father stood alongside both at a press conference earlier this year to propose funding three research centers , run by civilian scientists , that would study exposure related illnesses and offer comprehensive treatment for ailing veterans ampmdash exactly what daniel and his family had hoped for . though the act has yet to garner ample support on capitol hill , daniel is intent on seeing it through to the finish line . intense heat temperatures in the middle east , which regularly exceed degrees , are more than just unpleasant . for soldiers saddled with pounds of gear , stifling heat increases respiration rate and ups the tendency of deep breathing through the mouth ampmdash increasing the rate at which fine particles enter the lungs . if funding can go to these centers , he says , maybe we can finally start to understand these diseases coming out of theater , and get some real answers for what amprsquos happening to these soldiers . while daniel fights for veterans from the nation amprsquos capital , he amprsquos found fellow advocates more than , miles away . from their home in robstown , texas , le roy and rosie torres have for three years been working doggedly to help military families enduring medical crises similar to their own . the two have lobbied in dc , but the primary focus of their organization ampmdash called burn pits ampmdash is to document the afflictions plaguing individual veterans . after what le roy went through , i thought to myself , amplsquothese guys need somewhere to go , and we need a way to capture all of these symptoms , amprsquo rosie says . they can amprsquot just think they amprsquore the only ones with something wrong . burn pits operates as an online registry wherein veterans can document their deployments , what they were exposed to , and their current symptoms . the registry now counts over , entries , some of them submitted by family members of deceased service members . toxic sand the sand in the middle east contains a unique combination of heavy metals , bacteria , and fungi , according to some research . those heavy metals include known neurotoxins , and some of the bacteria can trigger or exacerbate illnesses like meningitis and cystic fibrosis . burn pits is more than just a hub for ailing veterans ampmdash the torres amprsquo think it could offer reams of useful information for scientists investigating exposure related health problems . one civilian researcher agrees . dr . szema at stony brook is now studying the patient information that burn pits has compiled . he doesn amprsquot have final results , but szema notes that several common themes have emerged nearly percent of respondents complain of respiratory problems , with some also suffering from cancer , gi distress , and migraine headaches , among other ailments . to szema , the findings and their root cause appear obvious . i can amprsquot say that any of his is really surprising to me , he says matter of factly . humans aren amprsquot supposed to breathe in smoke like this . there amprsquos no safe level of exposure . a handful of other studies about exposures in iraq and afghanistan are ongoing . unfortunately , scientists remain hampered by inadequate funding and a paucity of data . in large part , that amprsquos because the military didn amprsquot collect information on what each burn pit incinerated , when the pits were used , or which soldiers lived or worked close to them in fact , they didn amprsquot even keep a running list of operational burn pits until . of course , that kind of data collection is no easy task during a war , but some military officials have also made concerted efforts to sweep this thing under the rug by keeping available data to a minimum , says dr . cecile rose , a researcher at national jewish hospital in denver . rose is conducting two studies ampmdash one of them actually military funded ampmdash looking at exposures in iraq and afghanistan and subsequent health problems . scientists are really trapped in a data poor environment here , rose says . frankly , the likelihood that we will be able to really pin it down , what amprsquos causing these soldiers to get sick , is extremely unlikely . rosie and le roy , however , don amprsquot buy the claim that scientists can amprsquot offer them and other veterans any answers . not when they amprsquove got information from thousands of sick service members ampmdash with more entries being submitted to burn pits every single day . the answers are already there , rosie says . it doesn amprsquot take a scientist to look at these chemicals in the air , look at the symptoms , and say people were exposed , people are sick , people are going to die . they plan to keep the registry open , but rosie and le roy say they can amprsquot cope much longer with the emotional side effects of documenting diagnoses and deaths . some days i don amprsquot even want to open my computer , because there will be another entry to read , and then another , rosie says . it amprsquos like i amprsquom drowning , and i can amprsquot come up for air . i can amprsquot keep hearing that another soldier is sick , that another soldier has passed on . threefor daniel sullivan and the torres family , acknowledgment from capitol hill and answers from scientists are important ampmdash but they amprsquore also just a means to an end medical care and disability benefits for veterans who were exposed to airborne toxins in iraq and afghanistan . after all , political influence and conclusive research will be meaningless unless the va admits to a presumptive link between exposures during combat and subsequent health problems . the department has done it before , most notably for thousands of vietnam veterans who blamed exposure to the herbicide agent orange for devastating illnesses . but the fight for that acknowledgment took decades , and today amprsquos advocates are adamant that such a wait won amprsquot happen again . i amprsquom sure they would love to dwell in ignorance and bureaucracy for many more years , daniel says . but what we owe to veterans is the best care they can get . not a protracted battle just to get care in the first place . if i were filling this out , i would think it was a trap . i would think it was a trap and i wouldn amprsquot want to do it . now , in part because of the dogged efforts of daniel and the torres , it looks like that protracted battle might be averted the obama administration in january mandated the creation of a va registry for veterans of iraq and afghanistan . called the airborne hazards and open burn pit registry , the online questionnaire is meant to allow veterans to log exposures and note their health concerns for monitoring and scientific research . the information from that registry could ostensibly be used to develop a list of illnesses presumptively linked to toxic exposures ampmdash meaning a veteran with constrictive bronchiolitis , like le roy , would readily qualify for disability benefits . it shouldn amprsquot have had to take an act of congress , or the va getting pushed against a brick wall , rosie says of the registry , which she lobbied for on capitol hill in . but we amprsquoll take it . we want to work with them to make sure this is done right . but when the va in july released a draft version of the questionnaire , scientists and advocates alike voiced significant concerns . overall , they worried that the agency ampmdash already bogged down by costs associated with post traumatic stress and traumatic brain injuries ampmdash was trying to disprove that toxic exposures might be a third serious health repercussion of the wars in iraq and afghanistan . i think it amprsquos important that such a questionnaire meets at least a basic standard for occupational medicine , dr . miller said at the time . this one does not . for dr . miller , that standard means offering space for veterans to self report important information such as exposures , symptoms , doctor amprsquos appointments , and relevant medical prescriptions . but the survey , primarily in multiple choice form , instead offered a rigid framework that threatened to miss or exclude some ailing participants whose history or conditions didn amprsquot fit tidily inside a checkbox . daniel sullivan , after consulting with several scientists for their input , had a problem with more than just checkboxes . the questionnaire is an insult , he said . it amprsquos calculated in a way to get information to make a case that these illnesses are not exposure related . the draft included dozens of questions about non combat exposures , including whether or not veterans ever smoked , worked in dusty offices , or had hobbies ampmdash like woodworking or pottery glazing ampmdash that might have exposed them to airborne hazards . in fact , such questions were more extensive than those about a veteran amprsquos tours of duty . on a checklist asking about current illnesses , constrictive bronchiolitis was omitted . and then there was this single question on the survey amprsquos eighth page during your pre deployment , deployment , or post deployment integration period , did you experience an emotional event that you would consider very stressful ? after seeing his own brother die when doctors dismissed his symptoms as psychological , daniel sullivan found that unforgivable . when viewed in the context of what happened to my brother , and other people amphellip this looks like an intentional effort to perpetuate the myth of these diseases being psychosomatic , he says . if i were filling this out , i would think it was a trap . i would think it was a trap and i wouldn amprsquot want to do it . so daniel sullivan and the torres fought back . both submitted comprehensive critiques of the survey draft to the va office of public health , which led the survey amprsquos development . daniel even included letters from scientists ampmdash including dr . miller ampmdash to bolster the merit of his own statements . and in a heartening development , they won the va in september released an amended version of the survey that includes significant changes . most importantly , constrictive bronchiolitis has been added , and mentions of psychological stress removed . these changes , daniel hopes , signify a shift away from what he describes as the polarizing divide that has for decades characterized the relationship between advocates who ask for change amphellip and those officials who have the power to make those changes . the survey might now collect more valuable data , but whether that information is ever analyzed and acted on remains another question ampmdash one highlighted by the recent resignation of a top va epidemiologist . in december of , dr . steven coughlin abruptly quit his job with the va office of public health over what he describes as serious ethical concerns with regards to ongoing va studies . more specifically , coughlin alleges that his va colleagues often suppressed or changed valuable data about the health of veterans from oif , oef and the gulf war . in one specific instance , he says he was ordered to conceal data from the va amprsquos new generation study ampmdash a long term questionnaire of , oif and oef veterans ampmdash that asked about burn pit proximity , potential airborne exposures , and related health woes . local pollution lax regulations in iraq and afghanistan mean higher rates of industrial pollution , not to mention that both countries still rely on leaded gasoline ampmdash which emits heavy metals including arsenic , lead , cadmium , and mercury . i was being told amplsquodon amprsquot look at the data , we amprsquore not going to look at the data closely , amprsquo coughlin says , adding that he was threatened with disciplinary action if he didn amprsquot abide the command . it was just an untenable position for me , because what my supervisors were doing was greatly unethical . where this latest survey is concerned , coughlin isn amprsquot optimistic . he describes the changes as positive , but also notes that the va doesn amprsquot exactly boast a legacy of excellence . the va often has difficulty doing the right thing when it comes to examining environmental health hazards , he writes in an email to the verge . which makes politicians like tim bishop , and advocates like rosie , le roy , and daniel , all the more important . continued congressional oversight and external peer review are essential , coughlin warns , in order to keep the va accountable . four we amprsquore not going to shut up . we amprsquore not going to go away . rosie is resolute in that mantra , and vows that she and le roy don amprsquot need a whistleblower , or va data , to tell them what they already know thousands of veterans are sick , an untold number are at risk , and the military and va are paying lip service to a burgeoning crisis . the next agent orange , they worry , is already here . we have to keep going , because time is of the essence for these veterans , rosie adds . how many more need to get sick ? how many more need to pass away ? i just want to tell the government amphellip to do something . after being diagnosed with constrictive bronchiolitis in , le roy was permanently dismissed from his state trooper job ampmdash leaving him unemployed . medical bills constantly threaten to overwhelm the family amprsquos mortgage payments , and they amprsquove already once been forced to vacate their home . still , there amprsquos no indication that life for the torres will get any better after a protracted dispute with the va , the pair thought they amprsquod achieved a minor victory when the agency agreed to reimburse le roy amprsquos cross country visits to dr . miller . months later , rosie learned that the va had lost their paperwork . they amprsquoll need to start over . meanwhile , le roy is back in the hospital his headaches are coming more frequently now , and doctors worry that a mysterious lesion on his brain amprsquos left frontal lobe might somehow be responsible . but if you ask rosie and le roy , they amprsquoll still tell you they amprsquore among the lucky ones . he is alive , after all , when service members like tom sullivan aren amprsquot . even after experiencing firsthand the lifelong toll that war can impose , and grappling with how he and other veterans are being treated upon their return , le roy vows that he amprsquoll never regret having served . in fact , he would go to iraq all over again ampmdash even knowing what he does now . they may have taken my health , but they can amprsquot take what i stand for , le roy says . i will be a patriot until the day that i die . until they hang that flag on my coffin , i will continue to honor this country . editor joseph l . flatley front end designer scott kellum designer james chae video credits director editor sam thonis editorial lead katie drummond producer erin lee carr feature editors joseph l . flatley , thomas houston camera ryan manning , sam thonis photography credits dod photo by sgt . jason w . fudge , u . s . marine corps . photo by nicolas henderson . dod photo by cpl . alec kleinsmith , u . s . marine corps . dod photo by staff sgt . akeba r . lawrence , u . s . air force . dod photo by lance cpl . justin d . loya , u . s . marine corps . dod photo by tech . sgt . marvin preston , u . s . air force . dod photo by senior airman julianne showalter , u . s . air force . dod photo by airman st class jonathan snyder , u . s . air force . the verge lt ! j function var s skrollr . init smoothscrolling true j button intro . click function j div sidebar . addclass active j div . video . click function if j this . hasclass active j this . removeclass active else j this . addclass active j div . video . active . click function j header header . videobg zindex , scale true , mp 	 in san francisco amprsquos upscale pacific heights neighborhood , some students from kindergarten to the eighth grade attend classes at the private san francisco waldorf school . on any given afternoon outside of the cheerful , modern white building , parents congregate to wait for their kids . chit chat includes the typical fodder like play dates and birthdays , or who was cast in the school play . but occasionally the topic of illness arises ampmdash which is where things can take a turn towards the atypical . you might , for instance , hear about ampldquochicken pox parties , amprdquo where healthy kids come over to sick kids amprsquo houses to catch the disease . of course , there amprsquos a vaccine for chicken pox . it amprsquos been available since , and is part of every state amprsquos recommended vaccine schedule , which the majority of us children receive . but sf waldorf represents an unusual population only percent of incoming kindergarteners are up to date on all their vaccinations , one of the lowest rates in san francisco for a school of its size and vastly lower than the national average of percent . which puts sf waldorf firmly in the crosshairs of a national debate . a vast minority of parents across the country , around . percent , opt out of vaccines by citing either religious or philosophical reasons . and these non vaccinators have , in recent years , been the subject of intense media scrutiny . in part , you can blame a former playboy bunny jenny mccarthy , who abc recently hired as a new host on the view , has waged an ardent , vocal campaign against ampldquotoxins amprdquo in vaccines that she believes were responsible for causing her son amprsquos autism . recent outbreaks of preventable illnesses have only added more fuel to the fire . this year , states have reported cases of measles , making the second worst year for the disease since . in august , the illness struck people linked to a single texas megachurch that eschewed vaccinations . and just last week , a new study concluded that vaccine refusals were largely to blame for a outbreak of whooping cough in california . anti vaccinators are typically branded as na ampiumlve simpletons , while pro vaccinators are slammed as being reactionary reductionists the issue of vaccination invariably provokes polarized debates , often manifesting in online comment sections and on twitter and facebook . often , the levels of savagery and vitriol are on par with those surrounding debates about abortion and gun control . anti vaccinators are typically branded as na ampiumlve simpletons , while pro vaccinators are slammed as being reactionary reductionists . the reality , like most things , is more nuanced . at the sf waldorf school parents are educated , liberal leaning , wealthy enough to afford the , a year for kindergarten , and often working in technology , law , and other white collar professions that demand critical thinking skills . but some of them are also treating flawed , precarious medical advice as gospel ampmdash and disregarding the health of an entire community in so doing . looking at the decisions of these parents to stray from standard medical advice , and also at the community of doctors and educators who support them , provides a unique window into one of our country amprsquos most taboo topics . amplsquonot fully proven on some level amprsquowhen rebecca and mike became pregnant with their daughter , laura , the issue of whether to give her the standard childhood vaccinations seemed like a choice between life and death . but not in the way you might assume . rebecca , who asked that her name and the names of her family members be changed , has a family history of autoimmune dysfunction . her father died of scleroderma , and her sister suffered from pxe ampmdash both rare but serious diseases that manifest in the skin . rebecca was afraid that vaccines , which by design stimulate the body amprsquos immune response , might unintentionally trigger a disease that laura may have been predisposed to inherit . ampldquoi was afraid that her immune system was at risk of reacting against her , amprdquo rebecca says . ampldquoand my questions about that were not answered in a convincing way by the medical establishment . amprdquo it amprsquos my responsibility to be very vigilant . rebecca and mike didn amprsquot vaccinate laura for anything . when she enrolled at sf waldorf , they signed what is known as a ampldquopersonal belief exemption amprdquo or a pbe ampmdash a piece of paperwork that allows parents to opt out of some or all of the vaccines required by the state for entrance into kindergarten . in the us , states offer pbes and offer exemptions based on religion . laura amprsquos parents say they did not take the decision lightly . ampldquoas someone who has chosen a different path , it amprsquos my responsibility to be very vigilant , amprdquo rebecca says . at the slightest sign of illness , her daughter goes right to bed , is fed bone broth , and stays there . rebecca doesn amprsquot take laura on trips to countries with high incidence of serious disease , like polio or measles . this year , the united states has had cases of measles . by contrast , the republic of georgia had , . health concerns weren amprsquot the only factor behind rebecca amprsquos decision she amprsquos also suspicious about the true motives of pharmaceutical companies that profit from the sale of vaccines . ampldquoit makes it hard to feel there are neutral , trustworthy sources of information , amprdquo she says . rebecca amprsquos fears about government and big pharma collusion , along with her theory that vaccines trigger autoimmune disorders , are not uncommon among her fellow parents at sf waldorf . although the more infamous fear that vaccines cause autism isn amprsquot as much of a concern more about that in a minute , parents do worry that the shots might trigger allergies , asthma , and even type diabetes . waldorf is an educational system developed by rudolf steiner , an early th century austrian philosopher , which espouses to create well rounded children through experiential learning and ampldquoage appropriate amprdquo content . children are taught the arts and handicrafts , like woodworking and weaving , along with their academic subjects . the use of computer and tv screens at sf waldorf is , if not forbidden , strongly disfavored ampmdash so no angry birds or mickey mouse , even at home . team sports are discouraged until the sixth grade . there is nothing intrinsically waldorfian about opting out of vaccines , and the school takes no official stance on the issue . in fact , several parents and school administrators complained that connecting the issue with the school was unfair and misleading , and objected to the premise of this story . and yet , it is true that sf waldorf tends to attract parents who trend towards organic food and alternative health care ampmdash acupuncture , herbal medicine , and homeopathy ampmdash and who prescribe to the adage of the body as temple . for some of them , vaccines are ampmdash at best ampmdash a necessary evil . and at worst , they amprsquore just evil . ampldquoi was very influenced by naturopathic medicine , amprdquo says john , an sf waldorf parent who also asked that his name be changed . ampldquothey talk about vaccines are going to be very strong in supplanting the body amprsquos natural ability to develop immunity . amprdquo john and his wife did vaccinate against polio , measles , mumps , and rubella , but they opted out of chicken pox and flu vaccines for their two kids . ampldquothey should still be exposed to some things , amprdquo john says . both of his children partook in chicken pox parties they were sent to the home of a child with the illness , shared a lollipop , and soon after came down with chicken pox themselves . parents like john vaccinate selectively , while other parents space shots out rather than follow the vaccination schedule prescribed by the centers for disease control and prevention cdc . others delay vaccinations by several years , believing the more mature their kids amprsquo immune systems are , the better they amprsquoll be able to withstand the onslaught of foreign agents . ampldquoi delayed vaccinations until my kids were crawling , amprdquo says jane , an sf waldorf parent with three children . ampldquoi believed that while my children were cocooned in the nice little lair of my sling that they didn amprsquot need vaccinations , and if there was any potential for some kind of injury that it was just better to wait . amprdquo jane amprsquos kids are now fully vaccinated . by skipping or delaying vaccinations , parents put their own kids ampmdash as well as fellow sf waldorf students and community members ampmdash at risk of serious illness . but the school ampldquosupports the parents amprsquo right to choose , amprdquo says cory powers , the grade school administrative coordinator at sf waldorf . administrators also take great pains , powers adds , to communicate that parents who opt out of vaccinations should prepare for heavy responsibilities someone infected with measles will face a minimum day quarantine , as recommended by the san francisco department of public health . that amprsquos a lot of days to take off work to care for a sick kid . ampldquowhen the parent comes and signs a personal belief exemption , we tell them that if you make that choice , it amprsquos not a frivolous or casual one , amprdquo powers says . but for the most part , she notes , parents who choose to skip or delay vaccinations are the opposite of frivolous . rather , she describes them as ampldquochoosing extremely consciously and holistically . amprdquo ampldquothese are people who are also questioning gmos , amprdquo powers says . ampldquothings that are not fully proven on some level . amprdquowhat science saysbut there amprsquos a big difference between not eating gmos and not getting a vaccine . if i don amprsquot eat a corn chip at my local taqueria because i have doubts about the lack of research on gmos and believe it amprsquos because science and the government are in monsanto amprsquos pocket , i amprsquom not going to put my dining companions at risk of disease . but if i decide not to vaccinate my kid , i make him a potential carrier . he may be able to fight off measles , mumps , rubella , and other illnesses ampmdash but what if he spreads a disease to somebody who , for whatever reason , isn amprsquot so lucky ? if i decide not to vaccinate my kid , i make that kid a potential carriermuch like any medication , vaccines aren amprsquot percent effective or percent safe . even the cdc spells this out right on its website . but they exist and are widely used because the potential harms of not using them are far greater than any associated hazard . take , for instance , the mmr measles , mumps , rubella vaccine . the cdc estimates that for every , children in a developed nation who get measles , ampndash will die . by comparison , for every , ampndash , cases of mmr vaccination , the cdc estimates there will be a ampldquosmall increased risk amprdquo of febrile seizures among children under seven . the medical establishment , to date , has found no evidence of neurological or autoimmune disorders having been caused by vaccines . the most famous claim , that the mmr vaccine causes autism , was intensively studied and debunked . andrew wakefield , the british surgeon behind the original hypothesis , was long ago discredited and stripped of his medical license . other parents have worried that thiomersal , a preservative containing mercury that was used in vaccines until , causes autism . the preservative was removed from most vaccines as a purely precautionary measure , and subsequent studies have failed to find a shred of evidence for the thiomersal ampndashautism link . chicken pox parties also lack medical backing . the idea that it amprsquos healthier to become immune by catching an illness , rather than getting a vaccine , isn amprsquot supported by scientific research . ampldquothere is absolutely no evidence for ampmdash good science or any theoretical evidence for ampmdash the idea that a natural infection makes your body stronger , amprdquo says john swartzberg , a clinical professor at the uc berkeley school of public health . ampldquonatural infection challenges the body with a lot more foreign protein than a vaccine , so it amprsquoll put a lot more stress on the body . becoming very ill is not good for the body . amprdquobut decades of research , statistics , and ongoing assurances from scientists and government agencies still can amprsquot convince some parents . politicians can be bought , the thinking goes . the peer review system in scientific journals is corrupted by big pharma influence . scientists aren amprsquot studying vaccines hard enough , because the money lies in convincing the public that they amprsquore safe when they amprsquore actually not . ampldquoit becomes a question of faith , amprdquo says colin phipps , a chiropractor in san francisco who doesn amprsquot believe in vaccines and speaks on panels about the topic . ampldquodo you have faith in the cdc ? the fda ? big pharma ? science not driven by profit or motive ? do politicians have our best intentions at heart ? or do you have faith that the body is built to deal with pathogens in the universe ? amprdquofor at least some physicians in san francisco , addressing the vaccination fears of parents has become a difficult balancing act . ampldquoi think vaccines have become a scapegoat for our fears about medicine , the government , and mistrust of authority , amprdquo says dr . julia getzelman , whose pediatric practice attracts some vaccine skeptics . getzelman perceives vaccines as ampldquoone of the th century amprsquos greatest health successes , amprdquo and considers the concerns of parents to be ampldquonebulous amprdquo in nature . but that doesn amprsquot mean she forces vaccines on her patients some of the children getzelman sees follow an amended vaccine schedule , one that amprsquos contrary to cdc recommendations . ampldquonobody in the mainstream supports the alternative vaccine schedule ampmdash there amprsquos no science behind it , amprdquo getzelman admits . ampldquobut when you amprsquore on the front line of trying to individualize care , it doesn amprsquot necessarily always fit with the mainstream . amprdquothe guy in the iron lungin america , we live in a pax romana with regards to disease . it might not seem that way sometimes , what with our rising rates of autism , cancer , kids dying from peanut allergies , and so on . but as recently as years ago , there were no preventative measures for mumps , which can make men sterile . or rubella , which can cause serious birth defects if contracted by a pregnant woman in her first trimester . measles killed hundreds of people a year , and hospitalized percent of those who caught it ampmdash most of them children . those who grew up in the s remember going to the county fair and gawking at ampldquothe guy in the iron lung amprdquo paralyzed from polio . the specter of disease was real and present . today , we have what amprsquos known as ampldquoherd immunity . amprdquo that is , enough people have been vaccinated that they protect the unvaccinated , or those whose vaccinations fail . the chances of an american getting these formerly common childhood illnesses are very slim . the chances of dying from them are even slimmer . not because the diseases aren amprsquot serious , but because they aren amprsquot nearly as prevalent . in fact , herd immunity is actually why some parents don amprsquot vaccinate . ampldquowhen you think of it that way , it amprsquos hard to want to get vaccinated when you hear anecdotally about things going wrong from vaccines , amprdquo says dr . justin davis , a san francisco physician . time and time again , you get the message rewards come to those who think out of the boxdavis also points out an irony he perceives among his patients . many of them consider themselves ampldquoglobal participants amprdquo ampmdash they bike , recycle , and generally take proactive measures to protect the environment . but when it comes to vaccines and immunity , these parents utilize resources more selfishly . he is somewhat sanguine about this . ampldquoi take longer showers than i should , and i drive a car and take airplanes . who am i to say how people of privilege should choose to use the resources available to them ? amprdquo davis says . of course , there amprsquos an inherent problem with that position ampldquoif everybody were to opt out of vaccinations , amprdquo he admits , ampldquothere would be huge ramifications . amprdquoone of the tenets of a waldorf education is to teach self reliance , independence , and critical thinking skills . ampldquothey amprsquore saying , be educated before you just go along with the herd , amprdquo says one parent . clearly , this same type of impulse also leads some parents to question the status quo with regards to vaccines . ampldquopeople on the pro vaccinations side think that people who don amprsquot vaccinate , or vaccinate selectively , are crazy and uninformed , amprdquo says john , the parent whose kids got chicken pox from the lollipop . ampldquoi think that the people who make these decisions are actually the most well informed parents , and they amprsquore generally working with their healthcare providers to make these decisions . amprdquoquestioning authority is an impulse that can often serve you well . and that truth is held in particularly high regard in the bay area . after all , this is the land where apple computer was born and ampldquothink different amprdquo became a mantra . where the expression ampldquodisruption amprdquo became the tech term du jour to describe companies that were either breaking or skirting the law . where bradley manning was elected grand marshal of the san francisco gay pride parade . time and time again , you get the message rewards come to those who think out of the box . but when well educated , high performing people choose to engage in risky , self serving medical behavior , it also begs the question what made them feel so alienated from mainstream western medicine to begin with ? the answer , according to vaccine advocate dr . paul offit , largely comes down to how medical practitioners are perceived . in his takedown of alternative medicine , do you believe in magic , he writes ampldquopractitioners of modern medicine can appear callous and insensitive . patients feel more like a number than a person . that amprsquos where alternative healers come in they provide individual care , because they care amphellip where modern medicine is spiritless and technological amphellip alternative medicine is spiritual and meaningful . amprdquoit is not surprising that a class of person deeply involved in searching for and expressing their own individual uniqueness ampmdash and that of their children ampmdash would be turned off by a cookie cutter approach to health . and it amprsquos not surprising that in their disaffection , they amprsquod turn away and seek , as one parent put it , ampldquoother modalities . amprdquoand that amprsquos when the doubts begin to creep in . 	 here amprsquos a little secret about los angeles , haters the traffic isn amprsquot that bad . the worst thing about driving in la is trying to stay focused on the road amidst the most beautiful and complex scenery ever created by the dual forces of nature and technology . it amprsquos a sprawling network of neighborhoods and mountains and asphalt that inspires feelings of awe , and delightful regret that no one person can ever truly understand the depth of its character . that amprsquos how i felt when i moved here three years ago , anyway , and it amprsquos the near exact emulation of this emotion that makes grand theft auto v the greatest video game that has ever existed . the action unfolds in a fictional city called los santos , and it isn amprsquot an exact replica of la ampmdash that amprsquos a simulation too banal to sell to ampndash year old men . it amprsquos more of a late night cheeseburger dorito satisfying because it amprsquos delicious , but transcendentally entertaining because it tastes exactly like a cheeseburger you amprsquod eat late at night . but we don amprsquot eat our games in . we control caricatures in a universe limited only by a developer amprsquos budget ampmdashrockstar games allocated around a quarter billion dollars for gta v , which makes it the most expensive game ever produced . that amprsquos wild , but what amprsquos truly bonkers is that around half of that went to marketing , leaving the programmers with a mere fraction of a typical hollywood budget to build a high functioning alternate reality an abridged city that contains enough recognizable buildings , neighborhoods , and freeways to make it feel unmistakably angeleno . the uncanny canyon of a million ad budget at work in downtown lasmokin amprsquo and rollin amprsquosmokin amprsquo and rollin ampldquothe light here ! it looks like . . . butter ! amprdquo david lynch on los angelesi will never forget the first time i smoked weed with franklin clinton . he amprsquos the most relatable character in los santos a working class hustler trying to get out of his aunt amprsquos house in the ghetto with a simple set of morals , clear headed except when he sits in front of the tv and smokes a blunt . as someone whose medical marijuana is never very far away from his xbox controller , i couldn amprsquot resist the urge to spark up after pressing left on the d pad , commanding franklin through the same motions . we puffed together , we wondered about the strength of the herb together , we had the same slow realization that we were actually pretty stoned together , and later we both enjoyed a buttery sunset together ampmdash although i saw mine through a picture window behind an led screen , and franklin saw his in the full glory of his actual hometown . the more time i spent driving through los santos , the more enamored i became of the light rendering in gta v . it amprsquos a simulation as supple as a well oiled baseball glove rays of sun rake yawningly across the horizon of a vinewood hills infinity pool , glint blindingly off of reflective skyscrapers , and disappear flatly into the curves of matte black muscle cars , doing more to transport you into the game amprsquos atmosphere than any other piece of programming . driving toward a sunsetty redondo beach last week my girlfriend cocked her head quizzically and asked , ampldquoare we here , or are we in the game ? amprdquoof all the colorful and intricately programmed characters in los santos , there is one that rises above to establish himself as the most emotionally complete ampmdash a stunning feat for a snot rocketing speed freak with ampldquocut here amprdquo tattooed above a dotted line on his neck . ampldquothis is not a game to me ! amprdquo trevor phillips on lifeso i fell in love with a meth cooking murdererso i fell in love with a meth cooking murdererif you amprsquove ever seen wet hot american summer , you amprsquoll no doubt remember the muse for trevor philips amprsquo character sketch gene , a perpetually stained , war ravaged summer camp cook played masterfully by christopher meloni of law and order svu fame . the anarcho libertarian philips mediates the most indelible scenes of the game he amprsquos always waking up in varying degrees of undress in locales like a shit stained pig stall , the vanilla unicorn strip club , or on a catalina esque beach surrounded by dead bodies screaming ampldquoit wasn amprsquot me ! amprdquo in a hugely entertaining opening scene that plays out like a cross between sons of anarchy and breaking bad , trevor establishes tyranny over the meth trade in sandy shores which is a thinly veiled palm desert by mowing down the lost motorcycle club amprsquos trailer park , then moving on to torch a rival producers amprsquo lab ampmdash a ramshackle house populated by scores of inbred brothers . you almost want to reach through the tv and hug the script writers for simultaneously decimating baseless notions of hipsterdomlike the best characters in contemporary television , trevor amprsquos never ending campaign of shock and awe is complemented by a constantly evolving moral compass and a genuine desire for the betterment of the world around him , even if it means burning it all to the ground . as a result , he emerges as the most reliable narrator in all of gta v . he might find a human eyelid or two in his rancid lunchtime stew , but he amprsquos also the one who discovers drywall packed into a brick of false cocaine , protecting the crew from a bad deal . he amprsquoll tear floyd amprsquos love life apart spiritually and physically on tuesday , but on wednesday he amprsquoll act as an effective marriage counselor for michael de santa on a long drive through the mountains . these commutes to far flung mission locations can take up to minutes ampmdash an eternity in game time . they amprsquod become an exercise in drudgery if it weren amprsquot for the achingly beautiful coastal scenery whizzing by , coupled with rockstar amprsquos use of these moments to bring us deeper into the emotional arc of the characters ampmdash a kind of built in cutscene scripted as a conversation between passengers . as michael and trevor make their way from southern los santos all the way to north blaine county , an analytical michael admits that he amprsquos ampldquobeen wondering about some of trevor amprsquos lifestyle choices lately amphellip the weird music , the niche drugs , amprdquo and a wardrobe that amprsquos ampldquothe opposite of fashion amphellip trevor ! amprdquo he posits like a shrink on the edge of a massive revelation , ampldquoyou amprsquore amphellip a hipster ! amprdquo it amprsquos an amazingly well scripted exchange ampldquoi am not a fucking hipster ! amprdquo is the predictable reply , ampldquoi eat hipsters for lunch ! amprdquo when michael remarks that ampldquohipsters hate being called hipsters , amprdquo you almost want to reach through the tv and hug the script writers for simultaneously decimating baseless notions of hipsterdom , and for the equally irritating new york times linkbait of what the concept may or may not mean . as the revealing journey to east paleto concludes , michael gives trevor the credit he deserves ampldquoyou amprsquore what a hipster aspires to be . you amprsquore the proto hipster . amprdquo it amprsquos one of the few conversations in which trevor doesn amprsquot get the last word . ampldquofamily work is more expensive . amprdquo ampldquodoubled ? amprdquo ampldquono . squared . amprdquolook who s talking vlook who s talking vbad sound design can ruin a good script in any medium , and games have historically gotten everything ampmdash from voice acting to interaction programming to compression levels ampmdash dismally wrong . but gta v represents a leap forward in vocalization akin to the impact that m a s h had on television writing . instead of existing in a one dimensional plane , as almost no real speech does , characters react to the events around them a tightly woven programming architecture finds people talking over one another and reacting to the people around them in real time . if michael de santa smashes into a tree while his son is explaining the art of trolling , jimmy will pause his story to tell dad that he amprsquos a fucking maniac , and resume the conversation after they amprsquore back on the road . i wondered had a video game just made me feel productive ? i often found myself testing the boundaries of interaction programming , which became kind of a mini game in itself . after a botched robbery attempt on an armored vehicle , i remembered it had been a while since michael had checked in with his omnipresent therapist dr . friedlander ampmdash so i gave him a call as i was running from the cops , my character using one arm to hold the phone up to his ear and the other elbow to smash the window of a parked hatchback . after a successful carjacking , he pressed the phone to his shoulder with the side of his face , freeing both hands to grab the wheel at and o amprsquoclock ampmdash soon i had evaded the cops , finished my session , and met my contact at the film lot on time . as we discussed my role as an associate producer in our new project , i wondered had a video game just made me feel productive ? michael amprsquos frenzied contribution to the vinewood economy is part of a larger arc that sees the central character trying to regain the trust of his estranged family he amprsquos on a mission to prove to them that he amprsquos more than just a clever thug . it amprsquos a smooth meta move for rockstar as well while critics berate its macho hyperviolence with the knee jerk moral certitude of tipper gore on mortal kombat , anyone who amprsquos invested a few days in the game will learn that grand theft auto is about far more than just , you know , grand theft auto . nuclear familynuclear familyit amprsquos not like boosting whips isn amprsquot just as important as it was in the first gta . but michael is the kind of man that owns a book called dadnaissance , and his renewed obligations to his ex stripper wife amanda license plate am nd and their millennial spawn jimmy and tracey form a series of missions that are as psychotic as they are entertaining . it amprsquos not like boosting whips isn amprsquot just as important as it was in the first gtalike a prolific instigator of niche porn titles , amanda has a penchant for fucking her instructors ampmdash first her tennis coach , and later a ponytailed , toe shoe wearing latin yogi called fabian . to prove his alpha male domination in all things physical , michael can challenge his not so doting wife in an athletic mini game that amprsquos just as complex as top spin or a controller bending yoga session that requires all the dexterity of a wii fit game . tracey amprsquos misguided quest for fame finds her at the beck and call of yet another ponytailed douchebag , a seacrestian talent show host called lazlow . after a blackmail mission fails to keep the star making predator away from his daughter , michael turns to the tattoo parlor to create a more indelible impression ampmdash rockstar raises the bar in the ampldquofulfilling disgusting ambitions of teenage males amprdquo game by allowing the player to tattoo a giant cock and balls on an enemy amprsquos back . rockstar raises the bar in the ampldquofulfilling disgusting ambitions of teenage males amprdquo gameand then there amprsquos jimmy any father and son struggle in an attempt to understand one another , but when dad amprsquos a high level thief and junior amprsquos an xbox addicted wigger with a neck tattoo that reads ampldquoentitled , amprdquo the struggle is exponentially stranger . michael tries to gain bonding points by giving jimmy a ride to buy weed from a dealer who works at burger stop , but he also brings out a ampldquospecial milkshake amprdquo that he shares with his dad , in a kind of cute attempt at togetherness . but there amprsquos something far weirder than thc in the shake ampmdash michael gets too wasted to drive home and ends up getting abducted and probed by hallucinated aliens . he escapes by skydiving out of their vessel , descending through an acid warped sky over los santos and eventually waking up in his undies on a random vinewood lawn . it amprsquos a psychedelic ride more accurate than anything in enter the void and , as an immersive experience , far more expressive than anything that could be felt in a simple film . protip jumpstart your love life by bashing the yogi amprsquos head in with an ifruit laptopdon amprsquot mess this upclose encounters of a dedicated fatherit amprsquos complicatedblurred linesblurred linesone of the most important artistic advantages of creating a painstakingly detailed universe from scratch is the writers amprsquo ability to make cultural observations about the modern condition that wouldn amprsquot be possible in a less developed landscape . there are scores of moments that articulate my own fascination with the private lives of humans in ways i never could by simply writing words on a page . my favorite is the email that michael gets after reconnecting with his social media obsessed daughter pictured above . the stupid spelling , the extraneous punctuation , the teenage aversion to formal communication amphellip they amprsquore all details of tracey amprsquos personality we could have surmised , but rockstar uses the moment to showcase another subtly amazing act in the human history of los santos . i could go on and on the satirical yet better than real life radio stations hosted by gilles peterson , flying lotus , and lee ampldquoscratch amprdquo perry complete with ads hawking celebrity branded headphones and medical cocaine . the ifruit app on your real world device that allows you to train franklin amprsquos pit bull and customize your cars , and which spawned a clutch of spyware fakes in the google play store . there amprsquos the bawsaq stock market that you can invest in through a real world web browser , the slowly creeping pause music reminiscent of daft punk amprsquos tron legacy score . it amprsquos a never ending playground of unparalleled construction that demands answers to philosophical inquiries we amprsquove never before needed to entertain . the most beautiful spoiler alert you amprsquoll see all weekgta xxviigta xxviibecause i amprsquom the owner of a first gen xbox with a failure prone disc drive , i installed the game on a usb enabled microsd card . if you haven amprsquot seen one before , it amprsquos a laughably small piece of silicon if all of los santos fits onto a chip smaller than my pinky nail in , what , exactly , are the chances that we aren amprsquot living in a period piece programmed by rockstar mars in ? gta v has given me the greatest proof yet that those odds are infinitely slim ampmdash i am not a scientist , but as a gamer i can see that what i just finished playing transcends traditional definitions of a game . at its core , this is an experiential turing test that knocks on all the right doors of a matrix flavored singularity . if that makes me a technocratic solipsist , so be it . i amprsquom just glad rockstar amprsquos budget has gone up enough in , years to create a sunset as beautiful as the one i see every day out my window ampmdash even if it amprsquos probably just an exquisitely rendered simulation . 	 do you remember second life ? set up by developer linden lab in , it was the faithful replication of our modern world where whoring , drinking , and fighting were acceptable . it was the place where big brands moved in as neighbors and hawked you their wares online . for many , it was the future ampmdash our lives were going to be lived online , as avatars represented us in nightclubs , bedrooms , and banks made of pixels and code . in the mid s , every self respecting media outlet sent reporters to the second life world to cover the parallel universe beat . the bbc , now bloomberg businessweek , and nbc nightly news all devoted time and coverage to the phenomenon . amazon , american apparel , and disney set up shop in second life , aiming to capitalize on the momentum it was building ampmdash and to play to the in world consumer base , which at one point in boasted a gdp of million . of course , stratospheric growth doesn amprsquot continue forever , and when the universe amprsquos expansion slowed and the novelty of people living parallel lives wore off , the media moved on . so did businesses ampmdash but not users . linden lab doesn amprsquot share historical user figures , but it says the population of second life has been relatively stable for a number of years . you might not have heard a peep about it since the halcyon days of , but that doesn amprsquot mean second life has gone away . far from it this past june it celebrated its th birthday , and it is still a strong community . a million active users still log on and inhabit the world every month , and , newbies drop into the community every day to see what second life is about . i was one of them , and i found out that just because second life is no longer under the glare of the media amprsquos spotlight , it doesn amprsquot mean the culture inside the petri dish isn amprsquot still growing . packing tape and pyrotechnicspacking tape and pyrotechnicsone of second life amprsquos million strong population is fee berry , a year old mother of three children who lives in middlesex , a leafy suburb of london , england . and though her second life avatar , caliandris pendragon , is cool and calm , i amprsquove caught her at a bad time . ampldquoi amprsquom moving house , amprdquo she explains . in the background i can hear boxes being heaved back and forth , tape unspooling and being wrapped around packaged items . at one point in our conversation she has to ask her son to keep the noise down . berry became a stay at home mom after the birth of her first son and started gaming in , playing riven , a more puzzle centric sequel to myst , a popular adventure game first released in . both were developed by cyan worlds , at the time simply called cyan . a friend introduced berry to riven when she bought a second hand apple macintosh she was initially wary , telling the friend , ampldquoi don amprsquot think i like those sorts of things . amprdquo she finished the game within three weeks . she stuck with games produced by cyan for the next six years , graduating to uru , their mmo adventure game . when cyan discontinued support for uru live , the online section of the game , berry , like many others , moved on to an alternative . as with everyone entering their second life , she was dropped from the sky . her feet first hit the turf of the new virtual world on february th , . i can shrug off my role as a mother . ampldquoit amprsquos like every toy you ever had , all rolled into one , amprdquo she tells me in awed tones , recalling the power of the game to keep her playing nearly a decade on . it amprsquos also liberating , she explains , allowing her to forget about the kids , the responsibilities , and the extra few inches she amprsquod rather not have . it lets her cut free . in second life she doesn amprsquot have to be a graying year old mom she can keep the bright eyes and warm smile , but can pinch , tuck , and pluck the other bits so that she becomes year old pendragon , a vampish babe with full lips , long jet black hair , and heavy eyeliner . it s like every toy you ever had , all rolled into one . ampldquoi can shrug off my role as a mother , amprdquo she explains . ampldquoi can swear or misbehave in second life in a way i couldn amprsquot in real life . amprdquothe second ever person i meet in second life , in a drop off zone , proves that point . house chemistry amprsquos been in second life for nearly six years . the year old lives in new orleans , and may or may not look like his in universe avatar a foot inch tall man wearing all black , with thick brown dreadlocks down to his waist ampmdash he won amprsquot say . regardless , house chemistry amprsquos warm and welcoming , and seems to enjoy taking me under his wing , explaining the universe to me . when i ask him what he does in second life , i amprsquom expecting him to advise me to talk to people , make friends , and take some classes . he replies a little differently ampldquoanything i want . walk near me . i amprsquoll set this place on fire , watch . amprdquoand so he does , under a clock showing , on one of second life amprsquos introductory islands . truthfully , i amprsquom not impressed it amprsquos a pretty poor quality animation with blocky gray smoke and weirdly flesh colored balls i presume are meant to represent the actual flames . still , i politely show my admiration and ask him whether he amprsquod want to set stuff on fire in real life . ampldquono , amprdquo he says . there amprsquos a brief pause . ampldquotake your time . you amprsquoll learn how to do all kinds of cool shit . amprdquoi try and move the conversation on , asking house chemistry what he does in real life . ampldquoi build things , amprdquo he replies . i amprsquom intrigued by this person who builds things in real life , then sets polygonal representations of them on fire in second life , and say so out loud . he ignores it , moves on , shuts down the conversation . ampldquoyou got it now , amprdquo he says . ampldquoenjoy . amprdquoyou a wife or a men ? ampldquoyou a wife or a men ? amprdquothe concept of an avatar in the sense we know today first emerged in the s from the lucasarts game habitat and the cyberpunk novels of the time . philip rosedale , who created second life , describes an avatar as ampldquothe representation of your chosen embodied appearance to other people in a virtual world amprdquo ampmdash one that often blunts the harsh edges and tones fat into muscle . there are people like berry who use their second lives as a way to play a different role , a smudged mirror reflection of themselves ampmdash and that amprsquos great . but there are those who believe that identity in second life is too opaque . on my first day in universe i meet larki merlin , a something german second lifer who likes to punctuate his conversation with written word emoticons . ampldquoi am all time on big smile , amprdquo are his first words to me . his next words are to the point ampldquoyou a wife or a men ? amprdquo merlin amprsquos asking that for a good reason he stepped away from second life two years ago ampldquofor a long time ampmdash too many crazy people , only sex and lies . of the girls are in rl real life boys . amprdquothis might not be far off the truth berry tells me that at one point linden lab said six of every ten women in second life were men behind their avatars . one of the most famous women in second life , jade lily , is a male member of the us air force named keith morris . morris real life married another second lifer , coreina grace real name meghan sheehy in . despite this , merlin amprsquos back , but he admits that there are slim pickings in the universe he amprsquos met maybe two of a hundred friends in second life ampmdash and ampldquoyou waste hours to find them . amprdquo he amprsquos back , but barely . there amprsquos huge areas of second life that just look like suburbia and people will build a house and put a tv in it . every story has two sides . i asked berry about her experience in second life has it made her more comfortable , more confident ? has it changed her first life persona in any way ? there amprsquos a long pause . ampldquoerr amphellip it amprsquos made me realize other people are not as scary as they appear to be . amprdquo the first person berry ever encountered in a virtual world was in uru . ampldquoand i ran away , amprdquo she admits softly . ampldquoi don amprsquot know what i was afraid of , really . but they spoke to me and i ran away , because it was a stranger . amprdquo as a woman , berry says , the interaction was completely the opposite of what she amprsquod been taught ampldquoyou wouldn amprsquot strike up a conversation with an unknown male because there are dangers associated with that . amprdquo but when she plucked up the courage to stay and chat , ampldquoit made me realize i amprsquod been frightened of that percent instead of realizing percent are decent . amprdquowhen mainstream media outlets touched down in second life seven years ago they tended to focus on the strangeness of it all . people were having sex through a game and dressing up as foxes and kittens . the reality , says tom boellstorff , a professor of anthropology at the university of california , irvine , is more prosaic ampldquohumans already live many different kinds of life online is just one more of those kinds of lives . amprdquo ampldquoyou can do anything in second life , amprdquo boellstorff continues , his voice rising in a lilt . ampldquoyou can do crazy stuff . you can be a ball of light or you can be feet tall , or you can be a child , or a dog , or whatever . amprdquoyou can do all that . but most people ? ampldquothere amprsquos huge areas of second life that just look like suburbia and people will build a house and put a tv in it , amprdquo he says . ampldquothey amprsquoll watch tv with their friends online . amprdquo an entire world of opportunities out there and people choose to be couch potatoes . it is , eerily , just like real life . ghost towns and boom townsghost towns and boom towns ampldquowe thought of second life as complementing your first life , amprdquo hunter walk , one of the original linden lab team members working on the universe from its launch , tells me . it was conceived as a space that gave you a set of choices that were missing from reality . ampldquoin your first life you don amprsquot necessarily get to fly . here you can fly . in your first life you can amprsquot choose what you look like . here you can choose what you look like ampmdash and it amprsquos malleable . amprdquothat changeability extended right back to the developers . ampldquothe story of the internet in general is one of unintended consequences , amprdquo begins boellstorff . ampldquoit amprsquos about repurposing and doing things the original designers did not design for . amprdquo as the custodians of an internet based community , second life amprsquos developers were little different . when they began sketching out the universe early in development , linden lab deliberately left things open ended . ampldquothe early users showed us the way to where the community was , amprdquo explains walk . that community is now being overlooked , believes berry , who began working for linden lab making textures and music in june , and was fired in june after a dispute over money . ampldquoafter five years working quite closely with them , i still don amprsquot feel i really know what the culture is , amprdquo she says . ampldquothey simply never seem to understand their own product . it amprsquos ludicrous that they don amprsquot understand how people use second life , what they like it for , what they want it for . amprdquothere amprsquos no such thing as an average second lifer , but some people just don amprsquot get it , no matter how long they spend in world . berry tried , years back , to convince her mother and siblings to join the world . ampldquoi amprsquove had very little luck . if i can amprsquot get them to try it they amprsquore obviously not going to understand it . and it amprsquos really hard to explain it to anybody else . amprdquo a giant bubble floated down from on high . ampldquostep in , amprdquo she saidfor the longest time i didn amprsquot get it . i amprsquod spent several weeks pottering about , teleporting from one place to another . i stood on a dock of a bay , overlooking an azure sea and hearing the whistle of the wind . i walked through a cold , gun metal gray futuristic world full of walkways that reminded me of any number of first person shooters . i amprsquod chased a woman , inexplicably sprinting , arms flailing , through the palazzos of milan , looking at the fashion boutiques . i amprsquod visited london ampmdash in reality a tired collection of worn cliches , a cardboard cut out of the beatles crossing the street down from a roundabout with a red telephone box on one corner . it was kind of cool , but it was also corny . then berry invited me to nemesis . it amprsquos where she lives in universe , all rolling green hills and gated houses . berry ampmdash or pendragon , as she was in this world ampmdash wanted to show me just how magical second life could get . she had in her possession starax amprsquos wand . created by a user , it was at the time the most expensive item a user could buy in second life . clever coding meant that if its possessor mentioned certain words in game ampmdash ampldquomoney , amprdquo for example ampmdash the universe would change around it a briefcase full of cash would descend from the heavens and spit out greenbacks , for example . the wand has been largely outmoded by updates , but some commands still work . we were standing outside the perimeter wall of berry amprsquos house , green grass beneath our feet . her avatar hunched over and moved her hands on an invisible keyboard the animation shows when the real person is typing . in the chat box appeared a word . ampldquobubble . amprdquoa giant bubble floated down from on high . ampldquostep in , amprdquo she said . i did . and the bubble rose , and i saw a bird amprsquos eye view of nemesis . i was suspended in mid air in a giant bubble , and could roll over the shoreline high above the sea . i couldn amprsquot help but smile finally , i amprsquod found my niche . people come to the second life universe for different reasons some go there to escape their reality and to stretch the boundaries of their lives in ways forbidden by the constraints of their bodies or the norms of society . some go to meet friends and family there are some who want to create buildings , paintings , and whole new worlds . and some ampmdash big companies and small entrepreneurs ampmdash hope to make a living . there amprsquos no such thing as an average second lifer , but some people just don amprsquot get it even after the deluge dried up there amprsquos a booming economy in second life berry began taking meetings in with companies looking to extend their reach into the universe . her knowledge of the world was her selling point , helping companies avoid missteps in this strange , new place . ampldquoreportedly adidas spent a million dollars on their sim in second life , amprdquo berry says with a laugh . what it got them was a single store selling sneakers . problem was , the sneakers slowed down the universe ampldquoanybody running an event would say if you amprsquove got adidas trainers on , take them off because they were lagging the sim so bad ! amprdquo ironically , berry says , it was when the big companies descended on second life that the place felt most like a ghost town , and not a boom town they didn amprsquot get the ethos , didn amprsquot engage , and left empty offices and buildings . berry amprsquos earnings from second life have varied enormously a poor year can see her earn amppound , , for her consultancy work , as well as creating music and textures for avatars and locations in world a few years ago she specialized in providing christmas trees to those looking to get into the festive spirit . ampldquoit amprsquos not a fortune , amprdquo she explains . ampldquoi haven amprsquot earned a lot of money from it . amprdquo but it pays the bills . second life isn amprsquot a whole new world ampmdash that amprsquos something everyone , from berry , to walk , to boellstorff , has been keen to stress . for those truly committed , who have property , and cash , and a business , and money invested in the universe , it amprsquos simply an ongoing extension of their lives ampldquothat amprsquos why we chose the name , amprdquo walk says . settling a civilizationsettling a civilizationsecond life has survived its first years , but every society rises and ampmdash inevitably ampmdash falls . so what of linden lab amprsquos creation ? will people still be living second lives in ? ampldquoi wouldn amprsquot be surprised to see second life around for quite a while , amprdquo says hunter walk . it amprsquos been seven years since he left the prosaically crazy universe , but he still remains on its periphery . for a couple of years after leaving linden lab he occasionally dropped back in on the world , teleporting from place to place and checking out the sights . ampldquoit never quite got to the point where it was something i amprsquod be able to integrate into my life , amprdquo he says regretfully . instead , he now reads about it , takes pictures , and watches videos . tom boellstorff looks to history for precedent . lambdamoo was the original moo object oriented mud , a multi user dungeon game . set up so long ago that its creator , pavel curtis , can amprsquot remember whether it went online in or , it lives on today through the benevolence and hard work of a core group of volunteers that refuses to let the world die . fee berry amprsquos less sure . resident for nearly a decade , she amprsquos seen a lot of areas of second life fall victim to the decay that amprsquos part of a relentlessly forward looking world ampldquothey haven amprsquot really preserved the history of second life , as far as i can see , and don amprsquot really rate it as anything worth saving . i think that amprsquos a shame . amprdquoher second life relationship became a real life romancefired by linden lab and exasperated at the direction the universe is taking , she amprsquos spending more time in opensim , a financially free and less constrained version of the second life architecture , working on paid projects . there amprsquos one drawback it doesn amprsquot have a strong enough community or economy ampmdash yet . if it gets those , it wins hands down , she says . but that doesn amprsquot mean she amprsquos quite done with linden lab . she starts extolling the virtues of opensim , but brings it back to second life . ampldquoi hope to get a better work ampndashlife balance , and to be able to spend entertainment ampmdash leisure time ampmdash in second life , amprdquo she says . i get the sense that deep down , she amprsquos made such a strong connection that she amprsquos permanently a resident there . after all , her second life relationship with partner oclee hornet became a real life romance . ampldquohe had a bald avatar , which is quite unusual in any world , amprdquo she says . ampldquoi was interested to know why . amprdquo berry spent most of may in rotterdam , where hornet ampmdash real name eelco osseweijer ampmdash lives . the two own a two story red brick home together in second life , on which they spend a month for the freehold to the land . ampldquothere amprsquos a possibility we will live together in real life at some stage in the future , amprdquo berry explains . despite it all , i ask her , despite the changes , and the intractability , despite the disputes and the stagnancy , you amprsquore still a second life fan ? ampldquooh yeah , amprdquo she says . there amprsquos a pause and her voice grows richer , the kind of alteration in voice that only comes when speaking through a genuine , heartfelt , and involuntary smile . ampldquooh yes . yes . amprdquo lt ! var s skrollr . init smoothscrolling true gt	 gm voices is nestled on a rolling , leafy road in alpharetta , georgia , an affluent suburb of atlanta . a recording studio specializing in voice over work , it produces narration for corporate training videos , voicemail system prompts , and the like ampmdash not exactly sexy stuff , but steady , and for the best actors , lucrative . september day is one such actor , and on a morning in , she arrived to begin work on a special project . day , a red headed , year old mother of three who amprsquos done work for many high profile clients ampmdash companies like mtv , dominos pizza , and nickelodeon ampmdash had been given few details . she knew she amprsquod been hired to do a ampldquotext to speech amprdquo product ampmdash something where a computer reads text back in human speech ampmdash and she knew that she amprsquod be doing her ampldquoearly amplsquo s amprdquo voice she also has a spunky teen voice she amprsquos used for , among other things , an acne infomercial . day confidently rolled in having just given birth to her daughter a mere four days earlier ampldquovo is fantastic ampmdashnobody is going to judge me for wearing maternity clothes ! amprdquo she wasn amprsquot prepared for what was about to hit her . ivona , a polish text to speech company , was creating a computerized voice that would be incorporated into the kindle fire , the mini version of amazon amprsquos popular reader tablet . when kindle fire owners clicked a setting , they amprsquod be able to hear some of their books read to them by ampldquosalli . amprdquofor six to seven hours a day , for eight days , day read passages from alice in wonderland , bits of news off the ap wire , and sometimes random sentences , sitting as still in her chair as possible . she read hundreds of numbers , in different cadences . ampldquoone ! one . one ? two ! two . two ? amprdquo ampldquoit was like the ironman of vo , amprdquo says day . ampldquoi had not experienced anything like that . i am the queen of the ampndash second tv spot . that amprsquos my safe place . amprdquo she had to take a break after the fourth day , because she had gone hoarse . but then day soldiered on , and became the voice of many a breezy beach read . for every siri , there amprsquos an actor sitting in a sound booth , really needing to go to the bathroom day amprsquos experience is becoming increasingly common , as talking devices gain a commercial foothold . no longer a novelty , or something marketed primarily to the disabled , speaking gadgets , a la siri , gps systems , and text to speech enabled apps , are on the rise . it amprsquos easy to see the necessity when you amprsquore driving you can amprsquot google , so you ask your phone to find a starbucks . you amprsquore at the gym you have your rss reader reading your financial news to you . google , apple , microsoft , and even amazon have all invested heavily in speech , and many believe we amprsquore just seeing the beginning of this literal conversation with technology . today amprsquos talking phones and cars are almost human sounding . that amprsquos because they are human . or at least , they once were . for every siri , there amprsquos an actor sitting in a sound booth , really needing to go to the bathroom or scratch an itch . once that person finishes her job , she can go home . but her voice has only begun its journey . the story of that journey , from human to replicant , is one of a series of complex technological processes that would have been impossible years ago . but it amprsquos also the story of our stubborn desire as social beings to form relationships , even with unconscious objects . in order to establish trust in our machines , we have to begin to suspend disbelief . this is the story of how we fool ourselves . ransom note stylej . brant ward , the senior director of advanced speech design and development at nuance , is a former composer who went from writing string quartets on synthesizers to composing speech using synthetic voices . he amprsquos been working in the silicon valley tts industry for over a decade . nuance is one of the biggest independent speech recognition and text to speech companies in the world . speech recognition is a bit like the reverse of text to speech ampmdash the computer hears what you amprsquore saying , and converts it into text . the company does many things , including supplying the healthcare industry with voice enabled clinical documentation , meaning doctors can speak rather than type in their notes . it also develops voice recognition and text to speech capabilities for everything from tablets to cars . the text to speech industry is extremely competitive , and highly secretiveward and the company amprsquos senior design lead , david vazquez , are part of the team working out of nuance amprsquos sunnyvale , ca offices creating next generation synthetic voices . they describe their work as ampldquopart art , part science . amprdquothe text to speech industry is extremely competitive , and highly secretive . even though nuance ceo paul ricci confirmed that nuance is a fundamental provider for apple at the d conference earlier this year , ward and vazquez coyly change the subject when asked if the company is behind siri . that said , they amprsquove agreed to explain , at least in broad strokes , how they build voices . needless to say , one doesn amprsquot start by recording every single word in the dictionary . but when you amprsquore talking about an application that reads any news story that comes into your rss feed , or looks up stuff on the web for you , it needs to be able to say every word in the dictionary . ampldquojust say you want to know where the nearest florist is , amprdquo ward says . ampldquowell , there are million businesses in this country alone . you amprsquore not going to be able to record every single one of them . amprdquo ampldquoit amprsquos about finding short cuts , amprdquo says vazquez , a trim , bearded man who exudes a laid back joviality . he rifles through a packet of stapled together papers that contains a script . it doesn amprsquot look like a script in the hamlet sense of the word , but rather , an excel type grid containing weird sentences . scratching the collar of my neck , where humans once had gills . most of the sentences are chosen , says vazquez , because they are ampldquophonetically rich amprdquo that is , they contain lots of different combinations of phonemes . phonemes are the acoustic building blocks of language , i . e . the ampldquok amprdquo sound in ampldquocat amprdquo . ampldquothe sentences are sort of like tongue twisters , amprdquo says vazquez . later , a linguist on his team objects to his use of this expression , and calls them ampldquonon sequiturs . amprdquo ampldquothe point is , the more data we have , the more lifelike it amprsquos going to be , amprdquo says ward . the sentences , while devoid of contextual meaning , are packed with data . after the script is recorded with a live voice actor , a tedious process that can take months , the really hard work begins . words and sentences are analyzed , catalogued , and tagged in a big database , a complicated job involving a team of dedicated linguists , as well as proprietary linguistic software . when that amprsquos complete , nuance amprsquos text to speech engine can look for just the right bits of recorded sound , and combine those with other bits of recorded sound on the fly , creating words and phrases that the actor may have never actually uttered , but that sound a lot like the actor talking , because technically it is the actor amprsquos voice . getting a computer to assemble a human sounding voice is a herculean taskthe official name for this type of voice building is ampldquounit selection amprdquo or ampldquoconcatenative speech synthesis . amprdquo ward describes it as ampldquoa little like a ransom note , amprdquo but saying it amprsquos like a ransom note , where letters are chopped up and pasted back together to form new sentences , is a radical oversimplification of how we make language . as humans , we learn to speak before we learn to write . speaking is unconscious we do it , we don amprsquot think about how we amprsquore doing it , and we certainly aren amprsquot thinking about the minute fluctuations of stress , intonation , pitch , speed , tongue position , relationships between phonemes , and myriad other factors that allow us to seamlessly and effectively communicate complex ideas and emotions . but in order to get a computer to assemble a human sounding voice , all of those things have to be considered , a task described by one language professor as ampldquoherculean . amprdquotake , for instance , the phoneme ampldquoa amprdquo as in ampldquocat amprdquo . it will sound slightly different if it amprsquos the center of a syllable , as in ampldquocatty , amprdquo versus at the beginning of a syllable , as in ampldquoalligator . amprdquo and that ampldquoa amprdquo will also sound a little different if it amprsquos in a stressed syllable , as it is in ampldquocatty , amprdquo versus a non stressed syllable , as in the word ampldquoandrogynous . amprdquosentence construction presents other challenges . the simple task of making plane reservations isn amprsquot so simple for a synthetic voice . ampldquoif you amprsquore saying something like , amplsquoare you going to san francisco , or new york ? amprsquo the end of the sentence goes up in pitch , amprdquo says vazquez . but if it amprsquos a multiple choice question , say , ampldquosan francisco , philly , or new york ? amprdquo then ampldquoyork amprdquo goes down in pitch . screw stuff like that up , and all of a sudden the user experiences cognitive dissonance that was weird ampmdash oh right , i amprsquom talking to a computer , not a person . you shouldn amprsquot think , ampldquoi amprsquom talking to a computer . amprdquo you shouldn amprsquot think anything at all . ampldquomy kids interact with siri like she amprsquos a sentient being , amprdquo says ward . ampldquothey ask her to find stuff for them . they don amprsquot know the difference . amprdquodaisy , daisy , give me your answer doattempts to synthesize the human voice date back to the s , when scientific inventors experimented with reeds and bellows to get vowel sounds . but the most significant early advance was the vocoder a machine developed by bell labs in that transmitted speech electronically , in a kind of code , for allied forces in wwii . the vocoder was the inspiration for author arthur c . clarke amprsquos evil talking computer , hal , in the book a space odyssey , and a few decades later it produced trendy effects used by pop musicians like kraftwerk . early robotic voices sounded robotic because they were totally roboticin the plus years that ensued , there were many new takes on speech synthesis texas instruments amprsquo speak and spell , the knight rider esque talking cars of the s ampldquofuel level is low ! amprdquo and the voice built for physicist stephen hawking . the difference between those voices and the voices of today , however , is as stark as the difference between splenda and pure cane sugar . these early robotic voices sounded robotic because they were totally robotic . prior to the late amplsquo s , computing power just wasn amprsquot great enough to do concatenated synthesis , where a real human voice is recorded , minutely dissected , catalogued , and reassembled . instead , you made a computer speak by programming in a set of acoustic parameters , like you would any synthesizer . ampldquothose machines were simple compared to how complex the human vocal tract is , amprdquo explains adam wayment , vp of engineering at cepstral kep stral , a pittsburgh , pa based text to speech company that has created over different voices since its inception in . ampldquosound comes from the vocal cords , the nasal passages , leaks through the cheeks , the sides of mouth , reverberates around the tongue , all those tissues are mushy . . . so the source itself isn amprsquot a neat little square wave . it amprsquos tissue vibrating . amprdquohence the synthesizer approach produced speech that was intelligible , but not remotely human . not even a child would be fooled into thinking they could actually chat with their speak and spell . by the early s , computers finally got fast enough to search through giant databases for the right combinations of new words , allowing companies to start producing natural sounding concatenated voices . around the same time , artificial intelligence developed to the point where computers could make increasingly sophisticated decisions with regards to language . when you say the word ampldquowind , amprdquo for instance , do you pronounce it the way you would if saying , ampldquothe wind is blowing amprdquo or ampldquowind amprdquo as in ampldquowind the thread around the spool amprdquo ? an adult human will make the correct determination automatically based on context . a computer must be taught about context . robo voices not withstanding , the promise of text to speech has been evident since the dawn of personal computing ampmdash apple even offered a text to speech reader in the first mac . but it was the widespread adoption of mobile technologies and the internet that really fired up the demand for voices . the ability to access information , hands free , is a tantalizing proposition , particularly when coupled with speech recognition technology . there is one group that is surprisingly not psyched about it voice actorsyou can see how important text to speech has become by watching what the tech superpowers are doing . in a letter to shareholders last november , microsoft ceo steve ballmer stressed the importance of ampldquonatural language interpretation and machine learning , amprdquo that is , the artificial intelligence technologies underlying speech . there have been a flurry of acquisitions google bought uk based speech synthesis company , phonetic arts three years ago , and back in january , amazon acquired ivona , the polish text to speech firm that recorded day amprsquos voice for the kindle fire . while the tech sector gets excited about the future of speech , there is one group that is surprisingly not psyched about it voice actors . that amprsquos right , the very people supplying the raw materials . the reason might be they just don amprsquot understand the implications . although there are actors , like day , or allison dufty , a voice over actress who has done many jobs for nuance , who are willing to speak publicly about their work , those actors are few and far between . ironclad ndas keep many actors from associating themselves with specific brands or products . talent agents who have relationships with technology companies who do this work are often hush hush , to maintain their competitive advantage . and in the absence of information , paranoia reigns supreme . ampldquowithin our industry , text to speech tts is seen as a threat , amprdquo says stephanie ciccarelli , chief marketing officer at voices . com , an online marketplace for voice actors , and co author of the book voice acting for dummies . ampldquothey think it amprsquos going to replace human voice actors . amprdquoan email to one successful voice actor who has done narration for audible books , work for wells fargo , npr , at ampt , and others , got a polite but emphatic response ampldquothe only thing i can tell you about voice actors opinion on tts is that we all pretty much think it s abominable amphellip maybe one day it ll advance to the level that d animation is currently in , but right now it s almost a joke . amprdquovoice activated roach sprayback at nuance , ward and vazquez are excited to demo new technologies they amprsquove been working on . ward explains that nuance can weave bits of synthesized speech together with concatenated speech , and make it sound natural , and soon , he says , they amprsquoll be able to make an entirely synthesized voice that sounds good , too . computing power has increased to the point where it amprsquos possible to build something that doesn amprsquot sound like a totally fake robot voice . ampldquoit will still be still based on a real person amprsquos voice , amprdquo he says . even a synthesized voice needs a model to mimic . he and vazquez show me a neat trick where they amprsquore able to take acoustic qualities from one speaker amprsquos voice , and qualities from a second person amprsquos voice , and create an amalgamation of the two . another day , they demo a product that combines a speaking rss reader with an intelligent music engine the program can tell whether the news it amprsquos reading is happy or sad , and selects an appropriate piece of music to play behind it , giving the performance a broadcast feel . they latch onto the word ampldquopersonalization , amprdquo throwing around ideas about how one day , we might have our tweets read to us in the voice of the person who wrote them , or be able to walk into our home and say ampldquoit amprsquos me , amprdquo and have our thermostat adjust to the temperature it knows we want , using speech recognition and artificial intelligence . i tell them a random anecdote about a famous piano player who once built a chair that squirted roach spray , activated when he smoked a joint , to mask the smell . ampldquoyeah , you could use speech recognition to spray something into the air , so your wife wouldn amprsquot know you were smoking weed , amprdquo says ward . all jokes aside , this general concept doesn amprsquot seem too far away , considering the existence of smart home technologies like nest , a thermostat that learns what temperatures you like , and self adjusts when you come and go . nor does the reading of tweets in one amprsquos own voice cepstral recently created a custom pro bono tts voice for a blind teenager based on audio recordings he did in his bedroom , proving you don amprsquot need professional quality recordings to get a passably decent result . cereproc sarah prock , a person edinburgh based tts firm that created a voice for the late film critic roger ebert after he lost his larynx from oral cancer , plans to launch a personal voice cloning product soon . then all that needs to happen is that your tts reader be able to channel the other peoples amprsquo voices . it would be nice if voice systems like siri understood the users amprsquo emotional state and reacted accordinglybut even if vanity voices don amprsquot take off a lot of people really hate the sound of their own voice , after all , there still remains the promise of creating better synthetic voices that allow us to have a more fulfilling relationship with technology . ampldquosiri is incredibly easy to understand , but where we still need to break through a barrier is having siri convey the emotional and social characteristics that are so important in regular speech , amprdquo says benjamin munson , a professor of speech , language , and hearing science at the university of minnesota . at a bare minimum , he says , it would be nice if voice systems like siri understood the users amprsquo emotional state and reacted accordingly , the way a human attendant may adopt a soothing voice to deal with an enraged customer , for instance . synthesizing so called ampldquoparalinguistics , amprdquo that is , the social cues we communicate through language , is difficult , says munson , but notes that academic researchers are beginning to study it . ampldquowhen i got into this industry , most of the speech synthesis market was for automated voice mail systems , and the idea of producing a voice that could really communicate a sense of emotion and identity wasn amprsquot important , amprdquo says matthew aylett , chief scientific officer at cereproc . ampldquoafter all , you don amprsquot want the bank to read your balance in a sad voice if you amprsquove not got much money . amprdquobut now that synthetic voices are reading blog posts and even entire kindle books , carrying on conversations about scheduling , and telling you how to get to grandma amprsquos house , it amprsquos time , says aylett , to shift out of neutral . ampldquor d from star wars was always my favorite robot , amprdquo says aylett . ampldquohe still sounded like a robot , but had great character , emotion , and sarcasm . we try to produce voices with a sense of character . amprdquostill stuck on the talking roach spray chair , chatting cars , and the idea of having my twitter feed read to me in a chorus of friends amprsquo voices , i asked wayment from cepstral , how important increased artificial intelligence would be for future tts applications . he told me ampldquovery , amprdquo but then said ampldquobut not in the way you might think . amprdquorecently , said wayment , he spoke with a visually impaired customer who said do you know how hard it is to use a microwave ? when they amprsquore all different and have different displays ? which led wayment to imagine a world full of talking microwaves . he paused , then said seriously ampldquoi think the day is coming where even little devices are speaking , but we run the risk of just filling our lives with noise . it amprsquos not going to be enough to have devices talking , they amprsquore going to have to tell us things we need and want to know . they amprsquoll have to have insight . amprdquoand if they don amprsquot , i see a new business opportunity the synthesis of silence . 	 how internet abuse works she displeases him and he tries to punish her . he posts doctored photos of her to the web . in one , a noose is near her head . in another , her children appear to be performing sex acts . he emails graphic threats about violating her with a chainsaw . he sneers that she is too fat to be loved , and then ampmdash missing the irony ampmdash calls her a slut . he distributes her social security number online . he posts lies about a prostitution bust . posing as her , he solicits sex in online ads and includes her home address so men knock on her door at all hours . maybe he amprsquos anonymous but often he doesn amprsquot bother hiding his identity . why worry ? he knows that in his corner of the web , women who complain about harassment are the enemy . kathy sierra complained . she was one of those who called for help . photography of kathy sierra by katy mccarthyin , sierra was one of the most visible women in tech . she taught the java programming language at sun microsystems . her books on software design were top sellers on amazon . her blog was on technorati amprsquos top , a list that included other blogging pioneers , such as robert scoble , michael arrington , and om malik . her writing focused on design and coding and included very little that could be considered controversial . so , why would anyone wish her dead ? in march of that year , some visitors to sierra amprsquos blog called open season on the now year old . hundreds of commenters on her blog made rape and death threats . i hope someone slits your throat , wrote one person . people posted photoshopped images of her with a pair of panties choking her , or a noose near her head . she had enraged scores of men for supporting a call to moderate reader comments , which is of course common practice now . sierra went public about the threats , writing on her blog , it amprsquos better to talk about it than to just disappear . i thought things would get better . mostly , it s just gotten worse . but disappear is exactly what she did next . andrew weev auernheimer , a well known provocateur , hacker , and anti semite , circulated her home address and social security number online . he also made false statements about her being a battered wife and a former prostitute . not only did sierra find herself a target for identity theft , but all the people who had threatened to brutally rape and kill her now knew where she lived . so , she logged off and didn amprsquot return to the web until two months ago . she gave up the book deals , speaking engagements , and even fled her home . an anonymous internet group had chased her off the web and out of tech , and it finally managed to hijack her offline life . despite everything , sierra says she amprsquos lucky . she told the verge , in her first interview since , that she knows things could have been far worse . what happened to me pales in comparison to what amprsquos happening to women online today , sierra said . i thought things would get better . mostly , it amprsquos just gotten worse . it amprsquos not hard to find support to back that statement . in july , caroline criado perez ampmdash a british journalist who led a successful campaign to get the image of author jane austen on one of the uk amprsquos banknotes ampmdash received thousands of threats on twitter . women that talk too much need to get raped , wrote someone using the handle rapey in a tweet to criado perez . another user called catch me if you can wrote shut your whore mouth now , or i amprsquoll shut it for you , and choke you with my dick . the threatening tweets were then directed at male journalists who were critical of the attacks . paul mason writing for the guardian said his twitter timeline became full of threats , and some demanded he respect free speech . as he explained , i amprsquove been treated to graphic descriptions of child rape , outrageous accusations designed to evoke disgust , plus numerous other commentaries on my appearance , professionalism , life . twitter threats are just one example of online harassment . in july the washington post published a story about men who post phony ads to make it appear as if their ex wives or girlfriends are soliciting sex . one man , michael johnson ii of hyattsville , maryland , published an ad titled rape me and my daughters and included his ex wife amprsquos home address . more than men showed up to the victim amprsquos house . one man tried to break in and another tried to undress her daughter . johnson was sentenced to years in prison . his victim was physically unharmed but these ads can be lethal . in december , a wyoming woman was raped with a knife sharpener in her home after an ex boyfriend assumed her identity and posted a craigslist ad that read , need an aggressive man with no concern or regard for women . her ex and the man who raped her are both serving long prison sentences . the consequences of a free web ? we wanted an internet free from oversight , an environment where ideas could be exchanged freely . in many important ways , the web has achieved that idyllic vision . individuals have the ability to communicate with large audiences , a power that in the past belonged only to media tycoons and governments . a lack of gatekeepers means frictionless communication , but it also means the quality of that communication can amprsquot be controlled . and too often on the internet today , no consequence means no class . the internet experience is being degraded by those bent on settling scores , intimidating enemies , or simply silencing those with whom they disagree . the social networks say they amprsquore powerless to stop it . police say they amprsquore overwhelmed . for these reasons , many people find the web a hostile and dangerous environment . online harassment can take many forms . consider the message sent to african americans by trayvoning . that amprsquos the meme that caught on after the death of trayvon martin , the teenager who was stalked and killed in florida last year . people recreated scenes of martin s death and posted photos to the web . some of the pics show teenage boys and girls lying on a floor wearing hoodies and holding bags of skittles ampmdash the confection martin carried at the time of his death . some even wore blackface . in , tyler clementi , an year old rutgers student , jumped to his death from the george washington bridge in new york city after his roommate used a webcam to secretly record him kissing another man . clementi amprsquos roommate then wrote about the scene on twitter . while minorities and homosexuals are often targeted , experts say no group is more abused online than women . danielle citron , a law professor at the university of maryland , lays out some of the numbers in her upcoming book , hatred . . citron writes that the us national violence against women survey reports percent of cyberstalking victims are women . a group called working to halt online abuse studied , cases of cyberharassment , and found that . percent were female , . percent were male and percent unknown . a study of internet relay chat showed male users receive only four abusive or threatening messages for every received by women . things are getting worse because these technologies are going with us wherever we go , citron said . they amprsquore ubiquitous . we take our cellphones and tablets to work out , to restaurants , while we amprsquore out in the country . it amprsquos getting worse because online harassment is a simple , easy , and effective way to hurt someone . and what people want today is to hurt one another and get back at the people that hurt them , hunter moore , the founder of isanyoneup . com , told rolling stone last october . moore ought to know . he amprsquos one of the pioneers of revenge porn , the practice of posting nude photos to the web of a former lover in an attempt to embarrass , defame , and terrorize . moore has sold his site but scores of wannabes are cropping up . a check of these sites shows that victims are almost always women . experts say no group is more abused online than womenat myex . com over , nude photos and new pictures are added nearly every day . each post typically includes the name of the person photographed , their age , and the city they live in . the posts come with titles like , manipulative bitch , cheater , has genital warts , drunk , meth user , this girl slept with so many other guys , and filthy pig . skeptics question the authenticity of the photos . they claim operators of revenge porn sites use actresses or that those photographed are seeking attention . the verge contacted several women found on some of these sites , including myex . com . while all of them declined to be interviewed , they did acknowledge that the photos were posted without permission by an ex boyfriend or lover . one woman said that she was trying to get the pictures pulled down and had successfully removed them from other sites because she was not yet years old when they were taken if her claim is accurate it would make the snapshots child pornography . she pleaded that we not use her name and asked that we not contact her again . social networks say they re powerless to stop itif the woman was upset and afraid , she has a right to be , says holly jacobs , , who has started a nonprofit organization dedicated to ending revenge porn and supporting its victims . jacobs knows firsthand that these sites are killers of reputations and relationships . three years ago , jacobs was studying for her phd in industrial organizational psychology and working as a consultant at a university when a former boyfriend began posting nude photos of her online . the embarrassment and terror was just the beginning . jacobs amprsquo ex sent copies of the photos to her boss and suggested she was sexually preying on students . jacobs amprsquo employers , fearing bad press , asked her to prove she didn amprsquot upload the photos herself . she finally felt compelled to change her name jacobs is the new name . the low point came at her parent amprsquos house , when jacobs amprsquo mother told her she had seen the pictures . she called them disgusting . seething , she asked her daughter if she intended to become a porn star . jacobs asked herself where was the justice ? in high school , she was an honors student and captain of the swim team . she played the piano , spoke fluent french , was never in trouble at school or with the law . now , society was telling her that she had committed the unpardonable crime of being a sexual woman , that sex is still only acceptable for men . the discussion with my mom was the first time in my life i had suicidal thoughts , jacobs said . i was losing everything that i had built my relationships , my good standing at the university , my education that i worked my butt off for amphellip we all do these things when we amprsquore young , but it shouldn amprsquot ruin our lives . change comes slowlyjacobs understood that the photos could indeed ruin her life if she didn amprsquot get them off the web . she quickly realized , however , that she was on her own . many site operators refused to remove them . at myex . com , for example , management amprsquos message to those who want photos pulled down is tough luck . the site has a no removal policy , but it did recently begin offering victims the ability to remove their photos for a fee of . when jacobs went to the police , they found many reasons not to help her . they said she gave the pictures to her ex so they were his property he could do what he wanted with them . other law enforcement agencies said it was out of their jurisdiction and that she should go try the feds . according to jacobs , fbi agents told her that this was probably a violation of some kind , but since it didn amprsquot involve national security they wouldn amprsquot pursue it . that was a few years ago . as far as revenge porn goes , things might be improving . more states are looking for ways to outlaw the practice . california amprsquos state assembly is considering whether to pass a law that would mean anyone who posted photos of nude or partially nude people who had a reasonable expectation of privacy would face a sentence of six months in jail , a , fine , or both . new jersey is the only state with a similar law already on its books . when it comes to combating internet harassment in general , the country still has a long way to go . police didn amprsquot arrest anyone six years ago when sierra went to the police about the death threats she received . in criado perez amprsquos case , the journalist received hundreds of threats , and uk police made a single arrest . twitter and facebook aren amprsquot much help either , say women amprsquos advocates . valerie aurora , the co founder of the ada initiative , a group that tries to make the internet and tech sectors more welcoming to women , said twitter makes it difficult for harassment victims to get help . twitter makes it near impossible to deal with an attack from a lot of trolls similar to what happened to sierra and criado perez , aurora said . the only person who can report the abuse is the target . sometimes twitter takes months to respond . it amprsquos a total joke . photo associated press that could change . the social networks are under more pressure to combat harassment . in the wake of the criado perez threats , yvette cooper , a high ranking member of britain amprsquos parliament , called twitter amprsquos response to the attacks disgraceful , appalling , and unacceptable . twitter issued a press release vowing to improve safeguards but they offered very little in the way of specifics . robert scoble , the blogger and tech evangelist , has been a supporter of strong anti harassment efforts . still , he says that blaming twitter isn amprsquot the answer . there amprsquos million tweets a day on twitter , scoble said . most of them are great . they bring the world amprsquos news to me , let me talk to my friends . but it also means that you amprsquore in touch with people who don amprsquot have your best interests in mind . i don amprsquot know how you get all the good without enabling people to be assholes . criado perez doesn amprsquot buy that for a second . she said last week in a speech before the women amprsquos aid conference that she doesn amprsquot think police and twitter have done all they can do . for instance , she asked why harassers can continue to stalk a victim amprsquos timeline even after they amprsquove been reported . she did concede , however , that the causes of the problem are deeply rooted in society . ultimately , all these actions would be treating the symptoms and not the cause , criado perez told the audience . social media doesn amprsquot cause misogyny the police can amprsquot cure it . what we really need to do is sit down as a society and take a long hard look at ourselves , in order to answer the question why are we producing so many people who just seem to hate women ? aurora and other women amprsquos advocates aren amprsquot expecting much change in the current tech environment . they note most websites are operated by men and since few men experience harassment , there isn amprsquot much empathy for this issue . there is also the likelihood that some in tech sympathize more with the abusers . a few victims of online harassment argue that a large section of the tech industry showed where its priorities were by embracing the free weev movement . free weeveven before publicizing sierra amprsquos home address and social security number , auernheimer was a hero to many in the hacking community . he made a name for himself through the clever methods he used to punish enemies and for wreaking general havoc . in , he claimed to have hacked into amazon amprsquos system and reclassified books about homosexuality as porn , although amazon denied he was the cause . that same year , he posted several anti semitic rants on youtube . in one , he blames jews for porn and accuses them of dominating the country amprsquos banking system . the jews are winning , auernheimer says at one point in the video . i think we should hold the people producing it responsible amphellip we take all these vile pornographers , and all these fucking bankers that fund pornography , we line them up in the street and we crucify them , just like they crucified christ . and that would be change i could fucking believe in amphellip blood in the streets . auernheimer is in jail now . in march , he was sentenced to spend months in prison for releasing the email addresses of , at ampt customers . he says that all he did was expose a security flaw and that forced the company to secure its systems . according to him , he was doing society a favor . the fbi saw it differently . they called it identity fraud and conspiracy to access a computer without authorization . immediately , there was a call in the tech sector to rally around auernheimer . tech pundits predicted that his prosecution would prevent security analysts from exposing vulnerabilities . lawyers from the electronic frontier foundation , the group that advocates for internet users and tech companies , jumped in to help with his defense . i have this beef with a lot of organizations , including eff , aurora said . this is another case where they amprsquore saying , amplsquothe cases we care about are the ones white men are interested in . we amprsquore less interested in protecting women on the web . amprsquo in march weev was sentenced to months in prisontor ekeland , auernheimer amprsquos attorney , says that the government amprsquos attempt to turn auernheimer amprsquos act of simply alerting people to a security flaw justifies the attention his case has received . he says that government prosecutors overreached and pressed so hard to throw him in jail because they plainly don amprsquot like auernheimer amprsquos views . if his past behavior hadn amprsquot been so reprehensible , he wouldn amprsquot be in this trouble , ekeland said . i don amprsquot think there amprsquos any question he would not have been prosecuted if he wasn amprsquot this infamous internet troll . he has a big mouth , says outrageous things . i don amprsquot espouse or support his beliefs . but it amprsquos not illegal to be an asshole . if it were , half the country would be behind bars . there were plenty of techies who criticized auernheimer and said he was getting his due . but the debate over his case was larger than anything that has ever occurred regarding internet harassment . that wasn amprsquot lost on the women who have been threatened with rape and death while online . what it came down to for them was that a man who threatens women can generate more concern within the tech industry than female victims of abuse . his rise as a folk hero is a sign of how desensitized to the abuse of women online people have become , sierra said . i get so angry at the tech press , the way they try to spin him as a trickster , a prankster . it amprsquos like they feel they have to at least say he amprsquos a jerk . openly admitting you enjoy amplsquoruining lives for lulz amprsquo is way past being a amplsquojerk amprsquo . and it wasn amprsquot just my life . he included my kids in his work . i think he does belong in prison for crimes he has committed , but what he amprsquos in for now is not one of those crimes . i hate supporting the free weev movement , but i do . but it amprsquos not illegal to be an asshole . perhaps auernheimer has more empathy for sierra now , considering he knows a little more about what he put her through . remember , auernheimer said he published her social security number and lied about her being a prostitute because he wanted to punish her for speaking out , for seeking assistance . one of the ironies about this is that since his arrest , auernheimer has repeatedly asked for help . he also complained that the government robbed him of his right to free speech , though by making sierra a target for identity theft and physical attacks , he intimidated her into silence . auernheimer complains that the government wrongly used its considerable resources and power against him . that has to be the biggest irony of all . paul fishman , the us attorney for the district of new jersey , who handled auernheimer amprsquos case , wrote this his entire adult life has been dedicated to taking advantage of others , using his computer expertise to violate others amprsquo privacy , to embarrass others , to build his reputation on the backs of those less skilled than he . throughout the case , auernheimer has tried to play the role of free speech advocate and persecuted freedom fighter . while he and his supporters may be right that the law that put him behind bars is harmful and unfair , he amprsquos probably not the guy to argue against it on moral grounds . auernheimer is part of an internet subculture where might makes right , where the only moral code is for the superior to enforce their will on the inferior . looking at events through that prism , how can auernheimer or his supporters complain , when one might say that all the government did was troll weev ? tim carmody contributed to this report lt ! var s skrollr . init smoothscrolling true gt	 demand for secret messaging apps is rising as trump takes office two weeks after the us presidential election , reverend rebecca bryan stepped up to her pulpit in the boston suburb of brookline and looked out on her congregation . the liberal unitarian universalists at first parish were already gearing up for political action , a central tenet of the church s year old mission . the members regularly protest for immigration and prison reform . post election , they were debating turning the church into a sanctuary for undocumented immigrants . that sunday , bryan shared an idea about how to communicate whats app , she said , enunciating the two syllables as if trying the name out for the first time . a group that is entirely encrypted , where we know what we share is completely safe . nathan freitas , a software developer and privacy activist , was sitting in the pews . i m like , did my reverend just use the word encryption ? did my reverend just use the word encryption ? freitas had mentioned whatsapp to reverend bryan as a tool for the parish s social action because last year , the world s most popular messaging app updated to using end to end encryption by default . that means messages don t live on servers and aren t readable to eavesdroppers , or even whatsapp s parent company , facebook . overnight , the words typed by a billion people were whisked from the threat of surveillance , thanks to the code developed by a san francisco open source project called open whisper systems . founded in by idealistic cryptographer moxie marlinspike , open whisper developed the protocol adopted by not only whatsapp , but facebook messenger s secret conversations feature , and google allo s incognito mode . open whisper also has its own flagship messaging app called signal , and people have been flocking to it since the election . on november th signal vaulted up app annie s ranking of the most popular ios social networking apps , from th place to th . worldwide downloads grew percent in the last quarter of , with nearly half a million downloads coming from the us . as activists and wary citizens prepare for a president elect who seemingly disdains the first amendment , flirts with the idea of creating a muslim registry , and will soon sit atop a powerful surveillance apparatus , signal has become the gateway drug to the encrypted life . while trump s election helped propel signal toward the mainstream , the trump era heralds more uncertainty for encryption s already uncertain future . on one hand , law and order trump has made statements about protecting the country from hacks , announcing in early january that he d start a committee in his first days in office to combat cyberattacks we re like the hacking capital of the world , he told reporters . yet he s also spoken critically about encryption and privacy protections . on the campaign trail , trump blasted apple for refusing to break into the iphone of one of the san bernardino shooters and spoke enviously about russia s hacking of the democratic national committee i wish i had that power , he said at a press conference , man , that would be power . trump has already appointed encryption critic jeff sessions as head of the justice department , and robust surveillance advocate mike pompeo to head the cia . in the meantime , signal s post election popularity appears to be more than a temporary blip . marlinspike said the app is getting more sustained daily downloads than open whisper s encrypted products did after its second biggest boost edward snowden s revelations about the surveillance conducted by the nsa . it was five weeks since the election when i met moxie marlinspike at the humble office he shares in san francisco s mission district . open whisper s logo is printed on a sheet of paper and taped to the door , which marlinspike opened as he showed me into the kitchen . an aerobics class pounded through the ceiling . his blond dreads were gathered into a ponytail , and he wore a black hoodie zipped over another black hoodie the cliche hacker getup , squared . i don t have a lot of clothes , he explained . while he now lives in an oakland apartment , marlinspike used to have a more itinerant lifestyle he lived in a warehouse after moving to san francisco in the late s as a college shirking coding wunderkind . he took breaks from software jobs to indulge his wanderlust , sailing around the bahamas and jumping trains across the us . in , he posted a picture on his instagram standing next to signal s most famous endorser , edward snowden , in moscow . but all those biographical facts come from the internet marlinspike is cagey on all personal details , reticent to reveal anything beyond the fact that he s now housed . he s equally tight lipped on the election , not revealing whether he d even voted . marlinspike is a reluctant participant in silicon valley s startup culture . when i was a kid , entrepreneur was not a compliment , he said . that wasn t the kind of thing college kids sat around in their dorm rooms dreaming about . marlinspike worked for other software companies for years , and his first startup , whisper systems , was put on hold when he was acquihired by twitter in to head its security department . the gig didn t last long . fourteen months later , marlinspike walked away from million in stock options , quitting after a near death sailing incident in san francisco bay to get back to the work that most fascinated him . he returned to developing two encrypted apps for android textsecure for messaging , and redphone for calls . in , he folded both services into signal . signal s clean blue and white design makes it nearly indistinguishable from any other messenger . apart from a few missing features like sending voice messages on ios development is in progress , there s little it can t do . signal is widely regarded as the best in field for security , both for its encryption and for retaining less info on its users than other privacy focused apps . people also tout its ease , devoid of the clunky shenanigans of pgp encryption . the only hint of its underlying security is when using signal for phone calls . once both parties are connected , each is given a random pairing of words to confirm the identity of the person on the other end of the line . if encryption is difficult it self selects for people willing to jump through those hoops , and bad guys are always willing to jump through the hoopsthree years in , open whisper is still running with a skeleton crew just five employees , plus more than a dozen contributors in the open source community . marlinspike wants to grow that team , and he s hunting for talent willing to sacrifice the usual tech salaries and cush silicon valley perks . the website states that there s no gym membership , but any time you feel like doing push ups , we ll do them with you . open whisper doesn t patent its open source protocol , giving it away to the most highly valued companies on the planet for free . instead , open whispers work is completely funded by private donors and foundation grants . marlinspike declined to name individual donors , and tax forms don t disclose them . marlinspike s goal isn t unicorn riches , but unicorn ubiquity . for that , he wants to make encrypted messaging as easy as beautiful , as fun , as expressive , as emoji laden as your default messaging app . his reason if encryption is difficult , it self selects for people willing to jump through those hoops . and bad guys are always willing to jump through the hoops . isis or high risk criminal activity will be willing to click two extra times , he told me . you and i are not . what ? ! i ask . you are , aren t you ? at this point no , he said . i m unwilling . i don t use pgp . i don t do any wing nut stuff . i just want to be a normal person . unless you have facebook and gmail , you won t understand what people s expectations are . marlinspike thinks the reign of the crypto nerds has lasted long enough there are some people who ve built an identity around learning how to use this crazy stuff . and if the basis of your identity is you have master skills that are difficult to use , you re not incentivized to help other people to do it . marlinspike wants to make encryption uncoolly mainstream , in the way facebook became uncool when everyone s parents got an account . that s because marlinspike said people will find that the classic dismissal of encryption i have nothing to hide isn t actually true if the government or nefarious hackers target them . who doesn t have an email sitting in their inbox that would embarrass them to death should it be revealed ? and marlinspike wrote that with , pages of federal statutes and , administrative regulations , you probably do have something to hide , you just don t know it yet . with complete computer security now impossible , he said , the only way to ensure privacy is to make the hacked spoils useless like a thief getting into a lockbox to find only lumps of coal . if you have an unencrypted email sitting somewhere , it will become public , he states plainly with no hint of alarm . that is the inevitable outcome . there s no question washington learned the value of better encryption during the presidential election , with the hacks of the democratic national committee and hillary clinton s campaign chairman john podesta . after the dnc learned it had been compromised , clinton s campaign staffers were instructed to use signal for any communications regarding trump . it was , marlinspike said , a good decision . cam floyd though digital security buffs have long preached about tor and signal at professional conferences , for many surveillance can seem like a distant threat , one that is logistically annoying and just a little tinfoil hatty to deal with . certainly , some communities have been vigilant about the safety of their communications . snowden and laura poitras were early signal adopters and hearty endorsers . civil rights activists also used the app early on , having dealt with government spying since at least cointelpro , continuing on to the fbi s surveillance flights above black lives matter protests . first of all , black communities been knowing that we had to code our communications , said malkia cyril of the oakland based center for media justice , who has used signal to organize black lives matter actions with other activists since . we been coding our communications since slavery . the knowledge of the need is not what s missing for us . it s the skills and the information . but for the ranks of the lazy , oblivious , or those privileged enough to assume they wouldn t be targeted , there was always an excuse to put off switching to encrypted communication . i m not doing anything wrong so what do i care about the nsa , as one documentary filmmaker put it to me recently , or , as summed up in a recent google chat with a friend , i ve debated that . . . but it seems like so much work ! trump s election has prompted many to reconsider their relationship to surveillance . the week after the election , deanna zandt , a brooklyn based digital strategist with hot pink and purple hair , sent out an email to her clients advocating signal . hey y all , as the future looms so pale in front of us , a lot of us tech folks are gearing up for the long haul . i wanted to make sure that everyone feels like they have a handle on how to keep themselves secure online , she wrote . for the ranks of the lazy , oblivious , or those privileged enough to assume they wouldn t be targeted , there was always an excusezandt advises nonprofits like race forward , women action ampamp the media , and planned parenthood , organizations that are not just worried about government surveillance , but doxxing from political opponents . there s a reason people volunteer to be clinic escorts in the offline world , zandt said . we need the equivalent of that level of security in the online world as well . that doesn t mean everyone is psyched about the logistics of it when zandt stood before a race forward staff meeting in new york recently and instructed them to swap out their legions of saved passwords for more complicated ones , she was met with groans . when we talked about the revelations of snowden , it was hard to convince some folks on the progressive side to care , said josh levy , advocacy director of access now , a nonprofit that runs a digital security hotline to counsel activists around the world on how to avoid surveillance . i would talk to folks about the vulnerability of their data and reliance on large commercial platforms , but because of their trust in the president meaning obama they didn t pay attention to it . i d say , what if trump came to have access to that data ? americans had been a minority of callers to access now s digital security hotline . in the weeks post election , americans dominated it . the nascent trump opposition has also been organizing a slew of digital privacy crash courses . the human rights organization security first said they ve gotten post election requests from us media and community groups for digital security consulting , double the amount they normally get over an entire year . cyril s center for media justice co hosted a forum to discuss police surveillance in washington , dc , and the freedom of the press foundation the fiscal sponsor of open whisper systems spoke at a standing room only brooklyn cryptoparty in early december called communicating in trump s america . that event was a coming out of sorts for the newly crypto woke , people like phyllis , a year old gif artist in brooklyn , whose website portrait features her lying on candy in a gummy worm sweatshirt . phyllis considers herself an amateur activist . she had always been interested in online privacy given that her laptop is her primary work tool , but common story had never actually gotten around to doing much about it . jarred by trump s election , she s helping organize a group of graphic designers to do pro bono work for civil rights causes . she came away from the cryptoparty with an action item for the graphic designers first meeting everyone join a signal group chat . friends doing activism stuff are more proactive about it , phyllis said . my friends who are not as involved don t see the need to do it . i texted a friend like are you meeting me at a certain time ? and no response . so i gave up on logistical non activism stuff . some users say they re constantly arbitraging texts political info to signal , banalities to other messengers . if you re talking about the emmys , please get up off my signal , said cyril of the center for media justice . i don t need to encrypt a conversation with my wife about what groceries we need to buy . but jp , a bay area documentary filmmaker , got his family on the app , and they re already using it for not so sensitive intel to wit we are gonna study at brianna s house but going to trader joe s real quick for snacks . marlinspike said now is the perfect time for signal to teeter on default status in politically active circles . people don t generally interrupt a protest to ask , wait a second , what app should we be using ? he said . that s why making this stuff the new normal and a successful part of everyday life is important . so for marlinspike , an arguably bigger moment for encryption than the election came when whatsapp or the secret conversations feature of facebook messenger adopted his protocol , inching him closer to his goal that signal style encryption becomes so universal that he works himself out of his job , mary poppins style . if you re talking about the emmys , please get up off my signal . while the makers of encrypted services say they ve seen previous spikes in activity around current events , trump s rise seems different . nathan freitas , the unitarian universalist developer , directs an open source organization called the guardian project , which created the tor browser for android named orbot . when a brazilian judge outlawed whatsapp for a few days in may , downloads of orbot shot up percent in the first hours . another spike came after the turkish prime minister briefly blocked twitter during protests . freitas said daily orbot downloads in the united states are up percent after the election , and holding steady . he s also been fielding demands for more secure options on ios including an updated tor browser and a way to route apps through tor . and freitas has witnessed other post election changes his year collection of activists in his phone contacts have begun pinging him on signal . we ll see a time bound spike for a day or a week and then things go back to normal . what s different in this case , freitas said of trump s election , is things don t go back to normal . like signal , the guardian project is partially funded by the open technology fund , a federally funded program that , since , channels money to technologies that promote transparent societies , circumvent censorship , or skirt surveillance around the globe . we just never anticipated it was going to become a domestic issue , because we were thinking about tyrannies , a source close to the otf said . marlinspike said it would be a shame if the new administration interfered in future otf funding for encryption . the money for the fund is earmarked by congress , so it s subject to political tinkering and has fluctuated over its five year life . still , support for internet freedom appears in appropriations bills since , fanned out over several departments . why would we the us stop supporting something that upsets russia , iran , and north korea ? the source close to otf said . if those people hate this work , i would continue to do it . cam floyd it s unclear how the new administration s actions could affect the new crypto awakening . increasingly aggressive surveillance policies could solidify the interest , prompting more people to make signal their default messaging app . but there are several ways the administration could make things difficult for the project , and though trump hasn t yet said signal by name , all signs point to him not liking the concept one bit . trump badgered apple earlier this year for refusing to decrypt one of the san bernardino shooter s iphones at the request of the fbi who do they think they are ? he sneered in an interview on fox ampamp friends . meanwhile , marlinspike literally led a round of applause to praise apple s position onstage at a san francisco cryptography conference , stating , i actually think that law enforcement should be difficult . and , in fact , i think it actually should be possible to break the law . i don t like isis . fuck those people , right ? it s not like i m happy that they re using signal . back at his mission district headquarters , marlinspike clarified his statement . he said he s not agnostic about how people are using signal . i have opinions . i don t like isis . fuck those people , right ? it s not like i m happy that they re using signal or something like that . but , he said , bad actors will always find a way to encrypt their communications , while the average person will only do so if it s easy . yet that criminal activity or at least the suspicion thereof will always provide the major argument against encryption . signal was legally challenged for the first time last year , when a federal grand jury in alexandria , virginia , subpoenaed all signal data , messages , and subscriber details associated with two phone numbers for an unspecified criminal investigation . one turned out not to be a signal user . for the other , signal disclosed the only info it logs when the phone number first downloaded the app , and the last time they used the service . signal also lawyered up with aclu attorneys and challenged the grand jury s gag order forbidding them from publicizing the subpoena . signal won , and wrote a blog post about the ordeal . the new administration will have a range of policy carrots and sticks at its disposal . ultimately , it s not going to be possible to stop encryption from being used by people , said electronic frontier foundation executive director cindy cohn , because encryption is applied math , and it turns out you can t ban math . but the government can do a lot to discourage use of the tools . for instance , cohn said , lawmakers could require a backdoor to messages for law enforcement , or the fbi could pressure companies into weakening security . companies are susceptible because maybe they want to be a government contractor , or cooperate with investors or business partners that insinuate that they cooperate with law enforcement , cohn said . i don t have a clear map of all the pressure points , but it s not hard to think about the various ways this could happen . in december , a house working group released a report advocating a middle ground approach to any future regulations , arguing encryption was necessary for national defense and to safeguard critical infrastructure , yet creates trouble for law enforcement that cannot be ignored . as our interview wrapped up , marlinspike hopped into the elevator to head out into the dark too early december afternoon at the corner of th and mission . the street has hosted its share of both world series victory riots and political marches . i d read that marlinspike used to attend political protests , and when i asked if he attended an anti trump one , he just answered , i don t really want to talk about that , and smiled . he questions why reporters label him an anarchist . well , is that a misnomer ? he paused for awhile , then replied , it s complicated . that falls into his personal beliefs , a topic he doesn t want to talk much about . i m not at all used to being a public figure , you know what i mean ? i m a private person . i m less interested in asking people to stop surveilling us , than doing things so that they can t surveil us . marlinspike prefers to let his tech speak for itself a tool with clear political implications and anti authoritarian uses . that s where he s more useful anyways , he said pushing code , not policy . i m happy to support people fighting that fight for encryption , but simply people like apple computer or facebook are probably better positioned to have those conversations than i am . marlinspike instead will force the issue by continuing to roll out his protocol . he likens signal to the demonstrators at standing rock , who stopped the oil pipeline by physically blocking its construction . i m less interested in asking people to stop surveilling us , than doing things so that they can t surveil us , marlinspike said . that direct action is what i want to continue to focus on . lately he s gotten some experience sparring with governments trying to ban his work . when signal was blocked in egypt and the united arab emirates in december , open whisper fought back successfully with a workaround for its android app . reading the news , i texted him on signal about whether he d do the same if ever blocked in the united states . his reply pings yeah we d work to make it available . 	 i reached the breaking point , as many parents do , about two and a half months in . my newborn son , oliver , was hitting a phase where his five senses were really coming online . the mere act of being awake was often overstimulating sometimes he would start to cry when we turned on a bright light or closed a door too loudly . it was late afternoon and he was sitting in my lap wailing . i rocked him , fed him , and changed his diaper , but nothing helped . in desperation i did something that until that point i had resisted i grabbed my iphone and opened up the comics app . as soon as i started flipping through panels of the wolverine saga , the crying stopped . his little mouth gaped open in wonder . i took his hand and swiped it across the screen . a new image appeared . he smiled in delight . my mother came in from the kitchen . what are you showing him ? she asked with horror . don t you know how bad that is for his brain ? it s not that serious , mom , i countered , waving her off . a little bit of time playing with my phone isn t hurting him . my wife , overhearing us , joined in the conversation from the next room . you re going to turn him into a vegetable , she shouted . you re both nuts , i fumed , but i put the phone back in my pocket . oliver burst into tears . photo courtesy of the boston public library . knee jerk technophobiaevery new narrative technology has been demonized upon arrival by those convinced it amprsquos harming their children . in , the american annals of education declared that the ampldquoperpetual reading amprdquo of novels ampldquoinevitably operates to exclude thought , and in the youthful mind to stint the opening mental faculties , by favoring unequal development . no one can have time for reflection , who reads at this rapid rate . amprdquoradio was so addictive , parents warned , that children were skipping meals to tune in , and film transformed viewers into sexually deviant criminals . television was a mental wasteland . video games created violent killers . as for comic books , dr . fredric wertham wrote in my mother s suspicion of screens was just knee jerk nostalgia ampldquobadly drawn , badly written , and badly printed ampmdash a strain on the young eyes and young nervous systems ampmdash the effects of these pulp paper nightmares is that of a violent stimulant . . . unless we want a coming generation even more ferocious than the present one , parents and teachers throughout america must band together to break the comic magazine . amprdquoi viewed my mother amprsquos suspicion of screens as just another form of the knee jerk nostalgia that makes people believe new gadgets are addictive , dangerous , and capable of affecting not just how we think , but the way our bodies work . a few days after the iphone incident , however , i got an email from my mother with links to a half dozen scientific studies about the effect television , computers , and video games can have on young children amprsquos developing brains . too much screen time can , according to the various studies , lead to a delay in verbal skills , poor concentration , emotional instability , and a greater risk of developing attention deficit disorder . in , the venerable american academy of pediatrics officially decreed that exposure to screens is detrimental to children under the age of two . some of the most damning data my mother passed along came from the millennium cohort study , which tracked the long term health and development of children in the uk born between and . it found that by the age of five , children who spent more than three hours a day in front of a screen were more likely to engage in antisocial behaviors such as fighting and stealing than their peers . i wasn amprsquot just stunting my son amprsquos intellectual potential , it seemed . i was turning him into a dangerous hooligan . too much time with these screens can lead to impaired focus . ampldquoi have a lot of concerns about the impact of technology on young children , amprdquo says dr . gary small , a professor at the semel institute for neuroscience and human behavior and the author of ibrain . ampldquotoo much time with these screens can lead to impaired focus and social skills later in life . amprdquo the new wave of smartphones and tablets , says small , are far more compelling to infants than television . ampldquowhen we put kids in a room with an ipad , they will choose that over other toys . they will often choose it over their own mothers . amprdquoas much as it pained me , this was objective evidence i just couldn amprsquot ignore . i amprsquom the kind of guy who falls asleep reading twitter . at least once a month i get so caught up in an iphone game i miss my subway stop . my love of the digital world has led me to a great career , but now it seemed my status as a tech obsessed dad was hurting my son . when i bounced him on my lap and surfed the web , was that like second hand smoke for his fragile young brain ? baby s first ipadduring the first two years of a baby amprsquos life , its brain triples in weight , marking a period of explosive growth that will never be matched again in its life . those early years are a crucial time for mental development , setting the foundation for adulthood . synapses , the connections between neurons in the brain , explode in number . we amprsquore born with about , synapses per neuron , but by age three we amprsquoll have around , . from that point the number of neural connections actually begins to decrease . this explains , for example , why children are capable of learning complex language skills that intelligent adults find difficult to master later in life . for me , that amprsquos an argument in favor of giving my son access to technology at an early age . if the paradigm for his budding mind is swiping through apps and playing interactive games , he will be geared to build great digital tools . why would i emphasize spending time with books when they will likely be dusty artifacts by the time he amprsquos a teenager , relics of another age like the telegraph and the typewriter ? if oliver wants to be a figure skater or toll booth operator , i amprsquoll support him . but as a parent with the privilege of pushing him in what i think is the right direction , i take douglas rushkoff amprsquos motto to heart program or be programmed . learning to love technology , to build and to code , are the best skills i can give to prepare him for a bright future . what matters is the difference between passive and active consumption searching for a way to justify this rationale , i called dr . dimitri christakis , director of the center for child health , behavior and development at seattle children s research institute . ampldquoscreens are purely a delivery mechanism . what parents should be focused on is the content , amprdquo he told me . a blanket ban on screens , he argued , doesn amprsquot make sense . ampldquoi amprsquom a member of the american academy of pediatrics , but i have to say , their statement about the effects of electronic media is clearly out of date . amprdquowhat matters , says christakis , is the difference between passive and active consumption . in a study he conducted , two groups of kids played with blocks and watched tv . the group who spent their time engaged in active play scored significantly better on subsequent language acquisition tests . christakis is now replicating this study comparing the effect of television to interactive ipad games . the research isn amprsquot finished yet , but christakis says , ampldquoi suspect the effect of the ipad on the brain will be much closer to the blocks than the tv . amprdquoheather kirkorian , an assistant professor in developmental psychology at the university of wisconsin , came to a similar conclusion . she taught two groups of children new words one group just watched a video , the other had to touch a screen to produce an outcome . ampldquofor kids under months old , they learned more when there was an interactive component . and so i think that shows the potential touchscreen devices might have as educational tools , especially when compared to television . amprdquoa balanced approachmy wife and i took oliver on his first trip outside the country recently , a train ride to a wedding in canada . it was a scenic journey first we rushed past the hudson river on our left , then lake champlain on our right . but it was also a long day , hours on the rails , and when he got bored my son started to screech . my wife held him up to the window so he could take in the epic countryside rolling by , but he was not impressed . he tried to lick the window . oliver strained for the screen when i fired up a game of anomaly korea on my ipad . ampldquodon amprsquot you think we should be teaching him to appreciate the beauty of nature ? amprdquo my wife asked . feeling guilty , i closed my game and redirected oliver back to staring out the window . a family at the dinner table , each focused on their own personal screen , is the epitome of the idea of being ampldquoalone together . amprdquo but an ipad game seems like something my son and i could learn to love together . and some experts agree . ampldquoif you amprsquore there to guide them , today amprsquos interactive devices can be a great way to learn and to bond , amprdquo says michael levine , executive director of the joan ganz cooney center at sesame workshop . rather than making arbitrary limits on screen time , says levine , parents should make sure kids amprsquo experience with technology is shared . an ipad game seems like something my son and i could learn to love togetherlevine says he can relate to my desire to inculcate my son with my love of today amprsquos technology . ampldquofor dustin hoffman in the graduate , the future was amplsquoplastics . amprsquo i tell my kids , think digital and global . there is a certain kind of modern literacy that you are trying to introduce . amprdquoin some ways , says levine , keeping kids away from screens completely for the first few years of their life will set pretty unrealistic expectations about their exposure to technology . ampldquolet amprsquos not be pollyanna here . we are looking at wearable technology becoming the norm within a couple of years . amprdquothat wedding weekend was spent in a campground an hour outside montreal where there was no cell service or wi fi . for the first day i compulsively checked my phone , just in case some stray signal happened to poke through the clouds enough to let me refresh my twitter feed . but eventually i gave up trying . oliver loved walking around the lake , so we did laps through the forest , stopping to watch a flock of geese feeding near the banks . sometime during that trip , i realized it was silly to worry oliver wouldn amprsquot become a digital native unless i force fed him a tech heavy diet from day one that idea was just as foolish as the notion that brief exposure to gadgets and screens was somehow toxic for his brain . as long as we balanced the different aspects of his life , encouraged his passions and tempered his addictions , things would sort themselves out . and besides , whatever technology i amprsquom preparing or protecting him from today will likely seem as outdated to a teenage oliver as my collection of rap cds . ampldquothe world of digital media is transforming so rapidly , it amprsquos very hard for researchers to keep up with the effects on children , amprdquo says daniel anderson , a professor of psychology at the university of massachusetts who studies childhood development and media . ampldquotv today is , fundamentally , the same as tv years ago , but the way we engage with computers today is very different from , even years ago . amprdquo in raising his own son , anderson had ideas for how much television he should watch , but no clue about how to respond to the social networks that ended up becoming his son amprsquos obsession . ampldquoi expect those changes to keep accelerating , amprdquo anderson says . ampldquowe amprsquore beyond the event horizon , so to speak . amprdquo	 the enlightenment sages who wrote the first amendment into the us constitution in created the most secure legal foundation for a real democracy in history thus far . by refusing to grant government the power to shut anyone up , no matter how obnoxious , the authors of the bill of rights ensured that even if the worst , most corrupt idiots managed to grab power they wouldn amprsquot be able to silence their political enemies in stark contrast to ampldquothe divine right amprdquo of kings , who dealt with the opposition by throwing it into a dungeon . it amprsquos just words ampldquocongress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion , or prohibiting the free exercise thereof or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press or the right of the people peaceably to assemble , and to petition the government for a redress of grievances . amprdquowhat the first amendment really grants is the power of society to maintain its own standards over those of government . over centuries , sometimes despite the most furious opposition , individuals have increased their participation and added the force of their lives , their words , and their ideas to the culture . and so the principle of free speech is growing , slowly and unsteadily , into the truth of its logic each person , each member of the press , each citizen can believe , think , and speak independently and without fear of oppression . the same is true of amendments two through ten the bill of rights is a political structure built to safeguard a democratic state , but its implications in the personal lives of that state amprsquos citizens are immediate and profound . because of the ironclad protection of the first amendment , it has proved very difficult for government to control what we can read , listen to or see . a few curbs have been put up , though , notably by the federal communications commission fcc , the regulations of which largely determine what kind of material is bleeped out of radio and television broadcasts . there amprsquos a temptation to believe that even so mild a form of censorship as broadcast bleeping is a curtailment of that freedom , but the truth is more complicated . bleeping can also be understood as a vivid illustration of the first amendment in action . the bleep of censorship invariably draws attention to the material it was intended to conceal circles it , if you like , by loudly omitting it . bleeping also serves as proof that there is a watcher someone looking out for us in advance . in the bleep lies the evidence that you are being ampldquoprotected amprdquo ampmdash but by whom ? why ? and from what ? lt ! j document . ready function j body . addclass toggle on if j body . hasclass desktop layout edit this name j . write toggle button . last . after show redacted j toggle button . click function e e . preventdefault var body , button buttons j toggle button body j body if body . hasclass toggle on body . removeclass toggle on body . addclass toggle off edit this name buttons . text hide redacted else body . removeclass toggle off body . addclass toggle on edit this name buttons . text show redacted gta politician in your living roomin a tower in babel , media historian erik barnouw describes the invention of bleeping at the dawn of the radio age . or proto bleeping , i should say , since the earliest system didn amprsquot produce a censorship sound , but rather provided the engineer with a switch to a nearby phonograph that could be flipped to play music in case any troublesome content should appear over the live microphone . this innovation seems to have been prompted by the appearance on newark amprsquos wjz of one olga petrova born muriel harding in , a famous vaudeville actress and singer known and feared for her strong views . petrova was ampldquoa fanatic on birth control and always making speeches about it , amprdquo according to barnouw . she was friends with margaret sanger , who founded the american birth control league , the organization that would later become planned parenthood . one night in , petrova , then engaged at a newark theater , went to the local radio station wjz to perform . the great war had just ended , during the course of which the government had forbidden the use of private radio equipment . after the armistice the navy tried to retain monopoly control of radio , but congress put a stop to their power grab . wartime restrictions were lifted , but the pioneers of broadcasting such as those at wjz were mindful of potential government interference , and petrova had a reputation as a firebrand . she disarmed her hosts by announcing that she would be performing her own versions of mother goose rhymes , and then proceeded to read the following there was an old woman who lived in a shoe , she had so many children because she didn amprsquot know what to do . the comstock laws , which banned the distribution of ampldquoobscene amprdquo materials , including information about contraception , were still in force petrova had , arguably , kind of broken the law . the means for censoring broadcast content came years before the emergence of the first national broadcast network ampldquothe staff was terrified , amprdquo barnouw relates . ampldquothey were certain there would be trouble from washington . westinghouse then owner of wjz executives were already nervous about possibilities of this sort , and had wondered what to do if a red got on the air . an emergency switch was provided for the engineer in the shack . amprdquo thus , he could switch to that ampldquophonograph beside him ampmdash on his own judgment or on a signal from the studio . amprdquothus it was that the means for censoring broadcast content came years before the emergence of the first national broadcast network , nbc , in , and the federal radio commission in . by then , the technique was well established . petrova recounts an episode that took place in she amprsquod been reading a scene from her play , hurricane , on radio station wor when the red on air light suddenly went out . afterward , she learned she amprsquod been cut off the engineer told her that ampldquoradio audiences were very mixed amphellip it wouldn amprsquot do to offend any of their listeners . amprdquo ampldquoone would suppose that radio audiences must be completely paralyzed , amprdquo petrova observed dryly , ampldquoand therefore unable to turn off the switches of their own sets the instant their ears were shocked amphellip by what they heard . amprdquothe tug of war in the courts , in congress and in the media over restrictions on free speech in broadcasting has altered very little since then . justice william brennan was still making petrova amprsquos argument in his dissent in fcc v . pacifica foundation , the supreme court case involving george carlin amprsquos ampldquofilthy words amprdquo routine ampldquowhatever the minimal discomfort suffered by a listener who inadvertently tunes into a program he finds offensive during the brief interval before he can simply extend his arm and switch stations or flick the amplsquooff amprsquo button , it is surely worth the candle to preserve the broadcaster amprsquos right to send , and the right of those interested to receive , a message entitled to full first amendment protection . amprdquodecades later , stephen king repeated the sentiment in a interview ampldquoif howard stern is saying stuff that you don amprsquot like , if it offends you , you got a hand , you reach out , take hold of the knob , turn it off . he amprsquos gone , goodbye amphellip you don amprsquot need a politician in your living room to say you amprsquove got to put a band aid over that guy amprsquos mouth . amprdquowhat the bleep ? society is often compared to a single organism , ampldquothe body politic amprdquo or ampldquothe hive . amprdquo the increasing interconnectedness of people , of groups and nations , makes this analogy seem truer and more obvious all the time . if the hive has a mind , it has also an id the primitive , unconscious , instinctive part of our collective nature . it is also as uncontrollable and strange as the id of an individual person , that dark wild substrate of the psyche freud called ampldquoa cauldron full of seething excitations amphellip filled with energy reaching it from the instincts . amprdquo ampldquoi could kill you amprdquo is the standard illustration of the id in a single mind the fleeting , instinctive impulse that the superego effortlessly represses . the collective id is limitlessly more complicated it contains all our boundless shades of darkness and all our craziest , most selfish impulses . it is the total of all we are ashamed or alarmed or unhappy to feel , and everything we would prefer to keep behind the curtain . the collective id is what is bleeped or censored out of our media , which is really just another way of saying our shared consciousness . society amprsquos relationship with the dark side of its own nature is complex and contentious it amprsquos a struggle that is always clearly visible in our comedy . stand up comedy in particular is intimately concerned with ampldquocrossing the line amprdquo in order to confront us with the truth about ourselves . lenny bruce might be the best practitioner of this kind of stand up he was like a firehose for the collective id , like the role played today by kanye west , lewis black , or lady gaga . bruce amprsquos personal life was very troubled , but it was also his consummate skill in shocking the establishment that led him to be repeatedly harassed , arrested , and jailed . by the way , are there any niggers here tonight ? in a whisper ampldquowhat did he say amprdquo ampldquoare there any niggers here tonight ? amprdquo ampldquojesus christ , is that cruel . does he have to get that low for laughs ? amphellip amprdquoare there any niggers here tonight ? i know that one nigger who works here , i see him back there . oh , there amprsquos two niggers , customers , and ah , aha ! between those two niggers sits a kike ampmdash man , thank god for the kike ! amphellip the point ? that the word amprsquos suppression gives it the power , the violence , the viciousness . dig . if president kennedy got on television and said , ampldquotonight i amprsquod like to introduce the niggers in my cabinet , amprdquo and he yelled ampldquonigger nigger nigger nigger nigger nigger amprdquo at every nigger he saw , ampldquoboogey boogey boogey boogey boogey , nigger nigger nigger amphellip amprdquo amplsquotill nigger didn amprsquot mean anything anymore , till nigger lost its meaning ampmdash you amprsquod never make any four year old nigger cry because somebody called him a nigger in school . this routine is years old , but it still is very moving , still has the power to create discomfort , even anxiety . it amprsquos hard to say how much grief lenny bruce would have been given for writing and performing it today ampmdash one imagines he would have faced a lot of criticism from both extremes of the political spectrum ampmdash but it would be possible to watch on cable now , and on the internet , at least for the moment . still , this performance couldn amprsquot appear on ordinary television , at least not without so many bleeps as to render it entirely incomprehensible . luckier performers have made a success out of flouting conventional morality . in a notorious appearance on late night with david letterman , madonna whom letterman introduced by dryly observing that she had ampldquoslept with some of the biggest names in the entertainment industry amprdquo smoked a cigar and said ampldquofuck amprdquo times . letterman faux innocently asked , ampldquoyou realize this is being broadcast , don amprsquot you ? amprdquoyou might say that our relations with the cultural id provide a simple , accurate litmus test for what , in the end , separates the liberal from the conservative in matters of social policy , and determines his real attitude toward speech rights . social liberals are in a state of d ampeacutetente , or perhaps even on speaking terms , with the beast within , while social conservatives still seek to shame , repress , and somehow eradicate it . that amprsquos part of the reason why bleeping itself is inherently so funny . the bleep is the shock of a hidden truth revealed an explicit illustration of the superego amprsquos casual strangling of an unwanted , unworthy impulse the knowledge that this struggle is always going on beneath the relatively untroubled surface of daily life . first it was unconscious , and now it amprsquos not . my name is amphellip comedic meta bleepshortly after it became a familiar convention , the bleep became the subject of comedy in its own right . this kind of humor has a long pedigree . there amprsquos ampldquoelderly man river , amprdquo a lovely bit from stan freberg amprsquos radio show in which a persnickety censor , mr . tweedly of the citizens radio committee , noisily and self righteously bowdlerized a performance of the song ampldquoold man river . amprdquothe writers of arrested development are masters of this comic technique , repeatedly pushing the envelope . they snuck the word ampldquofucking amprdquo past prime time television censors by putting half the word at the beginning of the show , and half at the end . it amprsquos in the nature of certain artists to bend societal restraints to their own endsbut it was with the aid of censor bleeping that arrested development reached the summit of its satiric genius . the show amprsquos creator , mitch hurwitz , told neda ulaby of npr , ampldquowe realized , you know , it amprsquos more fun to not know exactly what it is that we amprsquore saying amphellip it becomes kind of a puzzle for people . and i think it amprsquos about , you know , letting your imagination do the work . amprdquoit amprsquos in the nature of certain artists to bend societal restraints to their own ends . in amprsquos ampldquomy name is amprdquo eminem needlessly substituted the phrase ampldquohi kids , do you like primus amprdquo for the original , ampldquohi kids , do you like violence amprdquo in the ampldquoclean amprdquo radio friendly version of the song . this produced a new , veiled joke . primus , who composed and performed the south park theme song , is well known for a certain penchant for all things frowned on by the fcc . if eminem wasn amprsquot to be permitted to tease the youngs for their attraction to violence , then he would surreptitiously tease them for liking ampldquowynona amprsquos big brown beaver . amprdquoa more recondite instance of the comedic meta bleep came in the inaugural episode of that deceptively moronic comedy central sitcom , workaholics . it amprsquos a layered , nuanced comment on the different kinds of mediation and restraints between performer and audience technical , editorial , societal , legal . in one scene , our slacker heroes discuss the dubbed profanities in a cable broadcast of die hard . adam yo , kyle , what amprsquos up ? kyle it amprsquos almost the ending , bro . it amprsquos die hard . adam did they just say , ampldquoclucking amprdquo ? blake yeah it must be on cable , so they switch the swear words out ? adam oh carl winslow , i amprsquod forgot about him ! karl ssshhhh ! anders did you know reginald veljohnson wasn amprsquot actually originally cast ampmdashkarl shut the cluck up . anders snatches kyle amprsquos snacks away , kyle says ampldquofuck amprdquo ampmdash and it is bleeped out . the fantastic confusion produced by south park amprsquos depictions of mohammed resulted in the collision of the meta bleep with the real thing in ampldquoepisode . amprdquo in this episode , the people of south park have to trade mohammed to tom cruise and his gang of angry celebrities in exchange for their dropping a class action suit , but nobody has reckoned with the ginger separatist movement , and it just gets crazier from there . there could be no doubting the real danger in making critical portraits of islam after dutch director theo van gogh was gunned down by a radical islamist in amsterdam in for having made a documentary film censuring the treatment of islamic women . so , shortly after the airing of south park amprdquoepisode , amprdquo when a group called revolution muslim threatened violence against the show s creators , matt stone and trey parker , in a blog post claiming that the two would ampldquoprobably end up like theo van gogh amprdquo for their comic portrayal of mohammed , comedy central wasn amprsquot prepared to take any chances . the studio added its own real censor bleeps to the comic ones written in by parker , and additionally bleeped out three long speeches in their entirety . to this day the uncensored version of ampldquoepisode amprdquo is not available to stream or buy . censorship , in practicethe supreme court has revisited fcc restrictions governing radio and broadcast television a number of times federal laws don amprsquot govern cable television , which is regulated locally . the federal laws guide ampldquoobscenity , indecency , and profanity amprdquo the fcc provides a handy fact sheet outlining the differences . in order to be considered obscenity , the material in question must pass a three pronged test first , it has to ampldquoappeal to the prurient interest , amprdquo or be be liable to turn the average person on sexually secondly , it must describe sexual conduct ampldquoin a patently offensive way amprdquo and finally , ampldquothe material taken as a whole , must lack serious literary , artistic , political or scientific value . amprdquo the last is how both ulysses and lolita slide out of being considered ampldquoobscene . amprdquo so , fuck em . i still have a job , and they don t . indecency , as defined by the fcc , is a much broader category , and can be anything that offensively describes ampldquosexual or excretory organs or activities . amprdquo so , pooping , farting , mentioning of the peen . and profanity is just ampldquooffensive language , amprdquo expletives and the like . but because the community amprsquos word is the real law , the fcc can amprsquot decide on its own what is offensive and what isn amprsquot not because they are sensible or thoughtful or even have half a brain , but because freedom of speech is the law . hence the fcc must rely on actual complaints received from members of the public in order to take action or levy fines against anybody . otherwise they would likely be sued , and they would lose . though cable networks aren amprsquot directly affected by fcc indecency regulations , they still must answer to audiences and advertisers . this is how the first amendment is supposed to work strategies for arriving at a consensus must be developed by the community itself . hence the modern censors of the cable era the standards amp practices departments at each cable network . these departments comb through every second of material broadcast , and try to make sure that the work is suitable for their wide audiences . this work requires a lot of sensitivity it amprsquos a balance , and is about making material available to interested audiences , as well as forbidding that which is likely to offend . robert pondillo amprsquos book , america amprsquos first network tv censor the work of nbc amprsquos stockton helffrich , documents early network censorship . when cher received a lifetime achievement award at the billboard music awards in , aerosmith amprsquos steven tyler introduced her , shouting gleefully , ampldquoshe amprsquos got patents on her ass ! amprdquo and when she took the stage , she said i amprsquove worked really hard , i amprsquove had great people to work with amphellip and amphellip oh , you know what ? i amprsquove also had critics for the last years saying i was on my way out every year , alright ? so , fuck amplsquoem . i still have a job , and they don amprsquot . this moment , among other similar ones , was described in the supreme court filings in fcc v . fox television stations , inc . . they weren amprsquot worried about steven tyler amprsquos ampldquoassless pants amprdquo comment , only about the single word , ampldquofuck , amprdquo that cher had nonchalantly dropped . in the years of bush ii , congress and the fcc broadly expanded their indecency policies , eventually deciding that networks could be fined up to , for ampldquofleeting amprdquo indecencies such as the inadvertent flash of a boob , or a casual expletive like cher amprsquos . but the court held that the fcc couldn amprsquot reasonably fine broadcasters for ampldquofleeting expletives amprdquo and ampldquomomentary nudity amprdquo after the fact , because their regulations were ampldquounconstitutionally vague , amprdquo so that broadcasters could not be sure of exactly what to avoid in advance . the judges stopped short of saying that the fcc amprsquos indecency regulations violate the first amendment they just said , y amprsquoall need to figure this out . if the supreme court ever decides that the fcc has no right to enforce indecency regulations , there will never be another bleep . it amprsquos quite possible that the day will arrive , if the outcome of hustler magazine v . falwell is any indication . here , the supreme court considered the matter of a satirical ad in hustler , claiming that moral majority leader reverend jerry falwell had lost his virginity to his mother in an outhouse while the two of them were ampldquodrunk off our god fearing asses on campari . amprdquo hustler amprsquos publisher , larry flynt , spoke about the case in an interview with ken paulson of the first amendment center . paulson falwell sued you , and at the lower court , he actually won in a very strange way . not for libel , because no one could believe that there was any truth to it , but because you were , in effect , mean to him intentional infliction of emotional distress . flynt they wanted me to pay reverend falwell , because i hurt his feelings . my attorney says ampldquopay it , amprdquo because he was suing me for million . he said it will cost you million to take it to the supreme court . i said , ampldquowell , that amprsquos where we amprsquore going , amprdquo and we lost in the fourth circuit . it wasn amprsquot looking very good then , and no one thought that the supreme court would ever grant cert , and they did . and their decision was unanimous . i remember justice rehnquist amprsquos words even so clearly today . he said , ampldquosimply because the government finds speech offensive does not give them the right to repress it amphellip and i don amprsquot think it was the supreme court siding with me over reverend falwell . i think that they were looking at the practical implications of the decision if they would have ruled the other way . amprdquoadventure time at san diego comic conmaria bustillos the fcc indecency regulations , as i understand them , are to do with sexual activity and excretory functions bodily functions , basically . how much do you have to think about these regulations as you go about your work ? adam muto supervising producer , adventure time a lot of it amprsquos done internally , actually . we have our own s ampp standards amp practices department at cartoon network . so it never has come to the fcc ruling against us . the tone of the material is really dark , but that amprsquos not the hard stuff to get through . the hard stuff to get through is the more obvious , like , scatological targets . kent osborne head of story , adventure time the poop is always internal . eyebrows raised around the table mb well , hmm , eventually , though ampmdashko it becomes external . mb these regulations are very much about what children should or should not be exposed to to protect their innocence , you might say . your stuff is pitched at children what do you think about exposing them to nihilism , the end of the world , the apocalyptic themes you guys go in for ? it amprsquos serious business . am yeah it amprsquos serious , but i don amprsquot think it amprsquos beyond the pale , or that it amprsquos something that they amprsquore not seeing anywhere else . childhood amprsquos sort of amphellip i mean , i was a really depressed kid , at times . wouldn amprsquot you want to see that reflected in what you amprsquore watching ? dead airthe petrovas of today , should they come on the radio and make reckless remarks , might be dealt with by means of an eventide bd broadcast obscenity delay , also known as the ampldquodump button . amprdquo the dump button delay system is different from bleeping in that the edit is concealed completely from the audience . before the invention of the dump button , this kind of hidden cutting was often done with tape delays . as sound engineering consultant gary mcauliffe explained at part , a low power radio broadcasting forum take two identical recorders , place side by side amprsquo apart assuming ips tape speed . record on one machine , but run the tape to the take up reel on the second deck , which plays the tape . this gives you about seconds to catch the s word . we used to do this all the time on any call in show back in the amprsquo s . you need closely matched machines , otherwise , you wind up with either tape on the floor or broken tape amphellip back then the fcc was really strict , so we took no chances amphellip amphellipthe dump button provides a relatively insidious , more censorship like form of editing , because its alteration of the original broadcast has been actively concealed . if we are to have disagreements about what constitutes acceptable media for a civilized general audience ampmdash and we should ampmdash they should be aired in every possible way . through a very loud bleep , for example . and through litigation , and yes , complaints to the fcc . through arguments at dinner tables and letters to the editor . a bleep is honest , immediate , noisy . it amprsquos the cultural superego in motion , calling attention to a difference of opinion regarding the offensiveness of the bleeped material . here is this questionable thing think about it for yourself , investigate if you like . in this way , the bleep is a literal demonstration of first amendment principles the khz sound of a community actively engaged in the process of establishing standards , and struggling to understand itself . 	 ever since he was , when omar danoun started med school , they amprsquove called him ampldquodoctor . amprdquo friends and family , cousins and neighbors ampmdash everyone in rantis , the west bank village he amprsquos lived in his whole life . it amprsquos a close knit population of around , , belonging to six clans and spread over a little more than acres of arid , rocky hillside , dotted with olive trees that cut hard shadows in the ochre earth . the carved stone ruins of roman wells and cisterns abound , traces of a centuries long history of human habitation . donkeys graze at the outskirts of town , and nearby a small brown dog lopes after a chicken , yapping as he goes . a group of giggling children sends a soccer ball skidding across a concrete roadway in the last of the fading daylight . to the west , just over the next ridge from rantis , lies the green line , the border separating the west bank and israel . a wire fence and gravel track run along the ridge on the other side , the israeli military conducts training exercises , and occasionally the flat crack of automatic weapons fire echoes dully in the valley . from the village summit one can look over the ridge and the wall , to the far horizon and the rising skyline of tel aviv , and beyond it , the placid immensity of the mediterranean sea . omar has lived here his entire years , and they call him doctor now because that is what he does . he ministers to the sick , helps to heal the afflicted the work of doctors everywhere . tall and slender , with dark , closely cropped hair and beard , he has a quiet intensity as he attends to his fellow villagers , farmers mostly , whether they need just a quick checkup or immediate attention , something that can amprsquot wait for the minute drive over dusty roads to ramallah , the nearest city . children , adults , everyone . you could say he was raised to do this work . when omar was born , his father , who once taught english literature and now manages student textbooks for the ministry of education , started an apiary in the valley west of rantis . the family came to raise more and more bees , selling their honey to pay for omar amprsquos education . he graduated and opened his clinic , committing himself to the long hours of caring for his people . today , he says , i want to go back and repay them what they paid me . because they spent a lot of money and effort on things for getting me education . so it amprsquos a kind of payback . omar wants to pay back his parents not only by becoming the village doctor , but in another way , one almost completely foreign to palestine . he amprsquos among a group of students and researchers who amprsquove formed the palestinian neuroscience initiative , hoping to kickstart sophisticated scientific research in an area with only the most basic medical infrastructure , and where specialization ampmdash in narrow but vital areas including pediatric cardiology , but also broader fields such as neurology and psychiatry ampmdash is almost completely absent . even among typically ambitious medical students , the idea of establishing a foundation for original neuroscience research in palestine seemed daunting . the students were too busy or simply uninterested in clinical research there were few qualified teachers there was little equipment , or money to buy any . what there was in abundance was skepticism . that was four years ago . today the initiative has more than students doing original research , and partnerships with scientists from rutgers university ampndashnewark , harvard university , switzerland amprsquos ampeacutecole polytechnique f ampeacuted ampeacuterale de lausanne , and the international school for advanced studies in italy . it has produced four published papers four more are currently under review . last september , it received a national institutes of health grant , considered among the most prestigious in the field , a marker of serious , professional work . it amprsquos making the kind of steady progress necessary to build an institution . but most importantly to omar and his colleagues , it amprsquos giving them an opportunity to help . to give back . building a foundationbuilding a foundationon a sunny summer afternoon , omar walks through a door with a computer printed piece of paper taped to the outside . al quds cognitive neuroscience lab , it reads , and the door opens into a rectangular , white walled classroom dominated by a long wooden table . just over a dozen students are seated around it . the women sit on the left , nearly all wearing hijabs , and the men sit on the right . at the head of the table , umbilicalled to the wall by a long extension cord , sits a macbook . on screen , the slightly pixelated face of mohammad herzallah leads the day amprsquos discussion , shifting black squares representing his curly hair . his voice , originating almost , miles away , in newark , new jersey , asks about the role of the hippocampus in treating depression . an extended answer follows about the workings of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors , a popular class of antidepressant drugs that includes prozac , zoloft , and paxil . or rather , popular in the united states . according to the world health organization , . percent of us adults surveyed experienced a major depressive episode in their lives the centers for disease control found that about one in every americans aged and over takes antidepressants , including ssris . as both diagnoses of depression and use of antidepressants rose in the us , prozac became a household name . more than just a drug , it has become a cultural signifier for debates about mental illness and its proffered cures . depression in the west bank is at percent ampmdash nearly double that of the usin palestine , by contrast , television does not air commercials for antidepressants , nor do magazines feature full page , pastel colored ads suggesting you ask your doctor if a particular pill is right for you . depression itself remains stigmatized . people don amprsquot want to speak about it , people don amprsquot want to mention it , people don amprsquot even want to speak about family members who have it , says herzallah , co founder and director of the palestinian neuroscience initiative . depressed patients often don amprsquot seek medical attention if they do , they often couch their ailment in physical terms , complaining about , for example , lower back pain . and they try hard not to be seen leaving a mental health clinic . beneath the collective reticence , palestine has a problem . according to one published study , percent of palestinians will experience a major depressive episode in their lifetimes . herzallah believes data gathered by the initiative indicates that rate in the west bank is closer to percent ampmdash or nearly double that of the us . yet , as herzallah puts it , we have about psychiatrists and neurologists to serve . million inhabitants of the west bank in palestine . people don amprsquot want to speak about it , people don amprsquot want to mention it , people don amprsquot even want to speak about family members who have it . a high rate of depression , and not enough trained medical professionals to treat it . it was a serious problem , yes , but also a potential opportunity . and mohammad herzallah knew how to recognize an opportunity . he hadn t planned to be a doctor . growing up in jenin , in the northern west bank , he wanted to be a physicist , either astro or nuclear . his father , himself a professor , cautioned him that physics and palestine don amprsquot mix if you want to do science and get support to go somewhere else to do it , he said , go for it . if not , consider something else . always interested in biology , herzallah chose medical school at al quds university , a palestinian school in abu dis , on the outskirts of jerusalem . when he arrived , he focused on neuroscience , teaching himself . he faced down a lot of skepticism in those early days . neuroscience simply wasn amprsquot being done at al quds . as an eager young medical student who wanted to become a researcher , he says , there were no opportunities at all . no facilities , no resources , and , perhaps most crucially , no understanding that research mattered . and doctors lacking the basic tools to treat their patients weren amprsquot likely to be swayed by herzallah amprsquos youthful enthusiasm they amprsquod tell him he was crazy to focus on such specialized research when people needed medical help now . even his father told him he was crazy he was on his own . until his fifth year , when he met dr . mark gluck and dr . adel misk . brought together by previous collaborations on parkinson amprsquos research , the two neuroscientists sought to establish the infrastructure for neuroscience and mental health research in palestine . it was a daunting goal their two schools , rutgers university ampndashnewark for gluck , al quds university for misk , had joined together , but as gluck says , it was very hard to find any student who would work for free on a project most of them thought would go nowhere . comparing their resources ampmdash teachers , technology , and money ampmdash with the million dollar labs at cutting edge world institutions , he says , provoked not just skepticism , but despair . among those initial recruits , though , was herzallah , who gluck dubs an absolute superstar . and soon enough the neuroscientists recognized the one problem they amprsquod come together to address also provided an opportunity . in palestine , there were many depressed patients to treat , and most of them had never taken any form of antidepressant . that enabled research on how antidepressants affect previously unmedicated brains ampmdash study difficult in , for example , the united states , where a much higher percentage of the population has taken such drugs . palestine has a relatively homogenous gene poolpalestine had another advantage a genetically homogenous population . different people react differently to antidepressants up to half of patients gain no benefits at all . genetics play a role in how patients react , adding one more variable to any study . it amprsquos especially difficult to control in a country like the united states , where centuries of immigration and intermarriage have diversified the gene pool . palestine , by contrast , has a relatively homogenous gene pool thanks to a lack of immigration and a tradition of inter familial marriage relatives marrying one another . those marriages lead to genetic homogenization in the next generation , which can create serious health problems as negative traits get amplified . rare genetic disorders such as juvenile onset parkinson s disease in children as young as , familial schizophrenia , and early onset alzheimer s disease are more prevalent among palestinians , says herzallah , in part because of a lack of genetic diversity . that gives the budding neurogeneticists at the initiative a tragic opportunity to study the links between genes and these rare diseases . the students had one more unique opportunity . more than half of palestine amprsquos people are younger than . rates of depression vary with age , and having so many young people offered an opportunity to study those differences . from the beginning , the initiative amprsquos founders focused on turning problems into opportunities , and on building a foundation that would last , not just for the students involved , but for the whole community . we train students to do research , herzallah says , but what we want to do is invest in people . in the long run , herzallah and his colleagues believe , they amprsquore helping to create not just researchers , but invested citizens who amprsquoll fight the palestinian brain drain by staying to help their homeland and people . research lies at the heart of medicine , and healthcare should be concerned with providing service , but with finding answers as well . the inner voicethe inner voice the quality of life here is . . . i mean , it amprsquos bad , it amprsquos not the best . finances are bad . so everything is against people coming back here , says ibrahim mughrabi , a postdoctoral researcher with the palestinian neuroscience initiative . the unemployment rate in palestine is over percent , with a poverty rate nearly as high . over half the labor force works in the service industry , and economic growth is driven almost entirely by donor aid and government spending , with very little private development . with the import and export of goods and labor controlled by israeli security policies , palestine has difficulty utilizing local resources . smart people can see more opportunities elsewhere , and seize them where they can . but mughrabi , like his colleagues , chose to stay . he helped establish the neurogenetics program , with studies examining genetic markers that confer risk for psychiatric disorders . he also examines how genotype affects responses to therapy , studying how genetic differences determine whether antidepressants help a patient . he describes the initiative as taking the first steps toward a palestinian neuroscience institute that would support researchers , educate clinicians and students , and inform the public about mental health issues . like many of his colleagues , he believes research lies at the heart of medicine , and healthcare should be concerned with providing service , but with finding answers as well . palestine needs doctors and clinicians , and it needs the medical infrastructure to support them . but it also needs researchers willing to remain and address their people s unique problems . many in the initiative echo mughrabi amprsquos sentiment . sundus shalabi , a fifth year medical student , says , i believe that you can do much more good for the whole community than just being a doctor . if you amprsquore a researcher , you can help so many people out there who are suffering . she amprsquos worked on genetic research with the lab for two years she amprsquos grateful to be doing the kind of work she believes in . i think as a doctor , as a medical student , and as a researcher , you have to make some sacrifices if you want to do some good for this country . i amprsquom willing to make these sacrifices because i think it amprsquos a very good thing to do for the people . we have very much to offer for our people and for the country , but this energy is wasted , so we need to collect it . collecting energy , harvesting brainpower and putting it to productive , local use . that amprsquos what the initiative amprsquos all about . it amprsquos a long term endeavor , as everyone acknowledges . we amprsquore starting a new generation of not only good medical students , shalabi says , but also motivated young researchers who are willing to do something good for this country other than just prescribing medicine . and for some students that means sacrifice giving up potentially lucrative jobs elsewhere , declining the clear path to becoming just a doctor , and dedicating themselves to a project the provokes skepticism in even their fellow medical students . i think as a doctor , as a medical student , and as a researcher , you have to make some sacrifices if you want to do some good for this country . you have to have faith to do this . without hearing anybody , you have to go with your inner voice to do things , especially in palestine , says aya imam , a sixth year medical student from east jerusalem . she was among the first to join the lab in she saw it as an opportunity to study abroad , and later spent two months as an intern in switzerland . during that time , she says , all i was thinking about was going back home . because whatever you do outside , okay , you re benefiting , but you don t feel like you re giving . she wasn amprsquot giving until she was back home , doing her part for the people around her . currently she amprsquos working on antidepressant research , looking for impairments in cognitive function among patients taking ssris . amplsquoyou want to do what in palestine ? you know , we don amprsquot have roads , amprsquo laughs mousa hamad , describing the skepticism he often still encounters when talking about the initiative . he works alongside mohammad herzallah at rutgers ampndashnewark , doing research and helping to publicize their work . it can sound crazy to outsiders . even herzallah amprsquos father still thinks he amprsquos crazy ampmdash if maybe a little less so than before . maybe you have to have that inner voice . for his part , herzallah says , i m not against the idea of being crazy , because everyone who achieved something important in history was crazy . we don t lack the brains . we don t lack the ambition . we don t lack the availability of smart people . looking to the futurelooking to the futureof course , not everyone thinks he amprsquos crazy . herzallah can point with pride to the partnerships with prestigious universities worldwide he can talk about the students trained on cognitive neuroscience research methodologies , about the working with partner institutions such as columbia and nyu he can offer the four published research papers and the other four under review . he can talk about the nih grant and about being on campus at am every monday to skype with his students , seven hours ahead of him in abu dis . call him crazy if you want , but for him there amprsquos no reason to think neuroscience can amprsquot come to palestine . we don t lack the brains , he says , we don t lack the ambition . we don t lack the availability of smart people . and the initiative continues to grow , with more students applying every year . with that success comes hope that as ibrahim mughrabi puts it , they will inspire our colleagues to start their own initiatives and maybe help channel and train future graduates into the much needed specialties in palestine . the crazy idea just might spread . meanwhile , omar danoun is leaving his small village , rantis . but not forever . he amprsquos leaving to learn more , heading to the university of detroit mercy to study . his relatives can amprsquot resist making jokes about sending him off to detroit with a bulletproof vest . he will go there to learn , and then he will come back , bringing with him the knowledge he amprsquos gained . back to his culture , to his family , and to the people who call him doctor . lt ! var s skrollr . init smoothscrolling true gt	 ampldquojesus , amprdquo molly said , her own plate empty , ampldquogimme that . you know what this costs ? amprdquo she took his plate . ampldquothey gotta raise a whole animal for years and then they kill it . this isn amprsquot vat stuff . amprdquo she forked a mouthful up and chewed . amprdquo ampndash william gibson , neuromancer on monday , august th , , at a television studio in london in front of around people , dr . mark post of maastricht university in the netherlands unveiled the culmination of five years of research a lab grown ampldquotest tube amprdquo beef burger , cooked in a pan and served to two members of the public . though a handful of tiny pieces of such meat had previously been displayed , the burger in that pan was the first fully cooked specimen tasted and admired by everyday citizens . ampldquoa few cells that we take from a cow , amprdquo post says , can be turned into ampldquo tons of meat . amprdquo what hanni r ampuumltzler , an austrian researcher , and josh schonwald , a chicago based food writer ampmdash the ampldquotasters amprdquo ampmdash were eating was percent perfect beef . it had never been slaughtered , had never been properly ampldquoalive , amprdquo and most importantly , had never been a living , breathing animal . the meat , which contained no fat , was pronounced to have ampldquoquite a bit of flavor amprdquo by r ampuumltzler , and the consistency was said to be ampldquoperfect . amprdquo ampldquosome people think this is science fiction , amprdquo sergey brin , founder of google and the single donor who provided funding nearly million thus far for post amprsquos research , said , but he sees it as an achievable goal . sticky toc engaged ! do not remove this ! for brin , a billionaire who wears google glass in the promo video for the cultured beef project , maybe that amprsquos true he amprsquos already living in a future where man can augment himself and surpass any obstacle . for the rest of us , meat ampmdash actual beef ampmdash which has never been an animal , undercuts one of our basic assumptions about it . for us to eat meat , something must die . the research brin is funding is , according to its leader , post , about to years away from producing a commercially available product , but they amprsquore clearly working at a breakneck pace to reach their goals . if they succeed , they would be part of a long and concerted effort to change the way that we , the human race , eat every single day . it would broadly affect our health , our well being , our environment , and our sense of who we are and the creatures we share the planet with . a growing consensus among scientists , doctors , environmentalists , and animal rights activists suggest that our current system of food ampmdash specifically meat ampmdash production is not sustainable . by , the global demand for meat will double as our population continues to rapidly grow . the effects of all this farming on our environment are currently devastating , and getting worse . simply put , we are destroying the planet , and meat production and consumption is arguably the most to blame . this is why people like post and his team are not the only ones working on solutions there is a small but growing community who ampmdash with financial backing and vocal support from some of the most powerful technologists and vcs in silicon valley ampmdash hope to apply scientific innovations to the course of human history and change the way we live . this lofty desire to apply our brains to complicated , seemingly overwhelming problems , in fact , is the story of human history . and really , in a way , it all comes down to meat . and yes , that sounds like science fiction , sergey . the huntersthe hunters it amprsquos fair to say that meat eating is critical to our history , joseph ferraro , an anthropologist at baylor university says , and without the consumption of meat , we would not have large brains , and wouldn amprsquot be where we are today . when humans really got started on earth , there weren amprsquot very many of us , and we weren amprsquot very smart . man was outnumbered by orders of magnitude for millennia by animals . two million years ago , if you were just plopped down into a random point on the inhabited earth , ferraro says , you probably wouldn amprsquot have seen another person for days or even weeks . the population , he says , was probably close to , . what you would have seen , ferraro explains , is a vast number of animals . men and animals evolved together on the planet over the course of thousands of years , with a supportive relationship crucial to our evolution . a paper ferraro co authored this past april suggests that early humans began to hunt ampmdash or at least to scavenge and butcher ampmdash animals for food around million years ago . and at just about that time , we see big shifts in the human fossil record of the increase in brain size , increase in body size , and hominins leaving africa for eurasia , he says . before that , humans were predominantly plant eaters . meat is rarely a majority of the diet of any human , even today , ferraro says , our diets and those of hunter gatherers were still primarily vegetative , fruit , with that extra meat component . once our innovations and technological advances meant that we could start hunting , however , the animal food seems to have enabled some of our most critical early evolutionary processes . the key thing about meat , he says , however , wasn amprsquot intrinsically the meat itself it was a lot of calories , a lot of nutrients and vitamins and minerals in these packages amphellip meat was the only possible source at the time and place in man amprsquos evolution . the history of man and animal is more complicated than a simple hunting relationship , of course humans began to domesticate the gray wolf the origin animal of all currently domesticated dogs around , years ago some estimates and evidence exist for a much , much earlier relationship , giving us a source of fur , security , beasts of burden , and eventually , the companionship which dogs are predominantly known for today . around , years ago , humans began practicing agriculture in earnest , and with it the process of bringing other animals into the domestic circle . all of this has meant that for most of our history , men and animals have had a complex and emotional , give and take relationship . for a very high percentage of the billion people living on earth , what to eat is not a decision that is made so much as it is passed on to us from our parents . most people have historically eaten similarly to their families ampmdash if you amprsquore hindu , for example , you might not eat cows , and if you amprsquore jewish , you sometimes avoid pork or seafood . there are also regional differences in what we eat , informed by a host of evolutionary , geographic , cultural , and religious practices . for most of human history , we ate what was localfor most of human history , we ate what was local , because there were no airplanes , steamships , or refrigerated trucks to bring us exotic or non local foods . plants that were found to be poisonous were added to the arsenal of things we don amprsquot eat . over time , however , culture took over , and man began to form customs for what food ampmdash mostly animals ampmdash was for eating , and what was not . generally , all bets are off in times of starvation , but our ideas about food are deeply ingrained in our communities , and we haven amprsquot bothered to examine them very closely . we figured out how to hunt , ferarro says , and that enabled so much of our development . eventually , it allowed the population to explode . this presented us with a new challenge how to scale the hunt . the factorythe factory those are chickens , said crake . chicken parts . just the breasts , on this one . they amprsquove got ones that specialize in drumsticks too , twelve to a growth unit . but there aren amprsquot any heads amphellip that amprsquos the head in the middle , said the woman . there amprsquos a mouth opening at the top , they dump nutrients in there . no eyes or beak or anything , they don amprsquot need those . ampndash margaret atwood , oryx and crake we teach children that old macdonald had a farm , and that on that farm , he had a cow moo moo , a goat baa baa , a chicken cluck cluck , and a pig oink oink . the reality , most of us know , is that old macdonald was largely replaced long ago by massive operations run by multinational corporations that often don amprsquot even bear the name farm . family farms were responsible for percent of the united states amprsquo chicken production until around the s . today , it is estimated that approximately ampnbsp percent of the animals raised for slaughter in the us live on factory farms . throughout the th and early th centuries , families increasingly grew and produced less of their own food on small farms , and those operations were consolidated into the growing food industry , which began to apply manufacturing techniques to the raising of livestock so that the growing millions , then billions , could be fed fast and cheap . by the middle of the th century , factory farms were so ubiquitous that the old macdonald farms of our childhood imaginations were quickly becoming an endangered species . in us law , factory farms are called concentrated animal feeding operations cafos for short . in practice , factory farms are very large ampmdash four farms in the united states produce percent of the cattle raised for slaughter and half of the chickens . they amprsquore operations that raise livestock in highly confined , high density conditions with more than , animals under one roof . the largest food production company in the united states is tyson foods , which reported a revenue of billion in . tyson employs , people and has operation centers in the united states . it works with nearly , farms who supply it with animals for the final stages of life , slaughter , and processing . the life cycle of an animal through large scale farming operations is generally birth at a farm most come from factories as defined by the epa , movement to a feedlot for finishing a highly confined city for animals , and finally , processing at a plant such as tyson . in , tyson processed slaughtered an average of . million chickens , , cows , and nearly , pigs per week . the company makes its profit by processing animals in efficient and brutal circumstances . for example , in , the average tyson chicken lived approximately days , weighed around . pounds at the time of slaughter , and had consumed about . pounds of grain per pound of its body weight . in , the same chicken lived just days , was slaughtered at an average weight of . pounds , and consumed just . pounds of grain per pound . simply put , the animals live less than half as long , eat half as much and are more than double the size they were years ago . the efficiency of these operations has enabled them to produce an ever increasing amount of animals for ballooning profits . the first few decades of the th century saw the introduction of vitamin supplements . combined with artificial lighting , it allowed animals to be raised indoors chickens will even lay eggs year round , now , and at increasing body weights . the advent of refrigeration meant that animal meat could be kept much longer , and transported farther distances , before going bad . a growing understanding of genetics led to the selective breeding of the strongest , healthiest birds . in the s livestock vaccination became standard . around the same time , the largest and most often cited technological advance in factory farming came with the introduction of low grade antibiotics into the chickens amprsquo feed and water supply . farmers were raising animals in such large quantities that disease could quickly and easily wipe out huge numbers of them the application of antibiotics , it was thought , would lessen some of that risk . it also meant they could be raised in far less sterile conditions . but there was also an unforeseen consequence the animals quickly grew fatter . antibiotics , it turns out , kill off the bacterium ampmdashwhich makes up the microbiome ampmdash found in the guts of all animals and helps digest carbohydrates . unable to process the bacteria , the animal ampnbspputs on weight , and fast . the cause of such rapid weight gain wasn amprsquot understood until early , but it became a standard method of fattening livestock in the s . today around percent of all antibiotics produced in the us are used for livestock . old macdonald was largely replaced by factory farms long agothese are just a few of the ways in which factory farms are able to meet the ever increasing demand for animal based food . the availability of large quantities of cheap meat has unsurprisingly increased demand steeply . the average person in the us now eats about pounds of meat a year . beef consumption has gone down , but overall consumption ampmdash of fish , meat , poultry , and eggs ampmdash has continued to rise steadily . over the past years meat consumption has steadily grown in proportion to the rest of our diets , now composing roughly percent of the calories in the average us citizen amprsquos diet . thanks to population growth and demand in developing nations , meat consumption globally is predicted to double by the year . all of this comes at a very high cost , a cost which many experts say will be devastating . a planet in dangera planet in dangersource usda food availability per capita data system , usda livestock amp meat domestic data here is the truth the earth is round saddam hussein did not attack us on elvis is dead obama was born in the united states and the climate crisis is real . ampndash al goreto produce pound of beef , the friendly neighborhood farmer will need pounds of grain and an estimated , gallons of water . if a , pound cow yields pounds of beef , that cow used . million gallons of water and , pounds of grain . so , on a basic level , farming at this scale is pretty inefficient , when you could effectively feed thousands of people with just the grain and water it takes to produce that one cow . it amprsquos not that inefficient if you amprsquore one farmer with a few cows and chickens though it amprsquos more expensive to raise animals that actually graze and just your family to feed . but even when you amprsquore as good as tyson foods is at maximizing profits , it amprsquos a mathematically unsustainable equation . today , up to a third of earth amprsquos landmass is used for grazing and growing crops . in the us , percent of our grain goes to feeding livestock . this has led to a critical situation where demand is expected to far outweigh supply in the next years . but inefficiency isn amprsquot nearly the only problem . man made climate change , or global warming , is primarily caused by an increased concentration of greenhouse gasses ghg ampmdash water vapor , carbon dioxide , methane , ozone ampmdash in the atmosphere . activities such as deforestation , burning fossil fuels , and yes , raising livestock emit greenhouses gasses , and all have been on a steep rise since large scale manufacturing processes were applied to various industries , including farming . the levels of greenhouse gas emissions have seriously increased since the industrial revolution , and most scientists agree that we amprsquore facing a devastating climate situation . the year will go down as the hottest on record , and livestock is partially to blame . a report by the food and agriculture organization fao for the un estimated that around percent of worldwide human caused ghg emissions were the result of livestock . this study has been widely cited but is also disputed experts believe that the percent figure vastly undercounts ghgs caused by raising animals . robert goodland , who was the lead environmental adviser to the world bank group for years , co authored an influential study for the world watch institute with jeffrey anhang also of the world bank . it estimated the figure was actually closer to percent , once undercounted emissions from respiration , land use , and methane were taken into consideration . goodland , who is now retired , notes that the kyoto protocol originally focused primarily on efforts to reduce fossil fuels or come up with renewable energy alternatives . but if the emissions from livestock are close to percent of the rising ghg levels , it follows that the only pragmatic solution , at this point , as goodland says , is likely to be increasing plant based diets and drastically reduced animal consumption . it amprsquos a behavior , he says , that can be changed overnight . having a positive impact on the environment by moving to a plant based diet , goodland and anhang argue , would be the most effective way to immediately and significantly reduce our man made ghg emissions . in fact , some estimate that if we globally reduced our animal consumption by percent , we could reach our ghg emission goals as set forth by the united nations . there are other devastating effects on the environment too the epa estimates that runoff which it regulates from factory farms into waterways is the largest single pollutant in the us . livestock also drink about half of the country amprsquos potable water each year , and they produce more excrement than humans , waste which is usually just spread on the ground , further contaminating the water and remember , there amprsquos a decent amount of antibiotics in that waste , too . up to one third of earth s landmass is used for livestockthis is what people mean when they tell you , as ashley byrne of peta told me , that factory farming is unsustainable . the population explosion means more mouths to feed , and meat consumption overall has been on the rise proportionally to the rest of our diets this increases pressure to raise more animals , and more food to feed them , which in turn gravely stresses our environment . the huge number of animals produces waste and polluting byproducts , and eventually , we amprsquore going to not only simply lack the livestock to meet demand , but will face the high environmental costs to boot . most experts believe that our effect on climate change is reversible , but only if we act immediately . beyond meatbeyond meat we have three options moving forward , says sergey brin in the cultured beef promo . as he tells it , we can all become vegetarians , we can continue to destroy the planet , or we can try something new . vegetarianism is on the rise ampmdash by some estimates it amprsquos at an all time high of percent in the united states ampmdash but it also feels fair to agree with brin when he dismisses it as the most likely way to address our problems , even as some meat eaters reduce their consumption . people know that how they eat affects their health , dr . donald smith of mount sinai hospital in new york city says , and that affects their behavior . beef consumption has been on a slight decline in the us in recent decades , partially because people have recognized it amprsquos better for their hearts ampmdash a study found that people who avoided meat were far healthier , especially in terms of coronary heart disease and percent less likely to develop cancer compared to meat eaters . initiatives like meatless monday ampmdash which encourages families to replace meat in just one weekly meal ampmdash have proven quite popular . but , for most people , when you cut out meat , you need to replace it with something . americans aren amprsquot going to go for a plant based diet that easily , right ? and that amprsquos where a handful of new , silicon valley funded companies swoop in . meat eaters know the feeling you amprsquore at a barbecue with friends or around the table at a family holiday , and the one , lone vegetarian drops a pale tofu dog on the fire or pulls a basketball shaped tofurkey out of the oven . maybe they don amprsquot know they amprsquore missing out , maybe they do . either way , what they amprsquore eating doesn amprsquot look that great , does it ? does it taste like meat ? does it even matter ? to the vegetarian , it usually really doesn amprsquot . meatless meats have been around for a long time big names in the market include boca burger owned by kraft foods , morningstar farms and gardenburger both owned by kellogg amprsquos and lightlife conagra . but the new companies trying to create meat alternatives , or meat replacements , aren amprsquot really trying to go after vegetarians . we already have them , says ethan brown , ceo of los angeles based beyond meat , and we know that . his company , founded in , was privately funded by kleiner perkins and the obvious corporation . obvious is a web incubator that was founded in by evan williams and biz stone and has gone on to also create and launch products like medium . the goal is to get everyone else on board . for beyond meat , and a handful of other companies such as hampton creek foods , a san francisco based startup that makes egg replacement products , the model is pretty straightforward . they work in concert with world class food scientists to come up with meat alternatives ampmdash let amprsquos call them tofurkey . ampmdash for consumer products that aren amprsquot only better tasting than their ancestors , but they amprsquore healthier , and often cheaper , and marketed in a way that meat eaters won amprsquot be turned off of . there is a growing market of educated consumers , brown says . they shop at places like whole foods ampmdash incidentally the first place beyond meat sold its products to . these consumers , brown says ampmdash some of whom are vegetarians but many who are not ampmdash are health conscious , and they care about the environment . beyond meat started , in june of , by selling a chicken like product to whole foods , which used it in prepared foods such as chicken salad . in april of , their consumer packaged chicken less strips were put on whole foods shelves nationwide . the products are vegan , and made from a combination of soy and vegetable proteins . what we envision , brown says , are supermarket aisles where in the future , you amprsquoll have two choices meat or meat free protein , sold side by side . you won amprsquot need to go to a special vegetarian section in most supermarkets , he says , because most people will eat a combination of both . beyond meat amprsquos products are attractively packaged the food itself looks a lot more like meat than its meatless . predecessors . i tasted beyond meat amprsquos chicken alternative , microsoft founder bill gates wrote this past march , and honestly couldn amprsquot tell it from real chicken . hampton creek foods takes a similar approach , but it amprsquos trying to convince people to replace eggs . an easier sell , if you consider that many doctors regularly suggest people limit their egg consumption anyway with mg of cholesterol , egg yolks contain one of the highest concentrations per serving of any food , which , in addition to foods high in saturated fat , raise cholesterol levels in the blood . but it amprsquos also true that eggs are the most consumed animal protein in the world , says josh tetrick , ceo of hampton creek foods . people have been using egg based egg replacements for years , but a lot of those products aren amprsquot good for baking or using in recipes , or they aren amprsquot that much cheaper than eggs themselves . the goal of beyond eggs , hampton creek amprsquos egg product , is to function just like an egg , regardless of how it amprsquos being used , and still be cheaper than eggs . their powdered egg alternative is made from peas and sorghum , among other things . it amprsquos totally plant based . hampton creek foods is funded by khosla ventures , which routinely supports technology based , environmentally disruptive businesses , and also by gates himself , through khosla . the goal is to put the burger before the cow for both of these companies , selling to consumers is only part of the equation . selling wholesale to other , much larger food companies is also a big piece of their business . if we can convince a general mills that our product will be cheaper , and taste just as good , tetrick says , that amprsquos how we succeed . and he amprsquos probably correct if general mills can use a cheaper egg substitute that tastes identical in its processed foods or baked goods , who will know or care ? i started out wanting to create a world changing business , tetrick says . he doesn amprsquot bother using the word vegan on his products , though they are , in fact , animal free . in many ways , tetrick is angling to change the world amprsquos egg consumption the way that margarine changed the world amprsquos butter consumption by being much cheaper , while still behaving a lot like the original . there amprsquos a lot of money to be made in these startups they amprsquore nascent markets , ready for growth . astute money men ampmdash people like khosla or gates ampmdash are often best at seeing the future , and in this case , they see tremendous market potential in the words of gates . they amprsquore small companies which apply scientific methods and develop their products in labs and at universities . and they have the environment in mind . ethan brown sees reducing meat consumption by percent as a reasonable goal , and one which would have a very , very positive impact on the environment , according to experts like robert goodland , whom he cites . but what about your hardliner ? the person who , regardless of health , food safety , environmental , or ethical concerns , just wants a great burger , made of real beef , at his weekend brunch ? he hasn amprsquot been forgotten either . in fact , he amprsquos getting arguably the biggest chunk of money and scientific research in food technology . because in this case , the goal is nothing less than putting the egg before the chicken . or more properly , the chicken breast before the chicken amphellip or even the burger before the cow . how to grow beef in a labextract tissue from a living animal via biopsyexercise to boost protein levelsextract myosatellite stem cells from the tissuegrind up muscle stripsadd growth serum to multiply cellsadd flavor , iron , and vitamins if necessarygrow cells on scaffolding to form muscledinner timescience fictionscience fiction fifty years hence , we shall escape the absurdity of growing a whole chicken in order to eat the breast or the wing , by growing these parts separately in a suitable medium . ampndash winston churchill , since the s , the possibility of growing animal cells in a lab by using stem cells has become a viable prospect . nasa spent the early s working with turkey stem cells , and the first edible specimen ampmdash cultured goldfish cells ampmdash were successfully produced in . in the united states , the effort to grow meat in a lab has been most vocally supported by jason matheny , who in authored an influential paper in the journal tissue engineering , a paper responsible for renewed interest in the topic of growing meat in a lab in the us . in he told the university of chicago magazine that cultured meat will be the purest meat ever , lacking the additives , antibiotics , and growth hormones given to most livestock today . in he founded new harvest , a non profit dedicated to raising awareness of in vitro meat , also called test tube meat , or cultured meat . in , mark post began investigating culturing meat in a lab with million in funding from the dutch government . when that funding ended , matheny worked to broker a deal for brin to begin funding post amprsquos work , though it was done anonymously until last week . around labs in the world are working to create cultured meatnicholas genovese of the university of missouri estimates that around labs ampmdash most of them at universities , often with some private funding ampmdash are working on creating cultured meats . it amprsquos nearly identical in some ways to research being done in tissue engineering and organ creation work , both using stem cells . geneovese amprsquos own work has been funded by peta for the past two years . in peta announced a million prize for the first lab to successfully grow test tube chicken . we want to focus on chicken , ashley byrne of peta says , because chickens are the most widely abused animals in the world . most scientists are focusing on one particular part of the problem , says genovese . for example , he amprsquos working on creating the best , non animal medium in which to grow the cells . the process of creating meat in a lab is a complex one . in the simplest of terms , the most common procedure begins with extracting stem cells from a live , adult animal . a growth serum post s contains animal blood but future growth mediums will be animal free is then added to the cells , which are grown on a scaffolding like a skeleton to form a muscular structure . this muscle is often exercised to create a richer , tastier flesh . at mark post amprsquos london tasting , both hanni r ampuumltzler and josh schonwald noted the same thing was missing from the meat fat . post calls it a technical bottleneck , and it amprsquos one of the next phases of research . what we love about meat is the fat , that amprsquos what makes it taste good , says ethan brown , but it amprsquos also the least healthy part of the meat . for people developing cultured meat , however , the goal is to get it as close to the real thing as possible , fat and all . they amprsquore going to get there , isha datar , director of new harvest says , it amprsquos just a question of when . post estimates that within to years , we could have a commercial product lab grown beef which is indistinguishable from that which comes from an animal , grown in a lab . theoretically , one crop of stem cells could create a huge amount of meat , with no animals harmed , no grazing land needed , grown in a sterile environment . this product would address all of the major concerns of large scale farming today , datar says environmental , health , and ethical . peta thinks their chicken challenge is likely to bring a product to market in far less time , though . i do think we amprsquoll make the goal within the next few years , byrne says . there are , of course , serious challenges to getting a product to market , and at the scale which would be required . there amprsquos still no fat in the meat , and for a product to be marketable , it amprsquos going to need to be nearly identical to real meat , or it will simply be an expensive gardenburger , as one environmental scientist with doubts about the project called it . it amprsquos also insanely expensive right now calling post amprsquos tester the , burger as the media has , over and over is generous post amprsquos research has cost , conservatively , in the realm of million so far . but theoretically , there amprsquos no reason this product couldn amprsquot be much cheaper than meat from an animal in the future that amprsquos how it worked in neuromancer , and it makes sense , mathematically . the final challenge , however , is whether people will buy it . can we get over our sense of how weird cultured meat is ? to me , ethan brown says , that will all be a question of how it amprsquos marketed . once we stop talking and thinking about it as the frankenburger , we amprsquoll go a long way towards realizing just how world changing such a product could be . of course , there are those who say we don amprsquot have to years left to address the environmental issues . for them , the in vitro meat project , even if successful , is just too far off , and they believe that people need to reduce their meat consumption now to impact the environment positively . but that amprsquos not going to stop us from trying . and it amprsquos not going to stop people like sergey brin , who see business opportunities in addition to the ability to address ethical and environmental concerns , from pouring money into projects that the rest of us still think of as science fiction . two million years ago , there were probably naysayers too , laughing at the guy with the diy spear running after a bear . and there were also probably plenty of people who disagreed when it was first suggested that you could raise massive quantities of animals , and that meat could be something which even poor people could afford to eat on a daily basis . at every turn , man amprsquos innovative nature has answered the call to solve critical problems . why should this time be any different ? 	 a murdered president . a fleeing assassin . a dead man amprsquos vertebrae . a deathbed confession and a ghastly suicide . a family amprsquos disgrace . conspiracy theories and courtroom battles . secret burials and an unmarked grave . an aborted exhumation and a hopeful dna analysis . oh , and then there amprsquos the riddle of that missing mummy . it amprsquos a story nearly years in the making , steeped in death , myth , and uncertainty . abraham lincoln , now viewed as a martyr who ended slavery and preserved the union , was in his time hated as much as beloved . a vaunted stage actor , john wilkes booth , killed him believing the death would revitalize the southern cause . it didn amprsquot , and booth was hunted and himself killed . he died paralyzed and helpless , unable even to lift his hands . or did he ? since the official account was released in , there have been doubters . stories bubbled up from the collective unconscious booth had survived , lived out his days in obscurity ampmdash either haunted by his infamous killing or unrepentant to the last , depending on who amprsquos telling the legend . the stories never gained much credence among historians , but they amprsquove persisted , returning every few decades like unquiet ghosts . john wilkes booth is dead , but his legend is not at rest . ampldquoany quote unquote amplsquofact amprsquo is always subject to finding new information , amprdquo says nate orlowek . he amprsquos spent the last years ampmdash his entire adult life , off and on ampmdash saying that john wilkes booth just may not have died the way history tells us . and he has evidence bits and pieces scavenged from the archives , dusty clues he thinks prove his case . but he amprsquos never actually proven it he amprsquos provoked some believers , tweaked some skeptics , and generally kept the theory alive . today , though , nate orlowek , along with the booth descendants who share his theory , are this close to knowing whether the infamous assassin died on a farmhouse porch in northern rural virginia . dna testing , they believe , will finally settle this historical mystery . all they have to do now is dig up edwin booth , the assassin amprsquos brother , and convince the government to let them test his remains against three vertebrae taken from that man shot through the neck and identified as booth years ago . it all sounds so simple , really . april , john wilkes booth walks into ford amprsquos theater and shoots president lincoln in the back of the head . he then escapes from washington , dc , leaving the city ampmdash and the nation ampmdash in a panic . for the next days , alleged booth sightings place him virtually everywhere in the country . april , union soldiers surround booth and an accomplice , david herold , in a barn at the garrett farmhouse in rural northern virginia . herold surrenders booth refuses . the cavalry sets the barn ablaze , and with the assassin moving around inside , one soldier , sergeant boston corbett , shoots him through the neck . dragged from the burning building , booth dies three hours later . after an autopsy his third , fourth , and fifth vertebrae are removed and preserved his body is buried in secret . one mad actone mad actyou know this story . you once learned it , probably in elementary school . in roughest outline , it goes something like this on april th , , president abraham lincoln accompanied his wife to ford amprsquos theater in washington , dc , for a performance of our american cousin . the end of the civil war , the bloody years that had so riven the country , was finally in sight . early that month the confederate capital had fallen to union forces less than a week later , general robert e . lee amprsquos surrender ended the war in virginia and prompted other commanders to lay down their arms . washington , dc , had begun to feel something like relief . the president had entered the theater to a standing ovation and the orchestra striking up hail to the chief . later , as lincoln sat in the presidential box high above the audience , john wilkes booth climbed the stairs . he stood in the dark , narrow passageway with a dagger clasped in his left hand , a philadelphia deringer in his right . he amprsquod long planned this moment , believing lincoln amprsquos death would rejuvenate the confederacy . our cause being almost lost , he had written in his diary , something decisive and great must be done . he stepped forward , shot lincoln in the back of the head , slashed his dagger across the arm of a bystander who tried to subdue him , and leaped over the railing onto the stage . he paused for a melodramatic flourish , facing the stunned crowd and yelling , sic semper tyrannis ampmdash latin for thus always to tyrants . he fled the theater and , amazingly , escaped the capital on horseback . the escaped booth became a specter in the public mindthe killing shocked the country . northerners feared saboteurs among them , while many southerners believed the murder would bring harsh retribution from the post war government . the escaped booth became a specter in the public mind , with witness reports coming in from chicago , philadelphia , and baltimore . meanwhile , the real booth was heading south , dodging the union dragnet on his way to mexico . he didn amprsquot get far . they finally caught him in the rising dawn of april th , holed up in a barn in port royal , virginia , with an accomplice , david herold . surrounded , herold quickly gave up , but booth refused . an officer set the barn ablaze , hoping to smoke out the assassin . instead , sergeant boston corbett fired his pistol through a crack in the building , hitting booth in the neck . paralyzed , he was dragged from the flames . as he lay dying , he repeatedly whispered , tell my mother i die for my country . and finally , with his limp and nearly lifeless hands raised to his face useless . useless . john wilkes booth escape route . this is the story nate orlowek had learned , too of a killer amprsquos mad act , his flight from justice , and his small , pathetic death . even before he amprsquod learned that official story , though , he amprsquod seen the prisoner of shark island , about dr . samuel mudd , who , the film contends , was scapegoated by a vindictive northern government . after mending booth amprsquos broken leg on the night of the assassination , mudd was tried as an accomplice and imprisoned on the titular island . the film , directed by john ford , plays fast and loose with history , but even at seven years old , orlowek says , i was outraged when i saw what they did to dr . mudd , and i had the sense that i wanted to go back in time . much like the heroes of another favorite story the time tunnel , a sci fi tv show in which two scientists amprsquo malfunctioning time machine sent them hurtling through history , righting wrongs along the way . in one episode , of course , they foiled an assassination plot against lincoln . even at his youngest , nate orlowek had a strong sense of justice and a belief in the mutability of history . the lincoln assassination became one of his many historical interests . but despite all he read , he never doubted the official story until he was . it was august , . he was visiting a friend amprsquos house one afternoon when he noticed a book its spine bore the familiar presidential silhouette and the title , web of conspiracy the complete story of the men who murdered abraham lincoln . david e . george , a drifter who amprsquod poisoned himself with strychnine in the frontier town of enid , oklahoma , in . courtesy of the library of congress . he paged through it , flipping to the final illustrated plate . there he saw the familiar face of john wilkes booth juxtaposed with a picture of a dead man sitting in a chair . the dead man amprsquos eyes were closed , his face draped with a thick mustache . in the right cast of mind you might see a resemblance between the two , accede that the dapper , year old star on the right could have sagged and drooped over years to become the swollen , mummified body on the left . and that amprsquos exactly what the book claimed . puzzle for history , it read , introducing the dead man as david e . george , a drifter who amprsquod poisoned himself with strychnine in the frontier town of enid , oklahoma , in . as the story went , george had several times confessed to being john wilkes booth , even going so far as to admit , i killed the best man that ever lived . after his grisly , self inflicted exit from the stage , george amprsquos body was embalmed by the local mortician , who assumed government officials would come to examine it . they didn amprsquot , but the remains became a local attraction , mentioned in newspapers and promoted by civic boosters . a lawyer named finis l . bates eventually claimed the body , and later wrote a book , the escape and suicide of john wilkes booth , detailing how he amprsquod come to know david e . george , how the man had confessed , and how his tale offered a correction of history . as year old nate orlowek held web of conspiracy in his hands and gazed into the puzzle for history , he could see only dimly the story he amprsquod spend the rest of his life pursuing . it was as though a quest had opened before him , this bookishly serious but charismatic young man . he had found not just a puzzle , but an opportunity to set things right . from his father , who had marched for civil rights and against the vietnam war , who when watching sports always rooted for the underdog , and who unapologetically believed that one man could save the world ampmdash from him orlowek learned that when something is wrong , you should try to change it . there are a lot of things that are not the way they amprsquore supposed to be , he says , and we should not accept things as they are if they amprsquore not the way they amprsquore supposed to be . we should fight to change them . a lot of people ask me , amplsquowhy john wilkes booth ? amprsquo he says now , looking back , sitting on a couch in the living room of his childhood home in silver spring , maryland . after his parents passed , he moved back here the coffee table is scattered with papers he amprsquos recovered from his basement , mementos and clippings of his time wandering the lonely labyrinth of counter history , searching for the truth in a jungle of rumor and misinformation . nate orlowek has spent years investigating whether booth died in the barn ampmdash or escaped to oklahoma . family photographs flank the couch . behind him , in gold , oval frames , hang line portraits of two young boys the orlowek brothers , nate amprsquos younger self gazing over his shoulder as he speaks . he amprsquos now , thinned by age and time , lightly tinted glasses resting on his nose , yarmulke crowning his head . you could wonder whether it has consumed him , this quest to correct history . but he denies that says it amprsquos really been a small , if persistent , part of his life . when he warms to the subject he speaks quickly , punctuating his points with a defiantly raised finger , his tales digressive , his facts precise . so why john wilkes booth ? really , that was what floated by , he says . like his father he wanted a cause bigger than himself like his father he wanted to save the world . i wasn amprsquot able to save the world when i was . i wasn amprsquot able to march for civil rights or work social security , the institution to which his father devoted his idealistic energies as a lawyer . but this thing with john wilkes booth was a way of doing something that made a difference , something that impacted people . he took to his cause with the zeal of an idealistic teenager . he recruited friends . he combed archives . when the library of congress told him he was too young to do research there , he cornered his senator in an elevator and , soon enough , got his access . not only that , but he gained entrance to the rare books room . the media flocked to him . local television , newspapers , and radio . a lot of radio . and then , in july , rolling stone . tim crouse amprsquos skeptically supportive feature ampmdash opening with the axiom , the infuriating thing about nut theories is that there amprsquos always that million to one shot that an irrefutable piece of evidence is out there somewhere , half buried , as it were , just waiting for someone to stoop down and dig it up ampmdash lifted the tale to a new strata of attention . orlowek soon signed on as a consultant for the lincoln conspiracy , billed as a story every american has the right to know . john wilkes booth s diary . courtesy of the library of congress . working on a movie was new and exciting , even if orlowek clashed with the producers over a fraudster selling the allegedly missing pages of booth amprsquos diary . but while the finished film , released in , alleged booth did not die in the barn , it also claimed lincoln amprsquos own secretary of war had conspired with the head of the secret service to kill the president ampmdash a plot supposedly revealed in the missing diary pages . even in a post jfk assassination , post watergate era , with audiences deeply cynical about government , the theory had limited popular appeal . historians were appalled . afterward , orlowek found himself drifting away from the work . because what more could he do ? continue digging through history , hoping to find that one irrefutable piece of half buried evidence ? what were the chances of that ? he amprsquod done his best , got the story out there . he turned to more tangible goals , petitioning president carter to clear the name of dr . samuel mudd . only after another researcher contacted him a dozen years later , in , did orlowek again take up his case in earnest . he traveled to enid , oklahoma , where locals had tried to interest the wildly popular tv series unsolved mysteries in a story about their famous mummy . his zeal renewed , orlowek signed on to help . soon enough , nate orlowek reached the next stage of his quest bringing up the bodytwo years later , the segment aired a full minutes devoted to the now mysterious body in the barn . host robert stack solemnly intoned , those who question the official account believe that in the confusion following the civil war , critical evidence may have been mistakenly recorded or perhaps covered up . other s dismiss these theories as revisionist nonsense . orlowek appeared and summarized the escape and suicide of john wilkes booth . opposite him , historian james o . hall cantankerously dismissed this evidence as poorly sourced , speculative , or contradicted by more persuasive evidence . he finally scoffed , i see no mystery about it at all . but a show called unsolved mysteries was unlikely to agree . instead , a concluding voiceover described booth amprsquos final interment in an unmarked grave in baltimore , maryland amprsquos green mount cemetery . over an image of the marble stele marking the family plot , stack pondered , perhaps there lies the definitive proof to this unsolved mystery . the implication couldn amprsquot be clearer . soon enough , nate orlowek reached the next stage of his quest bringing up the body . portrait of john wilkes booth around the time of lincoln s assassination . a family affairnate orlowek chose to seize the booth mystery . joanne hulme , however , was born into it . she amprsquos the great great great granddaughter of jane booth , aunt to john wilkes booth . that bloodline meant hearing from an early age that the assassin had escaped union justice , and that the body buried in green mount cemetery did not belong to her family . the official history was trumped by her family amprsquos story . photograph of left to right john wilkes booth with brothers edwin and junius in a production of julius caesar . she first heard about it in the summer before sixth grade , when her mother told her she was being dramatic , just like her relatives . that meant edwin booth , and , yes , his brother , john wilkes booth , who hulme until then had known as a presidential assassin , not a distant relative . her mother warned that she amprsquod be hearing the official story in school , but that the family knew better booth had escaped the barn and lived for many , many years . the family had always known it , and edwin provided money for him . the news astounded her , but most of the family never talked about their infamous relative , leaving her to ponder on her own . her mother even forbade discussion with her siblings . but like young nate orlowek , joanne hulme was interested in history . she amprsquod begun to devour stories about nicholas ii , the last emperor of russia , whose entire family was executed by the bolsheviks in . for decades afterward , rumors lingered that nicolas amprsquo youngest daughter , anastasia , had survived the killings , with several women claiming to be the orphaned princess . forensic dna testing recently identified the remains of the entire royal family , but at the time hulme connected the family mystery of anastasia amprsquos possible survival to that of her newly discovered relative . she was intrigued , both to know that she belonged to a family of actors and to know the mind of someone who could kill a president . she found a family biography called the the mad booths of maryland and began using stories from it to pry more information out of her relatives . much of what she heard made her proud , and she tried to share that pride . the assassination was a horrible crime , yes , but john wilkes booth wasn amprsquot a monster , she amprsquod argue the family name shouldn amprsquot be forever marred by his history changing act . there amprsquos a massive legacy before that terrible day in april , and there amprsquos a massive legacy afterward , she says . i wish history were kinder to the talent and the legacy of the booths . the family name shouldn amprsquot be forever marred by john wilkes booth s history changing actas for john wilkes booth , she heard that after his escape from the barn ampmdash where he had stayed , but never been cornered by union troops ampmdash he met up with supporters who spirited him out of the country . he went to sri lanka , india , the hawaiian islands . after four years or so , he returned to the states . similar stories had long circulated , painting booth amprsquos supposedly posthumous exploits as those of a swashbuckler , a reconstruction era zelig who always found himself among the day amprsquos most interesting world shakers . in the legends , he was a romantic figure the killer doomed to exile , yet still living an enviable adventure . joanne hulme grew up knowing that there was more to history than the official story . but like nate orlowek , there wasn amprsquot much she could do other than tell her story . there was evidence , much of it unpersuasive to skeptics , including almost all historians . i think historian is a self appointed title , she says . only after unsolved mysteries did another possibility present itself . after appearing on the show in , nate orlowek and his new research partner , arthur ben chitty , a historiographer and professor at the university of the south , were contacted by the smithsonian institution . it offered to back an exhumation of whoever was buried in booth amprsquos grave . there were no dental records , and after almost years , the skeleton was likely to be severely degraded . but with a technique called video superimposition ampmdash essentially overlaying a photographic image on an unidentified skull to check for a match ampmdash it seemed possible to prove whether the body in green mount cemetery was john wilkes booth . as a stage star he amprsquod had hundreds of photos taken . for the superimposition all they needed was a skull . the booth descendants at first resisted the idea , but orlowek amprsquos evidence persuaded many of them . joanne hulme amprsquos mother , virginia eleanor humbrecht kline , signed on to the project , along with lois w . rathbun , booth amprsquos great great grand niece . backed by the smithsonian , having rallied the family , recruited a young up and coming lawyer named mark zaid , and with the support of baltimore amprsquos state amprsquos attorney , by orlowek and company would finally know just who was buried in booth amprsquos grave . everything was going to plan . then the cemetery balked . four of booth s co conspirators were hanged , including mary surratt , the first woman executed by the us federal government . photograph courtesy of the library of congress . with media interest in the story at a new peak , orlowek and his team begin preparing a legal brief to exhume the body of the john wilkes booth buried in green mount cemetery , in baltimore , maryland . of the living booth descendants , support the project , along with the local district attorney . after exhuming the body , orlowek and the descendants plan to use photographic superimposition to determine whether it amprsquos really john wilkes booth . october the president of green mount cemetery and a group of historians go to court to block the exhumation , bringing more attention to the case . may the judge denies the exhumation request , finding no compelling reason to disturb the grave site . orlowek and his team begin looking into potential dna testing . with exhumations blocked in green mount cemetery , they focus on booth amprsquos brother edwin , buried in boston . the new plan calls for comparing dna from edwin amprsquos body with that contained in a vertebrae belonging to the man shot in garrett amprsquos barn . that specimen , however , belongs to the national museum of health and medicine , a government archive that amprsquos unlikely to allow testing . january orlowek and his team submit their proposal through their local congressman and begin to wait . march the nmhm responds that it will not allow any testing of the vertebrae , as it would significantly deplete the material and destroy both the physical integrity of the object and the evidence of the trauma suffered at the time of injury . at this point , it seems , orlowek has no recourse . history on trialhistory on trialgreen mount cemetery knew nate orlowek . he amprsquod asked permission for an exhumation several times in , but the cemetery president saw no reason to grant the request . he considered the escape and suicide of john wilkes booth an opportunistic fraud perpetrated by finis l . bates , or , perhaps worse , a joke played on the lawyer by the man who amprsquod claimed to be booth . and orlowek amprsquos case rested heavily on the story told by bates amprsquo book and a few scraps of testimony contradicting the official story . green mount wasn amprsquot about to disturb the cemetery based on such flimsy evidence . so orlowek returned with a lawyer , and with booth amprsquos distant relatives acting as plaintiffs against the cemetery . that attracted plenty of media attention , which green mount alleged as the true motive behind the case . the would be exhumers wanted to make the trial a venue for airing the escape story drawn from bates amprsquo book green mount responded that its duty remained to mary ann booth , who amprsquod interred her son amprsquos body there after the government returned it to her in . she amprsquod entrusted the cemetery with his remains , and it required that substantial , credible , and objective historical and scientific evidence be presented to the court in response to the amended petition in order to prevent disturbing the remains of the deceased for frivolous or unsubstantial reasons . to win exhumation , in other words , the plaintiffs would have to convince a judge that booth really might have escaped , and that digging up booth could prove it . green mount wasn amprsquot about to disturb the cemetery based on such flimsy evidencethe trial took place in may , with green mount amprsquos lawyers planning to eviscerate the escape theory . they treated it as an identification case , calling historians to testify that john wilkes booth had been positively identified at every part of his long journey from ford amprsquos theater to green mount cemetery . union troops had seen booth at the farmhouse they amprsquod taken his body aboard the uss montauk , a union navy ship , where it was further identified . when the body was returned in , green mount amprsquos witnesses testified , even family members had agreed it was john wilkes . the cemetery even called dr . james starrs , a law professor and exhumation expert already famous for digging up the five victims of colorado cannibal alferd packer , and who would go on to exhume famous outlaw jesse james and albert desalvo , alleged to be the boston strangler . starrs , perhaps coyly seeking to sabotage a high profile forensic exhumation that wasn amprsquot his , some speculated , testified that no one could predict the condition of the booth body after more than a century . other experts agreed , citing unfavorable soil and water conditions . even if the skeleton was reasonably intact , they said , video superimposition remained an experimental method ampmdash orlowek and his team wanted to test the body for months , with no guarantee of success . that was , of course , if the cemetery could even find the body . on the trial amprsquos second day , a woman called the judge amprsquos office to say that a co worker of hers was related to john henry weaver , the undertaker who amprsquod transferred the alleged booth body to green mount . she said it was not buried in the family plot , but in an unmarked grave somewhere on the grounds . the judge took this into consideration . later , though , the cemetery president testified that weaver amprsquos relative had told him that the body was , in fact , in the family plot . this uncertainty , paradoxically , strengthened the cemetery amprsquos case , given the possibility that digging up the graves might not even yield the right body . maryland law does not look kindly on impromptu archaeological expeditions through its cemeteries . the court heard further testimony designed to discredit the escape and suicide of john wilkes booth . michael w . kauffman , the historian who later wrote american brutus john wilkes booth and the lincoln conspiracies , compared the photo of the mummified david e . george with those of booth . soon he had the judge pointing out discrepancies the eyes were wrong , the hair was wrong ampmdash despite aging another years , george appeared to have gained hair on his head . kauffmann even mentioned that , according to a newspaper interview with the embalmer , finis l . bates had asked to make george look like booth . the judge amprsquos conclusion was blunt . to summarize , he wrote , the alleged remains of john wilkes booth were buried in an unknown location some one hundred twenty six years ago and there is evidence that three infant siblings are buried on top of john wilkes booth s remains , wherever they may be . there may be severe water damage to the booth burial plot and there are no dental records available for comparison . thus , an identification may be inconclusive . a distant relative is seeking exhumation and any exhumation would require that the booth remains be kept out of the grave for an inappropriate minimum of six weeks . the above reasons coupled with the unreliability of petitioners less than convincing escape cover up theory gives rise to the conclusion that there is no compelling reason for exhumation . orlowek and the booth descendants appealed , but the court amprsquos decision was upheld . there amprsquod be no digging in green mount cemetery . can dna solve the puzzle ? with any exhumations at green mount cemetery ruled out , it looked as though orlowek and his team had finally hit an obstacle they couldn amprsquot overcome . without the body , they certainly couldn amprsquot carry out the photographic superimposition . there didn amprsquot seem to be any other option . they needed that skull , and they weren amprsquot going to get it . but over the years , dna testing technology advanced . orlowek started seeing it used in criminal cases . in , he and his team decided to try another approach . if all the booth family remains in baltimore were untouchable , maybe they could find dna elsewhere . there was one booth who wasn amprsquot in green mount edwin booth , older brother to john wilkes , buried in mount auburn cemetery in boston , massachusetts . lois trebisacci , edwin amprsquos great great granddaughter , agreed to an eventual exhumation . with her permission , they could bring up the bones of her great great grandfather and retrieve edwin amprsquos dna . without the body in green mount cemetery , though , where could they find a dna sample for comparison ? that alone wouldn amprsquot prove anything after all , there was no controversy over who was buried in his grave . but by comparing it to the dna of the man in the barn , they could say whether the two were blood relatives . edwin and john wilkes booth , being brothers , would of course be related . and if the results showed that , yes , the two bodies belonged to the same family , orlowek admits he amprsquod concede defeat . joanne hulme is not so sure . without the body in green mount cemetery , though , where could they find a dna sample for comparison ? an elegant if unorthodox solution presented itself after the government removed booth amprsquos body from the farmhouse , army doctors conducted an autopsy . though authorities returned the body to the booth family in , the army kept three cervical vertebrae surrounding the path boston corbett amprsquos bullet had taken . today , those neck bones belong to the national museum of health and medicine nmhm , located almost too conveniently in nate orlowek amprsquos hometown of silver spring , maryland . philadelphia amprsquos m ampuumltter museum also has a tissue sample allegedly from the autopsied body , but its provenance is less certain , and decades spent in an unidentified preservation fluid have likely made dna testing impossible . orlowek and his team began building a proposal to compare dna from the vertebrae against that of edwin booth . they worked quietly , eager to avoid a repeat of the green mount trial , where prominent historians had blocked their efforts . in orlowek began talking to krista latham , director of the university of indianapolis molecular anthropology laboratory and an assistant professor of biology and anthropology . she specializes in skeletal dna analysis , with a background in forensic science . their first conversations revolved around hypotheticals , about what they could do given different scenarios , different materials . latham immediately embraced the project , seeing it as the only scientific way to solve the mystery . if there was a test to be done , she wanted to do it . i never wrote this off as a crazy conspiracy theory , latham says , i think it s kind of exciting . in today s world , you don t have mysteries like this . the need to preserve these bones for future generations compels us to decline the destructive test . latham prepared a proposal outlining the recent advances in forensic science . she cited the example of anastasia and the romanov family , whose remains had been identified nearly a century after their deaths thanks to skeletal dna analysis . she proposed that two independent labs take samples from the lucite encased vertebrae in the nmhm amprsquos care the minimally destructive procedure , requiring less than . grams of powderized bone material for each lab . compared to the dna extracted from edwin booth amprsquos bones , it could put the mystery of john wilkes booth amprsquos fate to rest . the national museum of health and medicine just had to give the go ahead . in early they submitted their proposal and settled in to wait . the response came quicker than they expected , and without the answer they amprsquod hoped for . although the results might be intriguing , and the temptation to exploit emerging technologies is strong , replied carol robinson , of the us army medical command , which oversees the museum , the need to preserve these bones for future generations compels us to decline the destructive test . given current technology , destroying those . grams is the only way to do such a test . yet even if the nmhm allowed harvesting a sample , the letter continued , the unique artifact would be altered and dna testing may or may not yield the information desired . the museum , which did not respond to multiple requests for comment , described itself as protecting the integrity of its collection , preserving those artifacts for future generations . but according to the bone keepers , until there exists a non destructive method of examining the vertebrae , there will be no test . the assassination of president lincoln from left to right major henry rathbone , clara harris , mary todd lincoln , abraham lincoln , and john wilkes booth . print by currier amp ives . forward into the pastjournalist ron rosenbaum once spent some time in dallas , texas among jfk assassination buffs ampmdash who one might less charitably call conspiracy theorists . he climbed up the grassy knoll around dealey plaza , and even down into the dark bowels beneath the street to look out of a storm drain , lowering himself bodily into one of the many suspected sniper positions . he looked out on elm street through a small rectangle of light , gaining just the perspective one buff wanted him to see . it made a handy metaphor for his benevolent skepticism toward the people for whom the assassination , then years gone , now closer to , was much more than history . i want you to know my attitude toward these people , he wrote , which can be summed up by saying that i amprsquoll go down into the manhole with them but i won amprsquot pull the cover over my head . but what struck him most about the buffs was not their imaginative ability to fill the plaza with ghostly snipers , or to weave disparate , tenuous facts into coherent if outlandish narratives . it was the quality of their grief . decades later , they still mourned for a handsome and charismatic young man gunned down in public on a bright november day ampmdash a man who also happened to be president . they are mourners , rosenbaum wrote . their investigation of the assassination is a continuation of his last rites that they can amprsquot abandon . unlike the rest of us , they haven amprsquot stopped grieving . their search for a truth could never end , even as it spiraled out to take in more and more of the world . it served the same function as the eternal flame on kennedy amprsquos grave , keeping his story ampmdash a story ampmdash in living memory . lincoln hasn amprsquot inspired that same sense of personal connection . whether it amprsquos because he amprsquos receded too far in time to be recognizably human , becoming only an idealized figure of america amprsquos greatest president , or , conversely , because unlike kennedy he lived before celebrity culture swallowed politics as it has everything else , providing the stage managed , focus grouped illusion of intimacy with even the president , lincoln amprsquos death does not move people to grief . as secretary of war edwin stanton supposedly said upon hearing of lincoln amprsquos death , now he belongs to the ages a towering martyr figure immortalized in georgia white marble , his words carved into rock around him . the monument to memory of john wilkes booth erected by pink parker . . booth got his own monument , erected in by a confederate veteran in troy , alabama . the foot stone read , erected by pink parker in honor of john wilks booth sic for killing old abe lincoln . denied his request to place the monument in front of the local courthouse , parker instead placed it in his own yard . it was refashioned into his headstone when he died years later . the picture of a union preserved but never truly unitedthat may seem anomalous , a trivial historical curiosity . yet even today , if you visit booth amprsquos grave in maryland , you amprsquoll recognize americans declaring their allegiance . in a corner of the family plot a white footstone rises from the ground . because it amprsquos unmarked , visitors often assume it amprsquos john wilkes booth amprsquos final resting place . on a recent visit , it was covered with pennies , dozens of tiny abraham lincoln portraits resting in the sun . they even perched in the family stele , tucked into the center of the double o in booth . and until recently , if you visited the site of booth amprsquos death , leaving the highway and traipsing into the overgrown median , you amprsquod find his picture waiting in the woods above a wreath and a black ribbon . there were benches , and in the ground a plaque reading , let your peace fall upon the soul of john wilkes booth . the twenty first century confederate legion . on the plaque lay pennies , placed face down . the picture of a union preserved but never truly united . this unfinished past haunts joanne hulme she says the booth family saga has given her years of angst . she lives in a comfortable artist amprsquos apartment in philadelphia , where she carries on her mother amprsquos work to prove that john wilkes is buried in the family plot . she doesn amprsquot want to pass such responsibility on to the next generation . for her , the question is not about correcting history , but setting right the story of her family . i try to let my siblings know ampmdash don amprsquot be like these historians , she says , don amprsquot let john wilkes booth be the person who has wrecked the legacy of many generations . asked whether this recent setback has brought his quest to an end , nate orlowek responds , at every step of the way i felt like the story , had , so to speak , ended , because my goal always was to just do the best i could . the only people who lose are the ones who don amprsquot try . he amprsquos appealing to the public , hoping to put pressure on the national museum of health and medicine . he wants other people to take up the fight . and maybe there are other options the m ampuumltter museum amprsquos tissue sample , maybe , or some as yet undiscovered non destructive test . don amprsquot give up , he says in the end we can all win , if we get the truth . and there amprsquos still that mummy , poor old david e . george . maybe if it could be found , its dna could match edwin booth amprsquos . but only a few people ampmdash maybe no one , actually ampmdash knows where the mummy currently rests . after touring the country for decades , it disappeared in the mid s , last seen in pennsylvania . rumor has it the mummy belongs to a private collector who amprsquos keeping it a secret , right under nate orlowek amprsquos nose . just another undead piece of american history , ready to rise up again when you least expect it . lt ! var s skrollr . init smoothscrolling true gt	 airports trigger anxiety . subway systems cause paranoia . we all know the statistics it amprsquos riskier to get in your car than it is to board an aircraft or take a train . but our collective memories of bombings , hijackings , and poison gas attacks often turn public spaces of transport into psychic mine fields . stuck in limbo between the here and there , pushing through a crush of strangers , we are totally vulnerable and alone . except we amprsquore not . there amprsquos always the voice . you know , the one that tells us that ampldquosmoking inside the terminal is prohibited , amprdquo and that ampldquounattended baggage will be removed immediately , amprdquo and that ampldquothe next stop is times square . amprdquo it amprsquos sort of irritating , yet something to cling to , as familiar and pervasive as the smell of cinnabon or axle grease . it may surprise you to learn that these announcements are not only real people , but for the most part the same two people . they are carolyn hopkins and jack fox , two cheerful , church going retirees who also happen to be longtime buddies . the story of how they came to conquer the sound systems of the majority of major transportation centers across the country is groovier than you amprsquod expect . it has roots in the music industry , and features a homespun business that was able to grow beyond its southern roots and go global by capitalizing on a weird technological niche . the next stop is louisville , ky . . mobile layout . voice object display none . desktop layout . voice iframe display none a conspiracy of voicesconspiracy theorists will probably be delighted to learn that a smallish , person company out of louisville controls the announcement systems in just about every important public space in the united states . they do it for airports including jfk , lax , and chicago o amprsquohare , all buildings at the capitol , the mayo clinic , the kennedy space center , and the new york city subway system , just to name a handful . the nyc mta has a host of other voices for specific platform announcements for instance , charlie pellett says , stand clear of the closing doors . they also work worldwide , from china to iceland and everywhere in between . conspiracy theorists will be delighted to learn a small louisville company controls most us announcement systems . listen to carolyn hopkins speak about her transition from music to announcementsthe company responsible for the voices , ied , short for innovative electronic designs , is the preeminent supplier of what amprsquos known as an automated paging system networked , computer controlled equipment that controls audio notifications for big complexes . though competitors exist ampmdash biamp , and qsc , for instance ampmdash ied is the main us player in this specialized sector . the company was founded in , but its genesis really occurred in tandem with the birth of rock amplsquon amprsquo roll . though it never had the fame of memphis , detroit , or muscle shoals , louisville , ky , where ied is based , was an important early meeting point for soul , r ampb , and electric instruments . the city nurtured popular touring bands like the sultans and artists like wilson pickett . louisville was also home to harvey fuqua , the moonglows amprsquo bandleader , who would later go on to help found motown records and serve as marvin gaye amprsquos mentor . ied amprsquos co founder , hardy martin , was a fixture in the scene , playing guitar in a band called the carnations . but he also had a head for business martin formed part of a music booking agency , triangle talent , that worked with major bands in the area . it was there that he began to pick up engineering skills . ampldquoi started out building sound and lighting equipment for the carnations , then different bands that triangle talent handled , amprdquo says martin . martin and his partner ray allen also started allen martin productions , a recording studio that at one time employed bill porter , one of the creators of the nashville sound . the studio later branched out into commercial and video work . ampldquothe first job i had with allen martin was to write the lyrics and the music for a jingle for a hot rod supplier called big red , amprdquo remembers carolyn hopkins , the female voice of ied . she had already been working with triangle talent as the lead singer of a regional touring soul band called the chaparrals , and before that , in radio as a producer . the chaparrals had a full horn section , sounded a bit like earth , wind amp fire , and played in full evening attire gowns , tuxes . ampldquoabsolutely excruciating in hot , kentucky weather , amprdquo says hopkins . when martin and three other partners started ied , they chose hopkins as one of their first voices . it was for the typhoon lagoon attraction at disney world at florida in . hopkins amprsquo voice isn amprsquot what you amprsquod expect from a paging system . it amprsquos neither robotic , nor elegant and actressy , but rather , mirthful and folksy . ampldquothey said , amplsquocan you do a certain voice ? amprsquo amprdquo hopkins , now , remembers . ampldquothey wanted a very happy smiling voice ! and i tried it . amprdquo the gig continued , and hopkins was called back every time they created a new system . her voice is neither robotic , nor elegant and actressy , but rather , mirthful and folksyjack fox was a local radio personality who had spent his entire career traveling around the country working as a dj at various adult contemporary stations before landing in louisville in . he has a classic booming , old timey announcer sound , has done extensive voice over and commercial work , and has recorded over , talking books for the blind . in , after the gulf war broke out , he was tapped by ied . it was the beginning of tighter airport security , and fox sounded strong . ampldquothey needed a male voice that was friendly yet authoritative , amprdquo says fox . typically , when a client needs a system built and hires ied , the voice actors are given very specific scripts as word or excel files . the actors then record them , and the files are uploaded to the computerized notification system that amprsquos constructed for the building complex in question . ampldquoi usually record a plethora of items for transit authorities ampmdash lots of options and variations . they don amprsquot change too often , but usually they are needed yesterday when i do get them . it amprsquos either feast or famine with numbers of takes needed , amprdquo says hopkins . comfort of strangersfox and hopkins are old friends . and they amprsquore both somewhat matter of fact about their omnipresence in transport stations the world over . ampldquosometimes it can be strange , because i amprsquoll be traveling somewhere , and forget i amprsquod recorded something , and suddenly hear my voice , amprdquo says hopkins , who recently retired to maine with her husband , but still records for ied from her home . i amprsquoll be traveling somewhere , and forget i amprsquod recorded something , and suddenly hear my voice listen to how jack fox started his voice recording careeronce she was on a moving sidewalk late at night , and there was a guy taking up both sides with his baggage , the way you amprsquore not supposed to . she sidled up behind him and tried to duplicate her own voice , which was playing on the intercom . ampldquohe didn amprsquot move and didn amprsquot react . i amprsquom going , amplsquowow . he must be dead or something . amprsquo amprdquoif they get recognized , it usually only happens while they are at the airport themselves . fox says he was renting a car at the terminal once , and the agent said , ampldquoyou sound like that guy ! amprdquo then there was the time he was traveling with his granddaughter ampldquoshe got this puzzled look on her face and said amplsquowhy is grandpa talking so much ? amprsquo amprdquohopkins , fox , and martin all have an informality and warmth that seems at odds with the environments their respective technology and voices inhabit . in the case of hopkins and fox , they view their work , quite literally , as a public service . they talk about how they hope that they can provide some mellowness to an otherwise stressful experiences . ampldquoi picture someone standing on a moving sidewalk and i amprsquom talking to that person with a friendly quality to my voice , so it won amprsquot be so cold and sterile . amprdquo says fox . ampldquomy father was a minister , and i think of this as my airport ministry . amprdquoclearly , although their rock and radio days are behind them , they amprsquore now programming the travel amprsquos soundtrack to have a little soul . photos by michael shane , audio mix by john lagomarsino	 the internet is an ad tracking machine . it s been true for long enough that we rarely talk about it anymore , but it bears repeating . for all the free speech and free information , nearly any site you visit will come with a dozen different tracking cookies , enabling uniquely tailored ads to follow you from site to site . targeted advertising is still the best way to make money on the internet , so those cookies are everywhere . the verge is no exception that vr room isn t cheap . sites try not to be creepy about it , some harder than others , but the overarching logic is hard to escape . it s a multibillion dollar business , and it pays for nearly everything you see online . yesterday at wwdc , apple threw a wrench into that system . alongside new autoplay blockers , the latest versions of safari currently in beta will have a new tool for blocking third party ad trackers , aggressively identifying and blocking any cookies used to track users across the web . as craig federighi said onstage , it s not about blocking ads , but your privacy is protected . your privacy is protected . it s an important move , particularly for the mobile web , where safari manages just under percent of browsing sessions . when safari added the option for ad blocking with ios , it was a day of reckoning for many web companies raising hard questions about the future of mobile browsing . this week s announcement is primed to make a similar splash . according to marc al hames , who works on the privacy focused browser cliqz , companies are already scrambling to figure out the best way around the new restrictions . this is a cat and mouse game , and it always has been , al hames says . users try out different things to protect themselves , and there s a multibillion dollar ad tech industry thinking of ways to circumvent it . surprisingly , google and facebook are poised to come out of that game ahead . but to understand why , we need to dig into how the new policy works . safari has had some version of cookie blocking for years , but the previous default was to allow cookies from websites i visit . the new policy goes further , using machine learning to identify tracking behavior no matter how the cookies are served . in many cases , blocking those cookies outright would break basic functionalities . instead , safari puts a strict time limit on how long the cookie can stick around , keeping cookies available for hours after a visit and outright deleting anything older than days . this is a cat and mouse game , and it always has been . the crucial distinction is between the first party sites you re purposefully visiting and the third party trackers that come along for the ride . as long as a cookie is associated with a website you ve visited in the last hours , safari won t change much which gives popular sites like facebook and the various google services an easy way around the new restrictions . the systems hit hardest by safari s new policy will be third party systems like criteo or adroll , which silently coordinate cookies in the background of thousands of sites . not coincidentally , criteo s stock plummeted in the wake of the announcement . that s much less of a problem for google and facebook , which already dominate online ads . most people visit facebook or a google service every day , and those users will never be too far outside the hour window . both services also work as a kind of permanent login , used to access sites like twitter or wordpress without a separate password . as a result , most users stay logged in to google and facebook as long as they re online . combine that with omnipresent like buttons , and you ve got an easy way to see what people are doing on the web . and as long as you re visiting facebook once a day , safari won t get in the way of that tracking . google and facebook s biggest challengers in ad targeting are telecom companies like verizon and comcast , which were given a huge boost by recent shifts in us telecom policy . but those companies should fare just as well . both verizon and comcast invested heavily in web media alongside advertising tech , which means they can take advantage of the same first party exception as google and facebook . disclosure one of comcast s media investments is a minority stake in vox media , parent company of the verge . as long as you re visiting aol or huffington post sites once a day , verizon will have no problem targeting ads , and cookie serving deals may extend that reach even further . as long as you re visiting facebook once a day , the company won t be affectedat the same time , ad networks that aren t attached to popular websites will take a serious hit . it won t be a total blackout , since most modern networks supplement cookies with more advanced fingerprinting techniques that profile visitors without transmitting any data . they can also try to make cookie serving agreements with websites , collecting data at the same time that they serve the ads themselves . but the new safari policy will still put those ad companies at a permanent disadvantage to more powerful players like google and facebook . those companies were already outmatched with google and facebook capturing cents of every new dollar spent on online ads and the new browser moves will make it even harder for them to survive . the result will tip the balance even farther toward the handful of giant companies that already dominate the web . apple isn t the only force pushing the web in that direction . the european commission s recent anti tracking proposals would establish a similar distinction between first and third parties . only last week , google announced an ad blocker for chrome that s likely to edge out small players even further . it s still hard to say what that will mean for smaller websites and everyday users , but google and facebook will only become more central to the business of the web . underneath it all is the basic logic of consolidation . these players google , facebook , verizon , and comcast control huge portions of how we connect to the web , from the servers to the fiber to the device , ending with the browser itself . now , they re using that control to play for advantage in ad tracking , with users stuck in the middle . ios and safari are incredibly powerful tools in that fight , and by all appearances , apple is using them to try to craft a less invasive web experience for its users . but after more than a decade of ad tech , untangling that knot may be harder than the company realizes . 	 wonder woman begins on the paradisiacal island home of the amazons , a mythical tribe of warrior women sent to earth to protect humans from their basest impulses . when world war i spills onto the island s shores , the film s titular heroine , diana gal gadot , leaves its relative safety to help american spy steve trevor chris pine deliver a german laboratory notebook to british intelligence . that notebook , stolen from a german chemist nicknamed dr . poison , contains the germans newest superweapon it s a formula for a new kind of gas , mustard gas , diana explains , translating the notebook for britain s military leaders . hydrogen based instead of sulfur . gas masks would be useless against hydrogen ! gasps one of those leaders . even in a film that includes a magical island created by zeus himself , these details about the gas are so strangely specific that they deserve a little fact checking . chemically speaking , does this formula make any sense ? not really . first off , mustard gas is such a horrible , terrifying weapon , it doesn t need to be made more potent . but if you were a chemist bent on raining destruction on the allied forces , you wouldn t do it by replacing the sulfur atom in mustard gas with a hydrogen atom . you d know that sulfur is the linchpin holding together this poisonous molecule . video warner bros . pictures the souped up mustard gas in wonder woman can crack glass . it s got a bat like structure , explains raychelle burks , a chemistry professor at st . edward s university in texas . sulfur s smack in the middle , and then you ve got two bat wings that come out and they re kind of crinkly cut . both of those bat wings are made up of two carbon atoms and capped with a chlorine . the four carbon atoms each sprout two little tufts of hydrogen fuzz , for a total of eight hydrogen atoms . although there is a villain in a human form , the race against time is a chemistry one . so , mustard gas also known as sulfur mustard has plenty of hydrogen already . and an additional hydrogen couldn t replace sulfur , because hydrogen only likes to bond to one other atom at a time . unlike sulfur , hydrogen doesn t have enough spare hands to hold on to both bat wings . still , burks says , the film does get the prominent role of chemistry in wwi right . although there is a villain in a human form , the race against time is a chemistry one , she says . in that way , they did capture world war i as being a chemist s war . image by ben mills wikimedia commons the chemical structure of mustard gas , with sulfur yellow in the middle connected to two wings . both wings contain two carbon atoms black , each bound to two hydrogen atoms white . chlorine atoms green bracket the entire structure on either end . the real life dr . poison was a german chemist named fritz haber . he won the nobel prize for the breakthrough that made the large scale production of fertilizer possible . he also spearheaded germany s chemical weapons program , and presided over the first successful use of a chemical weapon during world war i not mustard gas , but chlorine . with the help of the wind , the germans wafted chlorine gas across the allies trenches on a spring day in and killed more than , soldiers , writes sarah everts in chemical ampamp engineering news . this experiment in chemical warfare sparked an arms race that earned world war i the moniker the chemist s war , despite an international ban on chemical weapons . everts quotes german officer rudolf binding , who wrote i am not pleased with the idea of poisoning men . of course , the entire world will rage about it at first and then imitate us . each new chemical agent was met with a more sophisticated countermeasurebinding was right . a twisted call and response ensued where each new chemical agent was met with a more sophisticated countermeasure . among the earliest defenses against chlorine gas were urine soaked handkerchiefs the ammonia in urine could render the chlorine relatively harmless . but when the germans first weaponized mustard gas in , it presented a new challenge . contrary to its name , mustard gas does not actually have any mustard in it . it s named for its mustard like odor . nor is it a gas . soon known as the king of the battle gases , mustard gas is actually an oily liquid that can pass through leather , rubber , and most textiles , everts writes . image wikimedia commons this canadian soldier has blisters caused by mustard gas . artillery shells filled with mustard gas rained tiny droplets onto the battlefield that didn t need to be inhaled to inflict mass casualties . they soaked into the soldiers uniforms and covered their skin , causing a delayed reaction . hours after exposure , soldiers would start to vomit , and their skin would burn . huge blisters would form , and , if they inhaled the mustard gas , the lining of their lungs sloughed off . many went at least temporarily blind . both recovery and death were slow and agonizing . and the oil persisted on soldiers bodies and in the environment , where mortars could kick up residual mustard gas that had settled onto the soil months before . wonder woman doesn t show the gruesome effects of the hydrogen based mustard gas on people . instead , we see it shriveling a gas mask which isn t how mustard gas works , cracking glass it can t , and exploding in an airplane , which goes up like a chemical tainted hindenburg . it seemed like the filmmakers wanted to make the gas more flammable , burks speculates , and people might equate hydrogen with flames . like can we have a chimera ? and the answer is no . you cannot . you don t need to be the big , scary monster . no , this is scarier than that . still , the film captures the aftermath and horror of chemical weapons in a scene where the germans bomb a village with artillery shells containing the fictionally souped up mustard gas . an orange mist floats low over the ground as diana walks through to find scattered bodies . the thing that caused that devastation ? a tiny molecule you can t fight with your fists , or with weapons . once that creeping mist catches you , it s too late . bigger is not scarier , burks says . you don t need to be the big , scary monster . no , this is scarier than that . and it s a teeny , teeny molecule . wonder woman is a superhero movie , so it doesn t give anything away to say that diana beats the bad guy in the end . but knowing that chemical weapons continue to be used even today touches that victory with a sense of futility , which the filmmakers seem to have intended . after all , humans will continue to dream up new , horrific ways of hurting one another . but wonder woman gives us a chance to escape to an imaginary world where there s someone or something out there , trying to stop us . 	 kindred thinks the path to smarter software is by giving it a physical body ask geordie rose and suzanne gildert , co founders of the startup kindred , about their company s philosophy , and they ll describe a bold vision of the future machines with human level intelligence . rose says these will be perhaps the most transformative inventions in history and they aren t far away . more intriguing than this prediction is kindred s proposed path for achieving it . unlike some of the most cash flush corporations in silicon valley , kindred is focusing not on chatbots or game playing programs , but on automating physical robots . gildert , a physicist who conceived kindred in while working with rose at quantum computing company d wave , thinks giving ai a physical body is the only way to make real progress toward a true thinking machine . if you want to build intelligence that conceptually thinks in the same way a human does it needs to have a similar sensory motor as humans do , gildert says . the trick to achieving this , she thinks , is to train robots by having them collaborate with humans in the physical world . rose , who co founded d wave in , stepped back from his role as chief technology officer to work on kindred with gildert . kindred wants to train robots by having them collaborate with humans in the physical worldthe first step toward their new shared goal is an industrial warehouse robot called the orb . it s a robotic arm that sits inside a hexagonal glass encasement , equipped with a bevy of sensors to help it see , feel , and even hear its surroundings . the arm is operated using a mix of human control and automated software . because so many warehouse workers today spend a significant amount of time sorting products and scanning barcodes , kindred developed a robotic arm that can do some elements automatically . meanwhile , humans step in when needed to manually operate the robot to perform tasks that are difficult for machines , like gripping a single product from a cluster of different items . workers can even operate the arm remotely using an off the shelf htc vive headset and virtual reality motion controllers . it turns out that vr is great for gathering data on depth and other information humans intuitively use to grasp objects . kindred is now focused on getting its finished orb into warehouses , where it can begin learning at an accelerated pace by sorting vastly different products and observing human operators . because the company gathers data every time a human uses the orb , engineers are able to improve its software over time using techniques such as reinforcement learning , which improves software through repetition . down the line , the orb should slowly take over more responsibility and , ideally , learn to perform new tasks . but kindred s ultimate goal is much more ambitious . it may sound counterintuitive , but rose and gildert think warehouses are the perfect place to start on the path toward human level artificial intelligence . because the us shipping marketplace is already rife with single purpose robots , thanks in part to amazon , there are plenty of opportunities for humans to train ai . finding , handling , and sorting products while maneuvering in a fast moving environment is a data gold mine for building robots that can operate in the real world . rose and gildert believe the next generation of ai won t be in the form of a disembodied voice living in our phones . rather , they believe the greatest strides will come from programs running inside a physical robot can gain knowledge about the world and itself from the ground up , like a human infant does from birth . chris hayes , a kindred vr pilot and software engineer , operates the orb remotely using a vive headset in the company s san francisco office . kindred s is working toward what s known as artificial general intelligence , or software capable of performing any task a human being can do . artificial general intelligence , or agi , is sometimes referred to as strong or full ai because it exists in contrast to ai programs , like deepmind s alphago system , with very specific applications . other more conventional forms of weak or narrow ai include the underlying software behind netflix and amazon recommendations , snapchat camera effects that rely on facial recognition , and google s fast and accurate language translations . these algorithms are developed by applying deep learning techniques to large scale neural networks until they can , say , differentiate between an image of a dog and a cat . they perform one task , or perhaps many in some cases , far better than humans can . but they are extremely limited and don t learn or adapt the way humans do . the software that recognizes a sunset can t predict whether you ll like a netflix movie or translate a sentence into japanese . right now , you can t ask alphago to face off in chess it doesn t know the rules and wouldn t know how to begin learning them . kindred thinks our physical body is intrinsic to the secrets of human cognitionthis is the fundamental challenge of agi how to create an intelligent system , the kind we know only from science fiction , that can truly learn on its own without needing to be fed thousands of examples and trained over the course of weeks or months . the biggest names in ai research , like deepmind , are focused on game playing because it seems to be the most viable path forward . after all , if you can teach software to play pong , perhaps it can take the lessons learned and apply them to breakout ? this applied knowledge approach , which mimics the way a human player can quickly intuit the rules of a new game , has proven promising . for instance , alphago master , deepmind s latest go system that just bested world champion ke jie , now effectively teaches itself how to play better . one of the things we re most excited about is not just that it can play go better , but we hope that this ll actually lead to technologies that are more generally applicable to other challenging domains , deepmind co founder and ceo demis hassabis said at the event last week . google owned deepmind is focusing on game playing systems , like alphago , to make progress toward a general purpose strong ai . yet for kindred s founders , the quest to crack the secret of human cognition can t be separated from our physical bodies . our founding belief was that in order to make real progress toward the original objectives of ai , you needed to start by grounding your ideas in the physical world , rose says . and that means robots , and robots with sensors that can look around , touch , hear the world that surrounds them . this body first approach to ai is based on a theory called embodied cognition , which suggests that the interplay between our brain , body , and the physical world is what produces elements of consciousness and the ability to reason . a fun exercise here is thinking about how many common metaphors have physical underpinnings , like thinking of affection as warmth or something inconceivable as being over your head . without understanding how the brain developed to control the body and guide functions like locomotion and visual processing , the theory goes , we may never be able to reproduce it artificially . the body first approach to ai is based on a theory called embodied cognitionother than kindred , work on ai and embodied cognition mostly happens in the research divisions of large tech companies and academia . for example , pieter abbeel , who leads development on the berkeley robot for the elimination of tedious tasks brett , aims to create robots that can learn much like young children do . by giving its robot sensory abilities and motor functions and then using ai training techniques , the brett team devised a way for it to acquire knowledge and physical skills much faster than with standard programming and with the flexibility to keep learning . much like how babies are constantly adjusting their behavior when attempting something new , brett also approaches unique problems , fails at first , and then adjusts over repeated attempts and under new constraints . abbeel s team even uses children s toys to test brett s aptitude for problem solving . openai , the nonprofit funded by spacex and tesla ceo elon musk , is working on both general purpose game playing algorithms and robotics , under the notion that both avenues are complementary . helping the team is abbeel , who is on leave from berkeley to help openai make progress fusing ai learnings with modern robotics . the interesting thing about robotics is that it forces us to deal with the actual data we would want an intelligent agent to deal with , says josh tobin , a graduate student at berkeley who works on robotics at openai . applying ai to real world tasks like picking up objects and stacking blocks involves tackling a whole suite of new problems , tobin says , like managing unfamiliar textures and replicating minute motor movements . solving them is necessary if we re to ever deploy intelligent robots beyond factory floors . wojciech zaremba , who leads openai s robotics work , says that a holy grail of sorts would be a general purpose robot powered by ai that can learn a new task scrambling eggs , for instance by watching someone do it just once . this is why openai is working on teaching robots new skills that are first demonstrated by a human in a simulated vr environment , much like a video game , where it s much easier and less costly to produce and collect data . you could imagine that , as a final outcome , if it s doable , you have files online of recordings of various tasks , zaremba says . and then if you want the robot to replicate this behavior , you just download the file . kindred s orb is designed to automate the task of picking up and sorting products with help from human operators . when i first operated the orb , on an april afternoon in kindred s san francisco warehouse space , a group of six or so engineers were scattered about testing the robotic arms with various pink colored bins of products vitamin bottles , soft plastic cylinders of lysol cleaning wipes , rolls of paper towels . the orb is designed to help sort these objects in a large heap inside its glass container , while the arm sits affixed to the roof of the container . first , an operator wearing a vr headset moves the arm to a desired object , lowers the gripper , and adjusts the two clamps until a firm grip is established . then the human can simply let go . kindred has already automated the process of lifting the object in the air , scanning the barcode , and sorting it into the necessary bin . using the orb resembles operating a video game version of a toy claw machine in any gigantic warehouse , people have to walk around and pick up things , says george babu , kindred s chief product officer . the most efficient way to do that is to pick up a whole bunch of different things at the same time . those go to someplace where you have them separated . our robot does that job in the middle . the idea is that warehouse workers can dump a bunch of products into the orb , while a remote operator works with the robot to sort them . amazon is working on something similar , and the company now holds an annual picking challenge to spur development in industrial robotics that are capable of handling and sorting physical items . kindred is quick to recognize amazon s prowess in this department . in the fulfillment world , amazon uses a different set of approaches than all of the other fulfillment provisioners . they have the scale , the scope , and the know how to implement end to end systems that are very effective at what they do , rose says . but he thinks amazon is likely to keep this technology to itself . the advancements that amazon makes toward doing this job well don t benefit all of their competitors . kindred has entirely automated the process of scanning barcodes and sorting items with the orb . gripping , however , is performed by human operators . kindred s system , on the other hand , is designed to integrate into existing warehouse tools . last month , kindred finished its first deployable devices , and it created more demand than we anticipated , according to jim liefer , kindred s chief operating officer , though he won t disclose any initial customers . i was surprised when using the orb , with a vive headset , by just how much it resembles a video game . think of a toy claw machine , where the second the clamp touches down on an object , the automated process takes over and the arm springs to life with an uncanny jerkiness . it makes sense , considering kindred built its depth sensing system using the game engine unity . kindred imagines future versions of the orb being affixed to sliding rails or bipedal roaming robotsmax bennett , kindred s robotics product manager , says that the process is designed so that human warehouse workers can operate multiple orbs simultaneously , gripping objects and letting the software take the reins before cycling to the next setup . kindred imagines future versions of the robotic arm being affixed to sliding overhead rails or maybe even to bipedal robots that roam the floor . there is also a point at which the vive is no longer necessary . nobody s going to want to use a vr headset all day , bennett tells me , suggesting that an xbox controller or even just a computer mouse will do in the future . as for how the orb might impact jobs , babu says there will be need for human labor for quite some time . he s partly right amazon hired , workers in the last year alone , and plans to hire , more this year , mostly in warehouse and other fulfillment roles . but systems like the orb raise the possibility that fewer jobs are needed as the work becomes more a matter of assisting and operating robots . my view is that the humans will all move on to different work in the stream , babu says . still , forrester research predicts that automation will result in million jobs lost over the next decade , with only million new jobs created . the end goals of automation have always been to reduce costs and improve efficiency , and that will inevitably mean the disappearance of certain types of labor . kindred is split between its headquarters in vancouver , a machine learning division in toronto , and its robotics lab in san francisco . kindred is unique in the ai field not just for its robotics focus , but also because it s diving head first into the industrial world with a commercial product . many of the big tech companies working on ai are doing so with huge research organizations , like facebook ai research and google brain . these teams are filled with academics and engineers who work on abstract problems that then help inform real software features that get deployed to millions of consumers . kindred , as a startup , can t afford this approach . day one we said we re going to find a big market . we re going to build a wildly successful product for that initial market , and build a business by executing along that path first with one vertical and then maybe others , rose explains . he adds that his experience with d wave , which raised more than million over the course of more than a decade just to release its first product , inspired him to seek out a different approach to tackling big picture problems . gildert and rose don t want to rely solely on venture capital funding to build kindred you have this quandary that doing it right is going to take a long time , on the order of decades . how do you sustain that organization for that length of time without all the negative side effects of raising a lot of rounds of vc ? rose says . the answer is that you have to create a real business that is cash flow positive very early . kindred has raised million in funding thus far from eclipse , gv , data collective , and a number of other investors . but rose stresses that the company s focus is to become profitable with the orb , and that will help it in its main objective . that objective , since the beginning , is human level ai with a focus on what gildert calls in body cognition , or the type of thought processes that only arise from giving ai a physical shell . intelligence absence a body is not what we think it means , she says . intelligence with a body brings to it a number of constraints that are not there when you think about intelligence in a virtual environment . we certainly don t believe you can build a chatbot without a human like body and expect it to pass for a human . brains evolved to control bodies , rose adds . and all these things that we think about as being the beautiful stuff that comes from cognition , they re all side effects of this . 	 if a nuclear tipped missile were hurtling toward the united states , would we be able to stop it ? maybe , if we were very lucky . but some experts warn that the united states missile defense system isn t as reliable as people might think . right now , a constellation of sensors and interceptor missiles make up the ground based midcourse defense system , or gmd . it s intended to act as insurance against a small scale nuclear attack from north korea , or possibly iran , according to the department of defense . neither country has missiles capable of reaching the us , although us officials say north korea is getting closer . it s not meant to ward off an unlikely attack from the much larger and more sophisticated arsenals of russia or china nor would it be able to . still , it s the only defense we have against an intercontinental ballistic missile or icbm once it s in the air . on may th , , the us tested these defenses against an icbm like target for the first time . to stop it , a ground based interceptor missile fired from vandenberg air force base collided with the incoming warhead and smashed it to smithereens . the test appears to have been a success but that doesn t necessarily mean the gmd could stop an enemy weapon under real world conditions . in fact , the government accountability office a nonpartisan government agency also known as the congressional watchdog reported in that the gmd has not demonstrated through flight testing that it can defend the u . s . homeland against the current missile defense threat . here s what you need to know how is our missile defense system supposed to work ? for a second , let s imagine a frightening future where north korea actually does have working icbms and decides to launch one . satellites with infrared sensors and radar systems deployed in japan and on us navy ships would spot the missile launch , and alert control centers in the us . sensors , including a sea based , high resolution radar , would track the hostile missile as it flies . when the missile leaves the atmosphere , it enters longest phase of its flight called the midcourse . at this point , the missile breaks up into the warhead , debris , decoys intended to confuse our sensors , and the last stage of the burned out rocket booster . on the other side of the pacific , people in control centers in alaska and colorado would work quickly to find the warhead and figure out where to intercept it . then , they give the order to fire interceptor missiles from vandenberg air force base in california , or fort greely , alaska . there are interceptors stashed in silos at these two sites , each carrying a kill vehicle on a three stage rocket booster . tom karako , a missile defense expert with the center for strategic and international studies , describes the kill vehicle as a funny looking telescope with a jetpack attached to it . as the interceptor leaves the atmosphere and enters space , the pound kill vehicle and the rocket separate . using infrared sensors to find the incoming warhead , the kill vehicle moves into the warhead s path by firing its own little thrusters . when the two objects collide , the kill vehicle should , theoretically , obliterate the warhead without causing a nuclear detonation . image missile defense agency infrared image of a successful intercept in , where a ground based interceptor collided with a target launched from alaska . okay , but can it actually do that ? we don t really know . since , the gmd has been tested times . but the union of concerned scientists argues that these were conducted under artificial conditions where the timing of the incoming missile , for example , was known in advance . of course , for safety reasons , you can t exactly launch a surprise icbm at an air force base . and even so , the system has failed either eight or nine of those tests , depending on whom you ask . the department of defense s missile defense agency says eight failures , counting a glancing blow delivered to a target in as a success . but the pentagon s director of operational test and evaluation testified in a congressional hearing that it was a hit , but not a kill actually destroying the target apparently wasn t one of the test s objectives . that s why karako says that there is a need for more testing like the one on may th , which tested an upgraded component of the kill vehicle . the target took off from the marshall islands in the pacific , and flew toward the us with the speed and trajectory of an icbm . an interceptor missile launched from vandenberg air force base in california collided with the target and destroyed it . laura grego , a global security expert for the union of concerned scientists with a background in physics , says the gmd system has been described as like hitting a bullet with a bullet . she adds it s amazing that we ever actually do it . the difficulty is compounded by the fact that the interceptor missiles are essentially advanced prototypes , karako says . i think fundamentally what has challenged the program is the lost opportunities to go back and improve upon the basic design that was fielded back in , he says . everybody knows that that s what needs to be done , and now finally we re on a path to getting there but we have to keep at it . photo missile defense agency the missile defense complex at fort greely , alaska . how d we get to this point ? for decades the us went back and forth about whether , and how , to defend itself against incoming missiles . ever since the us developed the atomic bomb in , our best defense has been the prospect of devastating nuclear retaliation . but to supplement this game of nuclear chicken , the army asked bell labs in to start looking into possibilities for an antiballistic missile system . since then , the us very briefly deployed nuclear tipped interceptors designed to stop incoming missiles in their tracks with a nuclear explosion . in the s , ronald reagan announced his famous star wars plan which included a proposal for an x ray space laser powered by a nuclear detonation it never got off the ground . an anti ballistic missile treaty signed by the us and the soviet union in plus scientific and technological challenges stopped us from getting serious about defending against an icbm attack . there was also the concern that a sophisticated defense system could fuel a race for weapons that could overpower it . the clinton administration started making moves toward a national missile defense in the s . but the real push came after , when george bush pulled out of the anti ballistic missile treaty and fast tracked what became the gmd . this , grego and her colleagues at the union of concerned scientists argue , is what set the system up for failure by rushing missiles that were essentially still prototypes into silos . karako counters that the speed of the rollout was necessary we are unwilling , as a nation , to accept vulnerability , complete vulnerability , to be blackmailed by north korea . so we re going to do what we can to have some defenses , and we re going to improve it over time . photo missile defense agency launch of a target for a test from the u . s . army s reagan test site at kwajalein atoll because interceptors were rushed out before rigorous testing , the missile defense agency had to go back and fix them as flight tests uncovered issues . and those fixes have been both expensive , and incremental so not all the missiles have the same hardware , according to a report by the pentagon s director of operational testing . it went on to say the reliability and availability of the operational ground based interceptors is low , and the mda continues discovering new failure modes during testing . chris johnson , a spokesperson with the mda , says that the agency upgrades systems once new improvements are designed . one of those upgrades was to address a pretty serious design flaw discovered a few years ago that caused the vibrations from the thrusters to throw off the kill vehicles navigation . that made the kill vehicle more likely to miss the warhead it was designed to intercept . a fix for the thrusters was flight tested in and it was described as a success until an la times investigation revealed that , in fact , one of the thrusters had failed and thrown the interceptor way off target . we disagree with that characterization of the test , johnson says . the test met its objective , and the thruster performed as designed . the next challenge was to see whether the upgraded kill vehicle could actually hit an icbm like target as intended and it did , the missile defense agency reports . but again , it was under pretty ideal conditions the test took place during the day , there was only one icbm like missile , we knew where it was coming from , and where it was going . and , since it ll likely take several interceptors to destroy an incoming warhead , the next hurdle to clear will be for the pentagon to fire several missiles that will need to work together to stop one target . photo missile defense agency launch of an interceptor for a test . what does this mean ? that depends on who you ask . if you ask grego and her colleagues at the union of concerned scientists , it means that the missile defense agency needs more oversight . it should be required to test its acquisitions before it buys them , like many other defense programs . they re meant to be tested first and put through their paces before they re bought and put into the field , she says . in the meantime , the government should avoid statements about the gmd that give a false sense of security , grego says . the dod s ballistic missile defense review said that the united states is currently protected against limited icbm attacks . a senate report in said the gmd protects the entire us against an attack from north korea or iran . that s not true . at least , not yet , according to the gao , that says , gmd flight testing , to date , was insufficient to demonstrate that an operationally useful defense capability exists . but karako at the center for strategic and international studies disagrees i don t think anybody takes this lightly . this is a form of insurance policy . you don t have fire insurance and then go lighting matches around your house recklessly . instead , he argues that the missile defense agency needs to go back and methodically fix the interceptors based on what we ve learned from testing the gmd , as well as from regional missile technologies . there s been a number of decision points along the way , when the opportunity to fix these very fixable things could have been taken , but wasn t , he says . i don t think anybody really disputes that . making the system more reliable will take more frequent testing , a culture that allows those tests to fail , and enough breathing room to actually implement the fixes . still , it s pretty clear that regardless of how the gmd performed on may th , the best option we have against an icbm attack is never getting to that point in the first place . update june , am et this post , originally published may th , , has been updated to include a video and the results of the may th gmd intercept test . 	 to get to the panoptic studio at carnegie mellon university , you take an elevator down four flights to a dingy sub basement . inside room b , a series of metal cross beams enclose a massive , otherworldly structure a geodesic dome . each of the wooden dome s hexagonal panels is covered with a tangle of wires , cameras , and connectors , and a steady thrum emanates from the rows of computers that surround the hulking structure . at the bottom of the dome , a single panel is missing and bright light streams out , making it difficult to see what s inside . it looks like a portal to another dimension . people , when they come in here , they often ask us what this thing is , says tomas simon , research assistant in the lab , with a joking grin . we tell them a time machine , and usually they believe us . step inside the portal and everything is white , calm , silent this is where researchers are helping craft the future of virtual reality . i speak out loud , and my voice echoes around the empty space . in place of the clutter on the outside , each panel is unadorned , save for a series of small black spots cameras recording your every move . there are vga cameras and hd cameras , as well as rgb d depth sensors borrowed from xbox gaming consoles . the massive collection of recording apparatus is synced together , and its collective output is combined into a single , digital file . one minute of recording amounts to gb of data . the hundreds of cameras record people talking , bartering , and playing games . imagine the motion capture systems used by hollywood filmmakers , but on steroids . the footage it records captures a stunningly accurate three dimensional representation of people s bodies in motion , from the bend in an elbow to a wrinkle in your brow . the lab is trying to map the language of our bodies , the signals and social cues we send one another with our hands , posture , and gaze . it is building a database that aims to decipher the constant , unspoken communication we all use without thinking , what the early th century anthropologist edward sapir once called an elaborate code that is written nowhere , known to no one , and understood by all . the original goal of the panoptic studio was to use this understanding of body language to improve the way robots relate to human beings , to make them more natural partners at work or in play . but the research being done here has recently found another purpose . what works for making robots more lifelike and social could also be applied to virtual characters . that s why this basement lab caught the attention of one of the biggest players in virtual reality facebook . in april , the silicon valley giant hired yaser sheikh , an associate professor at carnegie mellon and director of the panoptic studio , to assist in research to improve social interaction in vr . there is nothing people are more keenly aware of than other people . for facebook , virtual reality represents the next great computing platform and the ultimate evolution of zuckerberg s social network . our communication has evolved from text to photos to video to live video and virtual reality is the obvious next step . we all know where we want to improve and where we want virtual reality to eventually get , said zuckerberg during his keynote at the recent oculus connect . it s this feeling of real presence , like you re really there with another person . this week oculus , which is owned by facebook , ampnbspreleased touch controllers for its rift vr system , allowing users to integrate more of their body into virtual space . but the technology has a long way to go . making social interactions in vr as natural as the ones we re used to in the real world is one of the grand technological challenges today , said sheikh , speaking at this year s f conference . it s a challenge because there is nothing people are more keenly aware of than other people . so the bar for deeply convincing virtual interactions is extremely high . but for the same reason , once that bar is reached , lifelike virtual interactions will be a transformative achievement , vastly extending our personal world , and connecting the world together in a way we haven t seen before . the panoptic studio during my trip to the panoptic studio , simon and another research assistant took me through one of the exercises the team uses to collect data . standing inside the geodesic dome , we played a game called ultimatum , in which three participants haggle over how to split dollars . for anyone to receive money , all three have to agree on how it s shared . it s a classic experiment in economics and game theory , with participants trying to weigh how much they can squeeze out for themselves without losing everything by failing to reach a consensus . roughly two thirds of what we communicate with one another comes through nonverbal cuesit s also a great opportunity to study body language . the three of us stood face to face , two aligned against one . as we bargained back and forth for several minutes , we were constantly shifting our postures , gaze , and position from one another . during the negotiations i tried to project confidence , but the results spoke for themselves i ended up taking home two dollars , while my hosts pocketed four bucks each . after the game , we left the dome and headed to a bank of computers to review the footage . i could watch a replay of our conversation from different angles , and they all told the same story . i began with an aggressive pose , my hands splayed in front , body squared , eyes fixed on the duo i was bargaining with . but as the game progressed i began fidgeting , rubbing my wrists , stepping backwards , and looking down at my shoes . your body often expresses inconvenient truths that your words are meant to mask , said simon . if what i m saying doesn t agree with the way i m saying it , or what i m doing , people will almost always listen to your body motion , or your non verbal behavior , rather than your words . decades of academic research have confirmed this primacy of body language , with scholars estimating that roughly two thirds of what we communicate with one another comes through nonverbal cues . skeletal tracking captured by the panoptic studio body language is a deeply instinctual children as young as one or two years old can understand social cues from facial expressions and posture . and scientific experiments have demonstrated that individuals who are blind from birth will gesture when they talk , even though they have never learned to gesture from watching others . our minds are so primed to pick up on body language that we can recognize signals even when shown only the most basic outline of the human form . a number of academic studies have shown that people can distinguish biological motion from mechanical motions with just points on a screen . our brains are remarkable inference engines , able to draw upon millennia of evolution and a lifetime of experience to transform these sparse points into fleshed out people in our imagination , and to predict the next actions of those imagined people as well , said sheikh during facebook s f conference . the challenge of making the pipeline of social vr work is to learn how to computationally do the same sort of inference and prediction . something as simple as a stare can convey anger , lust , or confusionartificial intelligence has made huge strides over the past decade in learning to understand what people are saying and how to respond . it can even best human experts when it comes to reading lips . but body language is much messier . to illustrate the problem sheikh likes to show two close up photographs of tennis player rafael nadal . in one , nadal is experiencing a moment of anguish , in the other , ecstasy . but with just his face , it s hard to know which is which . to clarify we need to zoom out , to read his entire posture , his hands , the full picture of a human . something as simple as a stare can convey anger , lust , or confusion with only the subtlest of changes to the rest of your body . the pillars of body language are facial expressions , gestures , posture , and gaze . humans have tried since the beginning to work these elements into our digital communications . emoticons were the most basic . a wink or a frown , while crude , can add an emotional effect to an email that would be difficult to impart with words . this was followed by decades of work on digital avatars with bodies that could express our intentions . in the mid s habitat , a game developed by lucasarts , let players use keyboard commands to change their avatars facial expressions . in the early s , startups like ampnbsptraveler , dreamscape , worldsaway , and the palace all competed for users to populate their virtual worlds . worldsaway users could walk and gesture and talk through speech bubbles . later worlds , like there . com , added voice chat , and used the volume of your voice to activate certain gestures . screenshots from onlive traveler , ampnbspthe palace , and habitat courtesy bruce damer the dot com crash wiped out most of this generation s virtual worlds . by , it was all dead , said bruce damer , a historian of the period . there were a few exceptions to that rule . dedicated communities of millions did coalesce around virtual worlds like the sims and second life . avatars in second life had opposable joints , and users could manipulate them to create unique gestures . this led to a lot of awkward movements , as parodied in this ampnbspclassic youtube video . body language was such a desired commodity that users even paid for animation overrides , or aos , a sort of software mod that replaced standard movements with specially scripted ones . the creators of these virtual worlds had imagined that one day everyone would use avatars to meet , shop , and fall in love online . but a year after second life launched , facebook began to percolate across college campuses . it was a sort of evolutionary reset . in place of a highly detailed d avatar , your online identity was a photo and some text . with facebook s purchase of oculus in , those two approaches to a social internet are coming together . facebook and others in the vr space are returning to the pursuit of highly virtual avatars that had been largely abandoned with the bursting of the dot com bubble . only this time , the technology is ready . the sensors and cameras needed for good positional tracking had been developed inside gaming consoles and smartphones , ready to capture not just our voices and keyboard commands , but the actual movements of our bodies . instead of manipulating a character like a marionette , says ebbe altberg , ceo of second life creator linden lab . in vr , it s like wearing the skin of the avatar . facebook avatars for its social vr software in mike booth , a year veteran of the gaming industry , went to see a demo of a new virtual reality experience . he was invited by his friend , jason holtman , another gaming industry vet , who had recently secured a job at oculus . booth had vast experience with cutting edge graphics and multiplayer games that let people interact online . but what he saw that day blew him away . it was a demo of toybox , a simple social vr experience that puts two people together in a virtual playpen . there were these floating blue hands and head that looked nothing like jason . but it was jason , because it picked up his biological motion , his nuances , the way his head nods . holtman s avatar had no body , no facial features , no hair , none of the intricate details that booth was used to from his work in the gaming industry . i ve been making video games for years , and i ve seen all kinds of stuff . the highest level triple aaa most realistic graphics , all that jazz . and all my career has been multiplayer online , so i m very used to being with other people in online space . but that experience with jason , i was literally speechless , and that s what s driven me to do social vr . booth is now leading facebook s efforts to create social vr , an extension of the service used by more than a billion people every day . the team s first challenge was to craft avatars . we thought , hey let s just use photographs and rebuild a three dimensional model of your actual head . in theory , everyone with a cell phone or webcam could then easily get a detailed , personalized representation of themselves . in practice , the idea was a disaster . a steely eyed photograph , stretched over a humanoid skull moving semi naturally created , booth says , a dead head . this problem , dubbed the uncanny valley , is common across the film and gaming industries , and even crops up in robotics people generally like representations of humans the more lifelike they become . but cross a certain threshold , and suddenly we find that same character spooky . part of our brain believes it s a real person , while other parts are screaming it s not . oculus avatars inside toybox if you take something that s remotely realistic , and you add that biological motion , you reach that uncanny valley much quicker than we expected , says booth . they re not breathing right , their eyes don t move right , they don t look in the right spot . they re psychotic ! the very limited avatars oculus had crafted for toybox were a clever hack around this issue . number one , it s blue not a biological color . the eyes are hidden behind a visor , there is no mouth that animates , says booth . when those cues aren t there , you focus on the cues that work . i wanted my friends to be able to smile or look confused . but for facebook , booth wanted something more appealing than a blue bobblehead . i really wanted to get eye contact , lip synch , and expressions . i wanted my friends to be able to smile or look confused , says booth . most importantly , he wanted users to be able to recognize their close friends . in april of this year , booth and his team revealed an early experiment . they took the floating blue hands and head from toybox , but allowed users to draw on personal details . booth was distinguished by his receding hairline , goatee , and glasses . he sketched a tie for himself and attached it below his head , at the bottom of a nonexistent neck . it was rudimentary , a literal line drawing , but it added a world of character to his avatar . six months later , at oculus connect in october , booth s team had made huge strides . facebook s avatars now had arms and torsos . they could make eye contact , and their mouths moved to a rough approximation of their words when they spoke . the highlight was what booth calls gestural emotes , emotions triggered by specific postures . booth compares it to the overblown movements of vaudeville actors . bring your hands up to your cheeks and your avatar will gape like macaulay culkin in home alone . pump your fists above your head and your avatar will break into a huge grin . to get to this point , booth and his team had to fudge reality . the position of an avatar s arms is just an educated guess based on the movement of their hands and head . so is the direction of your gaze . in the virtual space you can see other people s arms , but not your own the engineers figured seeing your digital arms in one position , but feeling your physical arms in another , would have been too jarring . we re making judgement calls on what we think we can get away with that will enhance the feeling of being there with a real person , explains booth . in the absence of technology that can truly capture body language , the team is building its best approximation . the science wasn t in yet , so i m just gonna wing it . altspacevr avatars two of the most prominent platforms emerging for social vr alongside facebook are altspacevr , an independent startup , and oculus , which is owned by facebook , but has its own avatar system . interestingly , both take nearly opposite approaches to conveying body language . they studiously avoid the tricks booth and his team use to improvise the things they cannot track arms , mouth movement , and gaze . instead , they stick almost religiously to what they can track with great fidelity , trusting our imagination to fill in the rest . a few weeks after f , i chatted with eric romo , the founder and ceo of altspacevr . i was in new york wearing an htc vive headset and holding a pair of motion controllers . romo was in california doing the same . a pair of laser emitting boxes affixed to the walls mapped the rooms we were in and tracked our motion , allowing romo and i to walk , wave , and interact as if we were in the same space , and not , miles apart . if we got too close to one another in the virtual space , i felt legitimately uncomfortable . it was easier to avoid talking over one another , because hands gestures and head position provided conversational cues . compared with facebook s avatars , our body language was limited . we were like children s action figures , given just enough mobility to spark the imagination . our bodies had arms and hands , but they stayed locked at our sides . our actual hand position was represented by a pair of controllers floating in front of our avatars . we had legs , but we couldn t walk around . instead we used a cursor to teleport from one position to another . our heads moved , but our gaze did not . our mouths didn t attempt to track the sounds of our words . we were like children s action figures , given just enough mobility to spark the imaginationromo explained that , for now at least , altspacevr was staying away from the methods facebook is using to approximate the movement of your arms or mouth . the research on this from the last decade is that it s easier to make an emotional connection with an abstract avatar where everything you see is tracked and rendered correctly , versus trying to make an emotional connection with a very detailed avatar that is not being captured in the right way , he explained . as more accurate tracking technology becomes available , altspacevr plans to add it in . right now , for example , anyone with a leap motion controller can have highly detailed hands , complete with flexible fingers , in place of two floating game controllers . when comedians perform for big crowds in altspacevr , they can wear a full body suit , allowing them to act out physical gags . oculus takes a similar approach . we were very clear early on that we wanted to avoid the temptation to add motion above and beyond what we could do with our track data , said mike howard , product manager at oculus , during a recent talk . there is a lot we could fake , from elbows , to knees , to the mouth , to eye movement at best they distract from the real movement that the user is trying to convey , and at worst they get it wrong , and they don t match what s being said . the first ground rule of avatar design for oculus is simple . leave it to the human brain , don t fake it . cameras and sensors inside the panoptic studio yaser sheikh , director of the panoptic studio , has nothing against cartoon avatars . i think this is great work , and it s certainly what the first wave of social vr will be like . but my personal research goal , and the goal of our lab in pittsburgh , is to do photorealistic social vr , he explained . it should feel as if , when i put on the headset , and you put on the headset in ny , we are in the same room , you look exactly the way you do , you move exactly the way you do . by feeding thousands of hours of social interaction from the panoptic lab into deep learning algorithms , sheikh believes he can teach computers to understand the subtleties of our body language , just as others have taught computers to understand spoken language , or to read lips . when we look at a video of another person , the amount of information that hits our eyes and reaches our brain is actually quite impoverished . the reason we are able to suck out so much information from this is because we have a lifetime of experience interacting with people , and a rich repository of data in our mind , he explained . the goal is to give machines that kind of imagination , that repository of data to draw on . the better computers get at understanding our bodies , the less hardware tracking will require . obviously , as much as we want to , we re not going to have cameras set up in everyone s living room , said sheikh with a laugh . what we want to do in the lab is get the sort of data that we need to build representations that will then drive measurement from much reduced capture setups , fewer cameras , and so on . the real promise of vr , in my opinion , is that it holds the potential of allowing us to build and grow relationships from distances . once social vr cracks the elaborate code and avatars are as convincing as actual people , a whole world of possibilities opens up imagine an online dating service that lets you converse with potential matches across candlelit table before you meet up in real life . or playing poker with a group of friends spread across the country , and being able to tell if a buddy is bluffing from his body language . sheikh s extended family lives in abu dhabi , and he sees social vr as a way to strengthen those ties . the bond with the grandparents and the extended family just isn t the same as if we were there . the real promise of vr , in my opinion , is that it holds the potential of allowing us to build and grow relationships from distances . of course , with convincing body language now a matter of computer code , the person across from you may not be what they seem . imagine you re in a boring meeting with a lot of people in real life it would be rude to walk out the door . in vr you can sneak away , while your avatar stays sitting , nodding intelligently , and paying attention . that autopilot version of a person i m sure everyone would love to have , says sheikh . this kind of embellishment could be used for good . the virtual human interaction lab found students were more attentive and retained more material when the avatar representing the teacher was coded so that it appeared to each member of the class to be gazing directly at them . no regular teacher could simultaneously be looking at every student , but in vr , those limitations don t exist . trajectory reconstruction of the author s dance moves inside the panoptic studio after my visit to the panoptic studio , i wanted to try the cutting edge of social vr for myself . so a few months later i traveled to facebook s headquarters in menlo park , where i got a demo of its toybox software . inside a windowless room optimized for virtual reality , i donned the oculus headset and an assistant placed the touch controllers in my hand . now i was across a table from my partner , a pair of floating blue hands and a head . in toybox , i had the visceral sensation of being with another human being , but the world had none of the constraints or consequences you find in your living room . we could smash a vase with our slingshot , then snap a finger and it would be back . at one point we lowered the effects of gravity , and sent our pile of blocks floating in every direction . they scattered to the four corners of our playspace , and a few minutes later , reappeared neatly where they had begun . my most vivid memory is of the moment we worked together to pick up a castle made of blocks . it required delicate coordination , and the physics of the wobbly structure pressed between our virtual fingers was so convincing that i could almost feel the weight in my hands . there is an irony to to the notion that in the near future , some of our most exciting social interactions might happen when we re shutting out the world . i imagined my own sons getting lost in this fantastic universe , and how wonderful a tool it could be for connecting if they found themselves living apart . conversely i thought of how strange it would feel to come home find them sitting across from each other in our living room , each wearing a vr headset , alone together in another world . we are social animals , and there is something intoxicating about being with another person in a virtual realm where earthly rules don t apply . vr promises to connect us in a more intimate way than any technology has before , allowing for new forms of collaboration and creation . eventually our avatars may come to feel like richer representations of who we are , or want to be . at that point , we ll have to be careful not to get lost in our virtual worlds , and forget the bodies we re leaving behind . editor michael zelenko design james bareham
