 the village of mandritsara , where people recently died from bubonic plague . flickr peter stephens to most , the plague is a thing of the past ampmdash a relic from the middle ages , when the disease known as the black death wiped out a third of europe s population . yet despite being wiped out across much of the globe , it s still very much a reality in parts of madagascar , where one of the worst outbreaks in recent memory has left dozens dead . last week , government officials announced that people have died this fall from pneumonic plague ampmdash a rare and extremely deadly strain of the illness that affects the respiratory system . according to madagascar amprsquos health ministry , pneumonic plague can kill a patient within three days of infection , leaving little time for antibiotics to take effect . the announcement came just days after experts at the pasteur institute of madagascar confirmed that bubonic plague killed people in the northwest town of mandritsara , and two months after the international committee of the red cross icrc warned that madagascar was at risk of a plague epidemic . there is an epidemic in madagascar . there is an epidemic in madagascar which is currently affecting five districts out of , the ministry said in a statement on thursday . eighty six people have been inflicted by the plague , of which have died . patients infected with bubonic plague typically suffer from flu like symptoms , gangrene , and swollen lymph nodes . the disease spreads through the bites of infected rodent fleas , which primarily use black rats as their hosts . bubonic plague can be treated with antibiotics , reducing mortality rates from percent to percent , but the pneumonic form ampmdash which typically starts as bubonic plague before spreading to the lungs ampmdash is far more dangerous . if left untreated , mortality rates approach percent , and can remain high if a patient doesn amprsquot receive antibiotics within hours of infection . it also spreads through air droplets , meaning that unlike the bubonic plague , it can be transmitted from human to human . plague is rare across most of the globe today , due in large part to better sanitation and the development of new drugs . but it remains persistent in parts of asia and africa ampmdash which account for an estimated percent of the world s cases ampmdash and especially in madagascar , a low income island nation of more than million people . since , an average of cases have been reported every year in madagascar , according to data from the icrc . last year , the country saw plague cases that resulted in deaths , more than anywhere else in the world . infection rates typically rise during madagascar s hot and rainy season , which lasts from october to april , when fleas begin breeding and transmission increases . the disease predominantly affects the rural highlands of madagascar s central and northern regions , where poverty rates are high and sanitation is poor , though it s been known to spread within crowded prisons , as well . we can t destroy all the rodents on the planet . dr . christophe rogier , director of the pasteur institute of madagascar , says there s no shortage of antibiotics in the country , but getting them to the remote highlands ampmdash many of which are inaccessible by car ampmdash remains an enormous challenge . these epidemics generally occur in very remote and rural areas , rogier says . the housing is not very safe , and there are a lot of rats and rodents . in a recent case , it took rogier and his team more than two days to reach remote villages , delaying urgently needed treatment for patients with pneumonic plague . there are social and cultural factors to consider , as well . in the most recent outbreak , many villagers thought it was the work of a spirit or curse rather than plague , and therefore didn amprsquot seek medical treatment until it was too late . poverty and illiteracy rates remain high in these areas , and when patients do seek help , it s often in the form of witch doctors or other traditional healers . rogier says it s difficult to say how this year s outbreak compares with those of the past , though he acknowledges that ongoing political turmoil has worsened conditions on the ground . tensions have been high in the country since , when current president andry rajoelina seized power in a military backed coup . the crisis led to a suspension of international aid , which has put extra strain on madagascar s public health facilities while exacerbating poverty levels . the country will hold presidential run off and legislative elections on friday , though there are concerns that the process may be rigged , further muddying an already unclear future . what happened in the middle ages could happen again . the pasteur institute of madagascar , together with the who and the public health ministry , have been working for years to combat plague by administering bedside diagnostic tests , distributing antibiotics , and using pesticides to control flea populations . rogier says this month s outbreak is now considered to be under control , noting that no new cases have been reported in four of the five districts , though he and other experts acknowledge that complete eradication remains impossible . the human disease can t be eradicated , since we can t destroy all the rodents on the planet , dr . eric bertherat , a plague expert at the who , said in an email . awareness campaigns and ongoing monitoring are therefore crucial going forward , experts say , but efforts have been hampered by a relative dearth of international funding . plague isn t nearly as common as malaria , dengue fever , or other tropical diseases , and as a result , research and control campaigns aren t as well funded . yet rogier argues that despite its scarcity , future plague outbreaks could have potentially devastating impacts , especially considering the fragile state of madagascar s economy and public health system . if we imagine that there is a preliminary case in the capital or in big cities , there will be hundreds and thousands of cases , and surely hundreds and thousands of deaths , he says . in actuality , what happened in the middle ages could happen again . 