 on thursday , april th , , a blast of dystopian satire hit the uk airwaves . max headroom minutes into the future was a snarky take on media and corporate greed , told through the eyes of investigative journalist edison carter matt frewer and his computer generated alter ego an artificial intelligence named max headroom . live and direct the definitive oral history of s digital icon max headroomby bryan bishop on thursday , april th , , a blast of dystopian satire hit the uk airwaves . max headroom minutes into the future was a snarky take on media and corporate greed , told through the eyes of investigative journalist edison carter matt frewer and his computer generated alter ego an artificial intelligence named max headroom . set in a near future where global corporations control all media and citizens are hopelessly addicted to dozens of tv channels , the movie follows carter working for the mysterious network as he discovers that network executives have created a form of subliminal advertising known as blipverts that can actually kill . while tracking the story , carter is flung into a barrier marked max . headroom . m . desperate to maintain ratings with its star reporter , the network enlists a young hacker to download carter s mind and create a virtual version of the journalist . but things don t go quite right . the result the stuttering , sarcastic max . minutes into the future kicked off an extensive franchise , and max became a singular s pop culture phenomenon that represented everything wonderful and horrible about the decade . max hosted music video shows max interviewed celebrities max hawked new coke max headroom became us network television s very first cyberpunk series . max was inescapable and then almost just as quickly as he had appeared , he was gone . thirty years after the premiere , i spoke with the writers , directors , producers , actors , make up artists , and network executives that helped bring max headroom to life . and it all began , like so many things in the s , with music videos . hello , world peter waggproducer i was working for a record label , chrysalis records . i was basically head of what they called , in those days , creative services . once mtv started , it totally revolutionized the dynamic of marketing and selling music music videos sort of becoming the most important part of our armory . fortunately , that fell under my wing . i went to andy park , a pal of mine who ran a commercial radio station and became commissioning editor for music at channel , which was a new embryonic tv channel in the uk . andy said , hey , what do you think about trying to develop a music video show for channel ? of course if you looked at mtv , it was a bunch of video jocks , real people , linking and introducing music videos . i thought to myself , well , alright , that s been done . so the starting point for the project was , we don t need a real person maybe it s animated maybe it s a character we can create that s some sort of hybrid mix that has a trans atlantic accent , that has certain visual attributes , if you like . it s like johnny carson meets terry wogan in england . so , the first person i enlisted was a guy called george stone . george stoneco creator writeri worked for an ad agency . i was a writer and radio producer and commercial maker , i suppose , and we had a number of clients that were record companies . i was interested in what we d call the landscape of television , if you like . we had the show title first max headroom . i mean , there was a list of about one of them was called the tube , i think . i did it one weekend , and max was the one that won . it s all sound , it s all vision , it s filling your head full of music and sound . peter waggproducer when i asked him , why max headroom ? he didn t really have an answer . so i said , well , i suppose it is maximum headroom . i mean , it s all sound , it s all vision , it s filling your head full of music and sound . george stoneco creator writer it s a joke that s very specific to britain , i think . there is a huge firm that specializes in car parks , and their height restriction notice is max . headroom , . feet , or whatever . from this single piece of signage , you had this title which everybody knew . as a consequence of max headroom , national car parks spent about million pounds changing all their signage to maximum height . peter waggproducer i started to look around at animation folk , and of course rocky and annabel and cucumber studios , at that time , for me , were the most cutting edge . rocky mortonco creator directorat the time , we were doing a lot of animation . you know , we did elvis costello s accidents will happen video and tom tom club s genius of love , and that sort of thing . elvis costello , accidents will happen tom tom club , genius of love annabel jankelco creator directorthe original idea that was pitched to us was to put graphics not computer graphics , because it was in the very early days but some kind of graphics between music videos to kind of jazz it up a bit and give some kind of backbone to what otherwise would just be a bunch of unrelated music videos . rocky mortonco creator director i said to her that , you know , this is a really boring idea . we re taking these music videos , which are really incredible , and then linking them together with stupid bits of graphics . it s just not interesting . i thought , maybe i should go with the whole idea of it being boring . what s the most boring thing i could do just to annoy everybody ? and the most boring thing that i could think of to do , which would really go against the grain for the mtv generation was a talking head a middle class white male in a suit , talking to them in a really boring way about music videos . and i thought , oh yeah , i m on to something here . this is really dull and uninteresting . george stoneco creator writer we were talking about it , and rocky said , i think he should be a man . and i think he should be computer generated . that set me off on the whole narrative network , minutes into the future , blipverts , and everything else . it all came from that moment . we thought , well why don t we , as a part of this show , produce every week a five minute kind of info burst drama , almost like a credit sequence , but which tells the story of how this computer generated character came to be . annabel jankelco creator director george came up with a great storyline with most if not all of the characters in place . nobody really knew what max would look like or how he would develop . we were talking about bell s theorem , action at a distance , artificial intelligence , and everything else . rocky mortonco creator director i came up with the idea that he already had a show as a real person . he was late for his show one night , and had an open top sports car . he went into the parking structure , went through the barrier , and hit his head on it , and he was basically knocked into a coma . in order to get him on air that night , they had to , sort of , download his brain , reconstitute him as a computer model of himself , and put him out on air . george stoneco creator writer so what you have in the character is a consciousness fully human , totally amnesiac whose first experience to the world is exposure to , simultaneous channels of television . that s where the character comes from . he is a fusion of every evangelist , every sports reporter , everything you see on tv . and from his perspective he sees no difference or distinction between them . annabel jankelco creator director peter wagg wasn t very interested in the idea of this talking , computer generated tv host . in fact , he was quite dismissive of it , saying that characters don t travel . i remember that specifically . george stoneco creator writer peter didn t understand any of it , really . we were talking about bell s theorem , action at a distance , consciousness , artificial intelligence , and everything else . and peter , for fuck s sake , is just an account man . i mean , it was a different language . he just wanted something easy that he could sell and make work . rocky mortonco creator director i pitched this to peter and chrysalis visual programming , and they didn t like the idea . they said , no . channel isn t going to like this . they re going to want , you know , these kind of little graphic y things to do it . so i said , well , let me pitch it anyway . george stoneco creator writer channel said , this is a good story , why don t we make a film of it ? and so the five minute episodes were strung together into a narrative . go to america , go and pitch this to hbo or cinemax . peter waggproducer so now i haven t got a half hour music video show anymore . i ve got a one hour movie of the week that sets up a part music video show . and nobody wanted to go back to the half hours anymore . the whole thing had just taken on a whole new level . but i only had enough money to do half hours from channel . annabel jankelco creator director the entire production , including the music video shows with max hosting them , was in the region of about million pounds . hbo , still in their infancy , had an arm called cinemax . we said to peter wagg , go to america , go and pitch this to hbo or cinemax . bridget potteroriginal programming vp , hbowe used the original programming in that era to try to help define the pay tv services . we were looking for something kind of edgy and unusual for cinemax , which was at that point just beginning to have some original programming . peter waggproducer i walk in , trying to pitch them something called max headroom . we ve got no idea what it is , we haven t got any visuals of what he looks like , so it s a bit of a stretch , right ? bridget potteroriginal programming vp , hbo first of all , i liked the idea . it just all seemed to work and we thought it was pretty interesting for cinemax . we wouldn t have thought of it for hbo because it was small and dangerous , in a certain kind of way . rocky mortonco creator director hbo said , listen , go back to your hotel room . don t leave , and we ll be back to you within hours . don t go to la . they came back and said , we want to do this . we re going to pay for the making of the origin film of how he got to be max headroom , and we want to be involved with channel , and we want to be part of this whole thing . minutes into the future with funding and commitments from hbo and channel in place , the project started moving forward in earnest . but for the core creative team of george stone , annabel jankel , and rocky morton , problems had already begun to surface . rocky mortonco creator director everybody got really excited . it came close to shooting the movie , and the producer , chrysalis visual programming , said , oh , i think i ve got a director that can direct this . and i said , what the fuck ? this is our project . annabel and myself are directing this . we said , well , okay . we re not going to make it then , because we own the idea . you have to go and do something else . finally we had to release the rights of our own creation to chrysalis visual programming . but we did get to make the film and direct it . peter waggproducer the difficulty then became trying to get a shootable script . the saddest part of the whole story for me was that i just couldn t get george to write me a script to shoot . and he is a genius . you ll always credit george , rocky , and annabel with the creative essence of what we came up with . but i had a producer s responsibility to channel and to hbo and to chrysalis co founder terry ellis . annabel jankelco creator director george had so many brilliant , genius ideas . a lot of it we would just compile and put into essentially a bible that i think made its way into the subsequent american tv series . but i don t know because i never saw the tv series . george stoneco creator writer i recall writing the last draft and being so angry i have a contract that s never been honored . i just met this very weird guy , a fellow called peter wagg , and he s got this very , very weird project . steve robertswriter my then agent in london and i were meeting over some other project , and she said , i just met this very weird guy , a fellow called peter wagg , and he s got this very , very weird project which he doesn t quite know what it is and what to do with it . and i couldn t understand a word he said , and i can usually never understand a word you say , and i thought i should put you both together so you can talk nonsense to each other . so i said , well , alright , which pub ? i arrived in my normal condition , which was jeans and a pullover , long hair and i think a ponytail in those days . he turned up in a suit . so we disliked each other absolutely instantaneously , but we had a pint and liked each other a bit more . and he said , well , we ve got this script from george , but unfortunately it all ends up with people shooting at each other with laser guns and deflecting the lasers with hubcaps it s not what we want , we want something else . we want to try and dig deeper and find out whether this idea has something else going for it . that s when i got excited , because i began to realize oh , this may be into the artificial intelligence area . peter waggproducer at the same time , we needed to try and find a max fellow . matt freweractori was over in england for years . this actor friend of mine auditioned for this thing called max headroom , and he very kindly said that he didn t think he was right for it , but he knew somebody who was . it was an incredible act of generosity on this actor s part , bill armstrong . i ve always been very grateful to him for that . he seemed like more of a weatherman or a newsman or something . annabel jankelco creator director the casting director does a precasting , and i believe he was in the slush pile . i noticed his polaroid and i thought , oh my god , this guy s got unbelievably well defined features . matt freweractori got called in to do this minute improvisation around six lines of what was then ostensibly max headroom dialogue . they just encouraged me to riff around , and it seemed like more of a weatherman or a newsman or something . john humphreysprosthetics designer all you could hear in the audition tape is rocky and annabel and peter wagg s laughter . and he just is max headroom , even from his audition tape he s perfect . he just is max headroom . . . he s perfect . image courtesy of john humphreys . with their lead in place , the team turned their attention to what would become the most important element of the entire phenomenon max s look . annabel jankelco creator director we actually did experiment , quite extensively , with computer graphics . it didn t take too long for us to realize that we had to fake this , because what we wanted was years down the line . explore our complete max headroom make up and design gallery rocky mortonco creator director i tinkered around with doing it like d , drawn animation , which didn t really work . then i tried a hand puppet . i molded a rubber head , and i put my hand inside and tried to manipulate it with my hand , and that didn t work . i remember i suddenly said to annabel , the face . the human face . we ll just use the actor s face and just make it appear as if it was computer generated by putting prosthetic make up on it , and then shooting it in a certain way we could make it look like it s computer generated . matt freweractor i gradually realized what i was getting into as plaster of paris head molds were made , and this prosthetics rubber make up business goo was happening . you suddenly realize that it s going to be a pretty arduous process creating the look for max . john humphreysprosthetics designer there was no specific design . they just wanted matt frewer to look like a computer generated tv presenter . you got to remember , in those days , what does a computer generated person actually look like ? there was nothing there . so we made a fairly simple make up really , we just changed his features a little bit , as if the computer generation hadn t quite got it right . but we wanted to keep as near to matt frewer as possible because he s a great actor . he s very animated , very expressive , so you don t want to hide all of that . you end up looking like this sort of jack in the box , squirming around . matt freweractor the max suit was in two fiberglass pieces , and they screw you into it . later on we had different versions of the suit . there was the tuxedo suit , there was a sort of golf suit , and then there was a white tuxedo all equally cumbersome , and they went right down to your elbows , and you couldn t move around . but in a way , you compensate , and it becomes even more computer generated looking , because you re sort of rocking back and forth to make up for the gestures that you can do with your arms or your feet or whatever . so you end up looking like this sort of jack in the box , squirming around . the tv gods giveth , and they taketh away . and what they tooketh away , i added . rocky mortonco creator director we d just made this commercial for a chocolate milk or flavored milk . and in this commercial , we had these moving , very primitive looking cgi linear backgrounds . what i basically did was stole that from the commercial , and just put it behind max . annabel jankelco creator director we then put him against blue screen . i remember this day particularly oh my god , were we relieved . we put him against blue screen , we lit him dramatically , with this one light source from one side , and we rotated him . . . we had our max . catch the wave production on minutes into the future got underway with steve roberts as the sole writer . the film is credited as being from an original idea by george stone , rocky morton , and annabel jankel . annabel jankelco creator director we shot it where stanley kubrick had shot full metal jacket , which was an abandoned gasworks called beckton gasworks which is big , like equivalent of the staples center . once we scouted that , we realized we had this perfect environment . you couldn t build that production design , and certainly in those days , we didn t have the funds to actually computer generate anything . rocky mortonco creator director it had this kind of dystopian , sort of futuristic kind of look to it . read steve roberts script for minutes into the future annabel jankelco creator director it was really part of the visual zeitgeist at the time , if you think about it . there was blade runner , there was brazil . there were a lot of dystopian landscapes out there . and it was post punk as well , remember , and it was still post war . london was pretty desolate then . peter waggproducer the launch was spectacular . we had the thursday night slot , which was channel s movie of the week slot , and the half hour episode on saturday . the way we started the half hour music video show , there were no opening titles . there were no credits for anybody . when it came to , it was just that satellite chssssssss , snow and buzz . and all of a sudden , max was there . like , bang ! and he s talking in german , and he s telling this joke about lederhosen all in german , he s roaring with laughter during the whole thing , and then the first music video we played was a german music video . and then max in english and this week s award for the worst tv commercial goes to . . . and a commercial break . we had no idea what the first commercial would be , but it already got the max headroom award for the worst commercial of the week . then at the end , it just went chssssssss and to static again . it was like you d woken up in eastern europe and turned the television on , and you re watching some weird station that you don t understand , and then it suddenly is cut off and gone . trailer for max headroom minutes into the futurerocky mortonco creator director we did about or of them and that really established the look and the feel of it . i started to do this kind of stuttering effect on video we were just looping . everybody was , like , okay , rocky . that s enough stuttering . i said , no . we got to take it so far that , like , the computer is jammed in this kind of in this freeze motion . peter waggproducer it just caught fire . we d doubled ratings within three weeks . we were renewed three weeks into the run . rocky mortonco creator director anybody under the age of just loved it . and anybody above that age was just completely confused . it was amazing , you know . it was a genuine phenomenon in its time . anybody under the age of just loved it . and anybody above that age was just completely confused . matt freweractor for a time it was . . . i won t say it was infuriating , but it was frustrating you wanted to go , that s me , that s me , it s not a computer generated man . but of course they wanted to swear me to secrecy because otherwise anybody could make a computer generated man if they knew that it was as easy as putting on all this make up . john humphreysprosthetics designeri have to say , it was being presented as computer graphics , and i had people even say to me , who worked in some big companies in britain , oh , you ll soon be out of a job , look at this , it s all done with computer graphics ! peter littenvisual effects artistit was very galling . it won a bafta for graphics , and of course other than a few lines , there weren t any graphics . a few wobbly lines . and they refused to enter us in the make up category because they didn t want anyone to know it was make up . i m trying to remember how long the make up took . probably four hours of make up ? when you get into the swing of it , we probably got it down to three hours or so in the end . i don t know if you ve ever had a lacerated cornea , but it s the worst pain i think i ve ever felt . image courtesy of john humphreysmatt freweractor over in london , we used , i think they re called haptic lenses , and they re hard lenses and quite a bit bigger than normal contact lenses . they were very painful to wear , and i ended up with severely lacerated corneas . i don t know if you ve ever had a lacerated cornea , but it s the worst pain i think i ve ever felt . i was popping painkillers , and it just wasn t working . annabel jankelco creator directorthat s why he then adopted ray bans for some of the shows , and when his eyes healed we could put back in the contacts . peter waggproducer we knew that there s only so long max in between music videos would last before it ran out of steam . so on the last show , we decided to do max interviewing somebody . i called around to all my mates at the record labels and said , what albums are you releasing around the air date that we had ? my pal at a ampm comes back and says well , sting s releasing his first solo album after the police . matt freweractor we introduced live guests into the proceedings , and it kind of evolved into this bizarre talk show format . it sort of became the rite of passage for various pop stars and film stars to come on and shill their latest project . but in turn they would get roasted by max . sting is interviewed on the max headroom show . the variety show version of the max headroom show complete with a live studio audience soon followed , with max facing off against the likes of michael caine , jack lemmon , and vidal sassoon . with two books , trading cards , and a legion of other merchandised tie ins , max was everywhere and every single item was copyright chrysalis visual media . around the same time , coca cola was looking for help as a reformulation of its flagship product , dubbed new coke , was flailing . explore the crazy world of max headroom merchandise peter waggproducer a guy at advertising agency bbdo in london saw the show , sent a video to bbdo new york , and it went to the creative department . arnie blum who was a group head at bbdo , was about to move to a different agency to be group head on coca cola . so he stuck the tape in his bag , and didn t tell anybody . he arrives at mccann erickson , he s on new coke that s dying , and his first job is how do we save new coke ? matt freweractor that was very exciting because we knew it had the potential to reach a global audience . peter waggproducer i got ridley scott to direct the commercials , which was a nice little circle . we did three years with coke . the ridley scott directed coke commercials featuring maxbridget potteroriginal programming vp , hbo that was just insane ! for cinemax , it was like the biggest thing that had ever happened , that a character that was on cinemax was on national television as the spokesperson for coca cola . we just couldn t believe our luck at that point . the catch the wave campaign garnered praise , national attention , and raised max s profile coca cola senior vice president john c . reid later told newsweek that coke s research revealed percent of all american teenagers knew max after the first series of ads . but it wasn t enough to save new coke s crashing sales . meanwhile , wagg lined up another business opportunity as max s popularity skyrocketed out of control . steve robertswriter stu bloomberg , who was head of development at abc television , happened to be in london the night minutes into the future aired . at the end of it , apparently he started phoning around and found out who the hell had made it and where they were . and the next morning we were invited to go and see him . peter waggproducer abc was , at that point , the third place network . like new coke , they needed to make statements , and they needed to try and do something a bit more dramatic to make a sea change . i went to see nbc , and to my great surprise they passed on the whole thing i went to cbs , and they ended up offering me a movie of the week . then i met with stu , and all i got out of stu was a pilot and six script order . but again , i thought let s back a guy i believe in , who s gonna champion the show on our behalf inside the network , and they need us more than we need them . that seemed like a good combination to me . one of the few max headroom commercials directed by rocky morton and annabel jankelmax crossed the atlantic , evolving from a niche cable character to a full blown , mainstream global phenomenon . but as the franchise developed , the remaining two members of the creative team that dreamed him up annabel jankel and rocky morton were left behind . rocky mortonco creator director they wanted somebody that was going to continue making this stuff , pumping it out , and playing the game . you know , somebody that they could parade around that would toe the corporate line . and we obviously weren t doing that . annabel jankelco creator director there was a lot at stake financially , and we were not well placed enough or well advised enough to be protected . all sorts of heavy hitters got involved . coca cola , bbdo , a big advertising agency . ridley scott had got himself involved . abc , chrysalis , the record company and it all kind of blew out of all proportion . rocky mortonco creator director we had lawyers , and we fought it . we tried to form a company with matt frewer to wrest control away from the producer , but then backdoor negotiations started to happen . we lost control , and it was costing us more and more money in lawyers fees . by the time it got to america , they made a fortune because they made this whole tv series without us . and they took our created by credit away on the american series . big time television abc went to work adapting minutes into the future into the first episode of the us series , blipverts . original cast members matt frewer , amanda pays theora , and william morgan sheppard blank reg joined the new show , while all other roles were recast . however , the first attempt at rewriting steve roberts script proved less than successful . michael cassuttwriterphil deguere jr . , the executive producer basically took it over . he simply went back to the original movie . i remember passing his office there was a video player with minutes into the future on the screen . it was kind of reverse engineering the original movie . steve robertswriter i finally get a phone call saying would i mind coming over to la for a few days to put it back the way it was before . during that time , waggie said , you know , they re asking me to provide a sample of what we would do as a second episode . so i vanished back to the hotel and spent two and a half days basically on room service and bottles of various encouraging fluids , and knocked out this page script . and i get a phone call from peter wagg saying , well , they ve just ordered a series of , mate . you re going to have to stay . what s my air date ? they said , march th . i said , you re shitting me . brian frankishproducer i went down there , and they went , we got to get going , we got to get going . what s my air date ? they said , march th . i said , you re shitting me . this is in december . how many scripts you got ? well , we got a pilot and one . oh , wow . you have zero data to start planning ahead with . but we had the english pilot to copy . and the conceptual work was fabulous . steve robertswriter my job was to find writers . i was stunned shitless because there weren t any . there are an awful lot of people who are very good at standard american television , but nobody who could really grasp this very wild , off the cuff idea . michael cassuttwriter september to october of i was working on the twilight zone , cbs revival , along with the obscure george r . r . martin . steve roberts was the original guy who came from england . everybody else was from twilight zone . honey , this is hollywood . we can do anything . brian frankishproducer richard lewis was hired as the production designer . there were some things wrong with the channel london thing . for instance , all of their wide shots of the environment were matte paintings . stuck out like a sore thumb . i went , ah , miniatures . and peter wagg went , can you do that ? honey , this is hollywood . we can do anything . i vanished to the hotel and spent two and a half days on room service and bottles of various encouraging fluids , and knocked out this page script . steve roberts in his la office . image courtesy of steve robertsmichael cassuttwriter the cast was fabulous . you could write for jeffrey tambor . you could write for amanda pays , george coe . i liked the look . i liked the action . it didn t feel chaotic when i saw it on screen , but it was a lot more challenging than standard television on its best day . image courtesy of shout factorybrian frankishproducer the playback environment was so complex . they had all those tv screens that max appears on . i went , gee , i can t do this with traditional post production . and how are we going to do the network boardroom with the big screen ? we found the ge light valve projector was the only thing that could project digital that big with that kind of clarity . that son of a bitch looked like a b when it rolled on the stage . and the expense was astronomical . it was something that nasa used . on the first six shows , i went million over budget , and nobody said no . annabel jankelco creator director one of the most bizarre things that ever happened was that rocky and i were in la , and the abc version of minutes into the future came on . we could not believe our eyes it was a shot by shot identical retelling , with american actors that kind of looked like the english actors . we were flabbergasted that they would do this . they would go to such lengths to recreate props that we d found in skips and we d found in old junk shops and things . neither blipverts , nor any subsequent episode of the abc series , bears any mention of george stone , rocky morton , annabel jankel , or the original idea credit . the show s quirky brand of cyberpunk struggled in its debut , coming in th for the night despite a strong lead in from moonlighting . but max continued to be a cultural juggernaut and the creative team took advantage , sharpening the tv industry satire with every episode . michael cassuttwriter in my mind it was on my birthday , or close to my birthday in , and there was max on the cover of newsweek . my episode was either airing that week or had aired the friday before . and foolishly i thought , hey , i m on my way to a real career in television ! not realizing that probably my acclaim peaked right then . matt freweractor at the time we thought we were the coolest kids on the block , and we were the hippest show in town , and they would never take us off the air . so we were kind of cockily trying to get away with things , slipping things past the censors and then just kind of boldly holding our middle finger up to the whole business . a commercial for abc s max headroompeter waggproducer every week , we d always deliver the scripts late a because we couldn t help it , but b because it gave them less time to read it , and c we d always throw in about six things we knew they d throw out immediately so that we could perhaps drift two or three others through that they d just missed because they went for the obvious . steve robertswriter it was vicious in its condemnation of the way television worked . if you were a fan in those days , you ll remember lines like , the ratings are plunging , we re down to million ! and the one says , well , we could go porno early . of course we absolutely were biting deep into the bones and ligaments of the hand that was feeding us . and i don t think they noticed , i truly don t think they bothered to look at it until somebody somewhere said , this is the fifth column , these are all probably communists or something . michael cassuttwriter i m not one of these people who s going to say they were too dumb to get it . i ve been in the network . there are some smart people there . as i said , stu bloomberg was one of the smartest people i ve ever run across at that level . he knew exactly what he was doing . in that world too , some of them were probably just secretly enjoying the tweaks because also it wasn t directed at abc specifically . we were tweaking the whole industry and any industry we saw coming . the problem was we never had a lot of pushback from the network on anything we were doing . let s face it , we were out there trying to do blade runner every seven or eight days . and for all my affection and respect for peter wagg and steve roberts , to some degree they were guys who not only had never done american network television i m not sure they ever actually watched it . there was a giant learning curve in terms of the pressures of schedule and money and production . see our behind the scenes gallery for abc s max headroom brian frankishproducer i was preparing an episode for shooting the next day , and o clock in the afternoon i called up to the writers , and i said , i need the script . i have no script for tomorrow s work . where is it ? and they said , we ll get back to you . i called them back at . i ve got the driver standing by , and the machine picked up . and then the machine picked up at , and the machine picked up at , and the machine picked up at . and my messages got , where s the stuff ? guys , i m really being pushed against it to holy shit , we re really fucked here in this situation . what are my actors going to do tomorrow morning ? to jesus christ , who are you guys ? don t you understand what i m doing ? and the last one was i don t give a shit anymore . i m lighting my first joint . hope you show up with the pages in the morning . and they played that someone s got that tape somewhere , and they played it at the wrap party . eager to capitalize on max s popularity , cinemax launched a third variety show anchored by the character in the summer of . the original max talking headroom show was shot in new york and featured max chatting it up with guests like penn and teller , dr . ruth , and william shatner . fears over max media saturation didn t stop the abc show from getting another season but there was a catch . peter waggproducer they moved us opposite miami vice and dallas at on a friday , which back in the day meant you were in a graveyard slot . michael cassuttwriter the moment we hit the air , the numbers were far less than they were , and you combine that with budget problems and just production problems it was not long for this earth . offline the second season of max headroom debuted on september th , . less than a month later , abc pulled the plug . peter waggproducerthe president of abc at the time was brandon stoddard . i m in the edit bay , editing a show , and i get this call , and they say , brandon stoddard s on the phone . and i m editing a sequence where george coe , who played the chairman of the board of network is saying , what the hell do they know about television ? it was like , i m about to get a call from the chairman of abc , to cancel the show . matt freweractorwe got called up on set , and there was supposed to be this big meeting with a producer . i remember going to jeff tambor , oh god , it looks like we re getting pulled off the air , just as a joke . and we were . image courtesy of shout factorysteve robertswriteri was on location on top of a building in the middle of la . it was a shot where a helicopter lands , and i think edison gets out and has a row with somebody . when suddenly , peter wagg walked across the roof . he was white as a sheet . and he just said , we ve got to stop everything , fellows , i m very sorry . brian frankishproduceri ll never forget the canceling . i turned to the a . d . and said , don t release anybody . keep them . nobody goes home today . we ll finish the day , and when we re all done , up on the next block is the player s club up on the th floor . they ve got a big , nice , s bar , and everybody meet me there for drinks . and everybody came up , and i told everybody we were canceled . i spent at the bar . michael cassuttwriterwe all showed up there and had the usual drinks . we still had at least one or two episodes yet to air . we kicked around the idea of giving max a little speech , which they were able to insert into the last episode . max s final speech from the episode lessons michael cassuttwriterwe had a completed script still in the works , as we couldn t do it right because it was a holiday thing . we had a christmas show , written by george r . r . martin , called xmas . what is a commercial holiday like in a world that makes a virtue of just rampant commercialism ? we came up with the holiday , xmas , in which everybody gathers around the tv and home shops . the person in the family or the community that home shops the most is the one who celebrates xmas the best . we had a christmas show , written by george r . r . martin , called xmas . brian frankishproducerthe writers and , actually , the people hiring the writers were not traditional thinkers . that s one of the reasons why i think we failed and one of the reasons why we were successful . michael cassutt and some of the other writers were really trying to throw exciting stuff together . but they didn t have enough time to really throw the ball and track it as it was flying to the catcher s mitt . steve robertswritermy private view is that capital cities , the outfit that ran this whole thing , was run out of new york . i think some top executive s wife rolled over one day and said to him , you know something ? this program is taking the piss out of the way you make your living . and he probably looked at max headroom for the very first time and said can it . we were believers . it was like a religion to us . we gave and we gave and we gave , and it was glorious , wonderful , and we loved what we were seeing . image courtesy of shout factorymatt freweractorthere was always this awareness that we were always kind of walking on eggshells , but it was kind of cool because we sort of put up on screen what we wanted to put up on screen without it being compromised , without it being homogenized , without it being diluted . we were able to walk away from it without it being packaged into something that they wanted it to be packaged into . brian frankishproducerwe were involved in the passion . we were believers . it was like a religion to us . we gave and we gave and we gave , and it was glorious , wonderful , and we loved what we were seeing . it was a unique time . everybody who worked on that show had an opportunity to be the best artists that they wanted to be at the time . and they really gave all of that . i was on the cover of newsweek , and then it disappeared . matt freweractorit was this bizarre , short , sharp shock over the course of four or five years , where the show seemed to be the biggest thing on the planet i was on the cover of newsweek , and then it disappeared . i remembered going to lorimar , the mgm studios . i think it was the day after we had the plug pulled . i saw the border security guy , and it was the strangest thing he pretended not to know me . because i was no longer worth knowing . i was persona non grata my parking space had been taken away . and my nameplate , which is the ultimate insult , of course . still in the air present a month after the cancellation , in november of , television viewers in chicago were hit by a broadcast signal intrusion when pirates broke into two local tv broadcasts with footage of a person in a max headroom mask . the culprits were never found . later that year , matt frewer told columnist marilyn beck about a max related film that was in development . the title ? max headroom for president . matt freweractor it was basically going to ride the coattails of the presidential campaign and do it as sort of a reality thing . there was an actor who was president why not a computer generated man ? like a lot of these things , it never made it to first base . one of the later max headroom coke commercialspeter waggproducerafter coke finished and the abc series finished and after hbo finished , there was still some heat . i remember still trying to sell a movie that we never managed to . i got interest , but i never was able to get it over the line , and then i just kind of moved on myself . two unaired episodes from the series premiered in , although the final episode , baby grobags , would never air on abc . one year later , back to the future part ii signaled the show s influence with a retro future arcade that included max inspired versions of michael jackson and ronald reagan , but aside from a few sporadic reruns on cable , the character largely went silent until . marty visits the cafe s in back to the future part iirocky mortonco creator directorchannel was switching over to percent digital broadcasts so they wanted to warn their audience , and they thought that max headroom ampnbspsomeone who was created for channel , originally ampnbspwould be the perfect spokesman to do that . matt freweractorthe idea being that he was older and grumpier looking , and was looking back on the good old days of pre digital . he had computer generated liver spots , and was this mean old bastard , really . when i was getting the make up on , i felt quite nervous . i was thinking , god , this is strange , because it had literally been years since i had put on the max make up . then as soon as the cameras rolled , i immediately got right back into it , it was the weirdest thing . rocky mortonco creator directorwe shot it in sort of a classic english retirement seaside town . we used the same process to create the same look , with the prosthetics , and then shot him a certain way and then , you know , sort of did the tweaks in the video edit . part of channel s digital switchover campaigntoday s cult shows live on thanks to the passion and dedication of their online fan bases . in many ways max headroom was the perfect candidate for that kind of following quirky and weird , with an unlikely underdog spirit . but while max lived in the future , his shows were confined by the pre internet era . james giffordcurator of maxheadroom . comthere was never much of an organized fan community . it was very , very scattered until the internet picked up the pieces . there was alt . fan . max headroom it was reasonably populated and vibrant in the usenet days . michael cassuttwriterthe property was tied up in litigation for , i don t know , years . that s the reason those shows were not available from basically until the shout factory did that dvd in . but every now and then somebody would talk to me or steve about reviving it . max headroom was judged to be more important than michael jackson . george stoneco creator writeri recall there was a documentary , a survey of the s that went out obviously at the end of the s , in which max headroom was judged to be more important than michael jackson . which was good . i think people got it that was the thing . max headroom was coming out of the air , really . and we were in the fortunate position that we were able to synthesize it . peter waggproducerit was such a moment in time , and it was the combination of so much talent from so many different disciplines and media that just coalesced into the perfect whole . and it predicted so much . eminem pays tribute to max in with his video for rap god bridget potteroriginal programming vp , hboit was way ahead of its time . peter was very lucky to have come in this door when he did with this project . because i don t know what else or where else anything that odd would have taken root . today , there d be a million places for max headroom . steve robertswriterwe had a laugh because we envisioned channels nobody could believe that there were channels . i mean , it was the highest number we could think of . now we ve got , and nothing but crap on most of them . michael cassuttwritermax is a character you can t beat . he s the clever innocent who keeps looking he s only a few hours old and so he has all this information , but he doesn t have any knowledge . that character is always fun and timeless . matt freweractoryou kind of go , well , it is a good time for a comeback , because the whole minutes into the future business we ve arrived . we re here now . and there was a certain kind of naive charm about making all this analog stuff look digital , but the amount of work that went into it nowadays any year old could throw it together on his laptop . and also the retro s thing . bring back the linda evans shoulder pads and the duran duran make up , i m all for that . you can t have enough hairspray and eye glitter . photo essay how make up brought max to lifebryan bishop photo essay the wildest max headroom merchandisebryan bishop photo essay behind the scenes of abc s weirdest showbryan bishop design by adam baumgartnerdevelopment by aidan feayeditorial assistance by chaim gartenbergedited by emily yoshida , michael zelenko lt ! try typekit . load catch e gt