 lots of pharmaceutical companies want to make drugs targeting women who have low sex drives or trouble becoming aroused . and now , the food and drug administration has new guidelines these companies should follow . the new draft guidelines come a year after the administration approved the so called female viagra a drug called addyi that promised to make women want sex more . the decision was controversial , and many opponents said that side effects like dizziness and nausea outweighed the benefits . women had to take the drug every day and couldn t drink while taking it and after all that , only percent at most experienced the benefit of . more sexually satisfying events a month . fda spokesperson andrea fischer said that the administration s decision on addyi has not changed and that it still believes that addyi s benefits outweigh its risks . future drugmakers targeting female desire now know what the fda wants in the trials , and what results in the last of three phases of testing are likely to get their drug approved . these guidelines replace earlier ones that used now outdated diagnostic information and didn t include comments from a meeting the administration held two years ago about female sexual issues . sexual problems can t be because of relationship issuesfemale sexual dysfunction is a complicated topic because it s caused by a combination of physical , psychological , and social issues from stress to guilt about sex to hormonal imbalance . it s very hard to say that dysfunction is caused only by one of these factors , says kyle stephenson , a psychologist who runs the sexuality and relationships lab at willamette university . so treating the dysfunction is more complicated than just taking a pill for it . you can intervene in different ways with a pill , in therapy , couples counseling and many of those can eventually affect all of the factors , he adds . if you intervene with couples therapy , that should affect biology . if you intervene with a pill , that should affect psychology . it s all interconnected . the new guidelines specify that subjects in clinical trials can t present sexual problems caused by another medical condition , medicines taken for another condition , or problems within the relationship . this last point is one that many activists and scholars that study this issue find important . they argue that it s perfectly reasonable to believe that women might have a low sex drive not because there s something wrong with them , but because they re in a bad relationship and so it s important to make sure we re not using drugs to fix an interpersonal problem . measuring sex drive is very complicatedsome people are very wary of using drugs because a low sex drive can possibly be fixed with things like counseling . mamta mamik , a professor of gynecology at mount sinai hospital , disagrees . if you just medicate and don t treat the other problems , it ll be back to square one , but i disagree that medication should just be put under the rug , she says . we can t say it s always just a psychological problem , it could be a real problem with a real solution and feel those women deserve chance to get treatment . the discussion is similar to that around depression , she adds . depression is another problem that many people think should be treated only with counseling and not anti depressants . right now , one of the most common ways to measure sexual dysfunction is the female sexual function index fsfi . it s a survey that asks questions , including how often did you feel sexual desire ? and how would you rate your level of sexual desire ? though both stephenson and mamik say that the fsfi is probably the best scale we have , the fda has doubts about whether it should be used by pharma companies . first , the fda is worried that some questions can lead to misleading scores . if someone taking a drug reports that they have more sexual fantasies than before , but don t actually want more sex , their score will improve . but it probably won t solve the problem they came in for . another worry is that the survey will be inaccurate because it asks people to think back over the past month . instead , the fda recommends that women record their symptoms every day . no scale is perfect because measuring sex drive is very complicated . it can be hard to separate subjective experience with physical indicators . one question on the fsfi asks how often a woman becomes lubricated during sex . thing is , women with sexual dysfunction are often not very aware of their bodies , and so their self report might be inaccurately low and lead to a focus on physical problems instead of encouraging women to notice their bodies more , says stephenson . we need to develop a better scale . you need to look at everything , look at childhood events , individual factors , anything that may have happened in a relationship , physical factors , says mamik at mount sinai . it should include a holistic perspective of a person , it should include all the causes that may cause problems , including guilt or anxiety a lot of women feel guilty about sex and that s a problem in causing arousal . there is already at least one other drug in the works to treat low sex drivewhen it comes to outcomes , the guidelines say that success from a drug is measured by how much more sex , arousal , or sexually satisfying events or how much less distress a woman had compared to before . in the past , a lot of focus has been on the number of sexually satisfying events , but research suggests that it s not a good measure because the frequency of sex can depend on so many external factors that don t have to do with desire or distress , says stephenson . the real question for most of the researchers i m familiar with , and certainly for me , is two primary points level of desire and level of distress , he says . if someone is happy with their subjective experience , even if they re not necessarily feeling more sexual desire , then the job is done . finally , the drug should be tested in at least two trials that show it to be effective . people in the trial should be sexually active women over the age of , including menopausal women , who are in a stable relationship . the last factor makes it less likely that any improvement is because of the relationship itself improving , or because of a better partner . whether there s an actual market for these drugs remains mostly conjecture . very few people bought addyi , which is made by valeant , but other pharmaceutical companies remain interested in developing drugs that fix women s sex drives . the fda won t comment on drugs until they are approved , but there is already at least one other drug in the works , called palatin . the public is welcome to comment on the new guidelines until december . rachel becker contributed to this report . 