 ever since he was , when omar danoun started med school , they amprsquove called him ampldquodoctor . amprdquo friends and family , cousins and neighbors ampmdash everyone in rantis , the west bank village he amprsquos lived in his whole life . it amprsquos a close knit population of around , , belonging to six clans and spread over a little more than acres of arid , rocky hillside , dotted with olive trees that cut hard shadows in the ochre earth . the carved stone ruins of roman wells and cisterns abound , traces of a centuries long history of human habitation . donkeys graze at the outskirts of town , and nearby a small brown dog lopes after a chicken , yapping as he goes . a group of giggling children sends a soccer ball skidding across a concrete roadway in the last of the fading daylight . to the west , just over the next ridge from rantis , lies the green line , the border separating the west bank and israel . a wire fence and gravel track run along the ridge on the other side , the israeli military conducts training exercises , and occasionally the flat crack of automatic weapons fire echoes dully in the valley . from the village summit one can look over the ridge and the wall , to the far horizon and the rising skyline of tel aviv , and beyond it , the placid immensity of the mediterranean sea . omar has lived here his entire years , and they call him doctor now because that is what he does . he ministers to the sick , helps to heal the afflicted the work of doctors everywhere . tall and slender , with dark , closely cropped hair and beard , he has a quiet intensity as he attends to his fellow villagers , farmers mostly , whether they need just a quick checkup or immediate attention , something that can amprsquot wait for the minute drive over dusty roads to ramallah , the nearest city . children , adults , everyone . you could say he was raised to do this work . when omar was born , his father , who once taught english literature and now manages student textbooks for the ministry of education , started an apiary in the valley west of rantis . the family came to raise more and more bees , selling their honey to pay for omar amprsquos education . he graduated and opened his clinic , committing himself to the long hours of caring for his people . today , he says , i want to go back and repay them what they paid me . because they spent a lot of money and effort on things for getting me education . so it amprsquos a kind of payback . omar wants to pay back his parents not only by becoming the village doctor , but in another way , one almost completely foreign to palestine . he amprsquos among a group of students and researchers who amprsquove formed the palestinian neuroscience initiative , hoping to kickstart sophisticated scientific research in an area with only the most basic medical infrastructure , and where specialization ampmdash in narrow but vital areas including pediatric cardiology , but also broader fields such as neurology and psychiatry ampmdash is almost completely absent . even among typically ambitious medical students , the idea of establishing a foundation for original neuroscience research in palestine seemed daunting . the students were too busy or simply uninterested in clinical research there were few qualified teachers there was little equipment , or money to buy any . what there was in abundance was skepticism . that was four years ago . today the initiative has more than students doing original research , and partnerships with scientists from rutgers university ampndashnewark , harvard university , switzerland amprsquos ampeacutecole polytechnique f ampeacuted ampeacuterale de lausanne , and the international school for advanced studies in italy . it has produced four published papers four more are currently under review . last september , it received a national institutes of health grant , considered among the most prestigious in the field , a marker of serious , professional work . it amprsquos making the kind of steady progress necessary to build an institution . but most importantly to omar and his colleagues , it amprsquos giving them an opportunity to help . to give back . building a foundationbuilding a foundationon a sunny summer afternoon , omar walks through a door with a computer printed piece of paper taped to the outside . al quds cognitive neuroscience lab , it reads , and the door opens into a rectangular , white walled classroom dominated by a long wooden table . just over a dozen students are seated around it . the women sit on the left , nearly all wearing hijabs , and the men sit on the right . at the head of the table , umbilicalled to the wall by a long extension cord , sits a macbook . on screen , the slightly pixelated face of mohammad herzallah leads the day amprsquos discussion , shifting black squares representing his curly hair . his voice , originating almost , miles away , in newark , new jersey , asks about the role of the hippocampus in treating depression . an extended answer follows about the workings of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors , a popular class of antidepressant drugs that includes prozac , zoloft , and paxil . or rather , popular in the united states . according to the world health organization , . percent of us adults surveyed experienced a major depressive episode in their lives the centers for disease control found that about one in every americans aged and over takes antidepressants , including ssris . as both diagnoses of depression and use of antidepressants rose in the us , prozac became a household name . more than just a drug , it has become a cultural signifier for debates about mental illness and its proffered cures . depression in the west bank is at percent ampmdash nearly double that of the usin palestine , by contrast , television does not air commercials for antidepressants , nor do magazines feature full page , pastel colored ads suggesting you ask your doctor if a particular pill is right for you . depression itself remains stigmatized . people don amprsquot want to speak about it , people don amprsquot want to mention it , people don amprsquot even want to speak about family members who have it , says herzallah , co founder and director of the palestinian neuroscience initiative . depressed patients often don amprsquot seek medical attention if they do , they often couch their ailment in physical terms , complaining about , for example , lower back pain . and they try hard not to be seen leaving a mental health clinic . beneath the collective reticence , palestine has a problem . according to one published study , percent of palestinians will experience a major depressive episode in their lifetimes . herzallah believes data gathered by the initiative indicates that rate in the west bank is closer to percent ampmdash or nearly double that of the us . yet , as herzallah puts it , we have about psychiatrists and neurologists to serve . million inhabitants of the west bank in palestine . people don amprsquot want to speak about it , people don amprsquot want to mention it , people don amprsquot even want to speak about family members who have it . a high rate of depression , and not enough trained medical professionals to treat it . it was a serious problem , yes , but also a potential opportunity . and mohammad herzallah knew how to recognize an opportunity . he hadn t planned to be a doctor . growing up in jenin , in the northern west bank , he wanted to be a physicist , either astro or nuclear . his father , himself a professor , cautioned him that physics and palestine don amprsquot mix if you want to do science and get support to go somewhere else to do it , he said , go for it . if not , consider something else . always interested in biology , herzallah chose medical school at al quds university , a palestinian school in abu dis , on the outskirts of jerusalem . when he arrived , he focused on neuroscience , teaching himself . he faced down a lot of skepticism in those early days . neuroscience simply wasn amprsquot being done at al quds . as an eager young medical student who wanted to become a researcher , he says , there were no opportunities at all . no facilities , no resources , and , perhaps most crucially , no understanding that research mattered . and doctors lacking the basic tools to treat their patients weren amprsquot likely to be swayed by herzallah amprsquos youthful enthusiasm they amprsquod tell him he was crazy to focus on such specialized research when people needed medical help now . even his father told him he was crazy he was on his own . until his fifth year , when he met dr . mark gluck and dr . adel misk . brought together by previous collaborations on parkinson amprsquos research , the two neuroscientists sought to establish the infrastructure for neuroscience and mental health research in palestine . it was a daunting goal their two schools , rutgers university ampndashnewark for gluck , al quds university for misk , had joined together , but as gluck says , it was very hard to find any student who would work for free on a project most of them thought would go nowhere . comparing their resources ampmdash teachers , technology , and money ampmdash with the million dollar labs at cutting edge world institutions , he says , provoked not just skepticism , but despair . among those initial recruits , though , was herzallah , who gluck dubs an absolute superstar . and soon enough the neuroscientists recognized the one problem they amprsquod come together to address also provided an opportunity . in palestine , there were many depressed patients to treat , and most of them had never taken any form of antidepressant . that enabled research on how antidepressants affect previously unmedicated brains ampmdash study difficult in , for example , the united states , where a much higher percentage of the population has taken such drugs . palestine has a relatively homogenous gene poolpalestine had another advantage a genetically homogenous population . different people react differently to antidepressants up to half of patients gain no benefits at all . genetics play a role in how patients react , adding one more variable to any study . it amprsquos especially difficult to control in a country like the united states , where centuries of immigration and intermarriage have diversified the gene pool . palestine , by contrast , has a relatively homogenous gene pool thanks to a lack of immigration and a tradition of inter familial marriage relatives marrying one another . those marriages lead to genetic homogenization in the next generation , which can create serious health problems as negative traits get amplified . rare genetic disorders such as juvenile onset parkinson s disease in children as young as , familial schizophrenia , and early onset alzheimer s disease are more prevalent among palestinians , says herzallah , in part because of a lack of genetic diversity . that gives the budding neurogeneticists at the initiative a tragic opportunity to study the links between genes and these rare diseases . the students had one more unique opportunity . more than half of palestine amprsquos people are younger than . rates of depression vary with age , and having so many young people offered an opportunity to study those differences . from the beginning , the initiative amprsquos founders focused on turning problems into opportunities , and on building a foundation that would last , not just for the students involved , but for the whole community . we train students to do research , herzallah says , but what we want to do is invest in people . in the long run , herzallah and his colleagues believe , they amprsquore helping to create not just researchers , but invested citizens who amprsquoll fight the palestinian brain drain by staying to help their homeland and people . research lies at the heart of medicine , and healthcare should be concerned with providing service , but with finding answers as well . the inner voicethe inner voice the quality of life here is . . . i mean , it amprsquos bad , it amprsquos not the best . finances are bad . so everything is against people coming back here , says ibrahim mughrabi , a postdoctoral researcher with the palestinian neuroscience initiative . the unemployment rate in palestine is over percent , with a poverty rate nearly as high . over half the labor force works in the service industry , and economic growth is driven almost entirely by donor aid and government spending , with very little private development . with the import and export of goods and labor controlled by israeli security policies , palestine has difficulty utilizing local resources . smart people can see more opportunities elsewhere , and seize them where they can . but mughrabi , like his colleagues , chose to stay . he helped establish the neurogenetics program , with studies examining genetic markers that confer risk for psychiatric disorders . he also examines how genotype affects responses to therapy , studying how genetic differences determine whether antidepressants help a patient . he describes the initiative as taking the first steps toward a palestinian neuroscience institute that would support researchers , educate clinicians and students , and inform the public about mental health issues . like many of his colleagues , he believes research lies at the heart of medicine , and healthcare should be concerned with providing service , but with finding answers as well . palestine needs doctors and clinicians , and it needs the medical infrastructure to support them . but it also needs researchers willing to remain and address their people s unique problems . many in the initiative echo mughrabi amprsquos sentiment . sundus shalabi , a fifth year medical student , says , i believe that you can do much more good for the whole community than just being a doctor . if you amprsquore a researcher , you can help so many people out there who are suffering . she amprsquos worked on genetic research with the lab for two years she amprsquos grateful to be doing the kind of work she believes in . i think as a doctor , as a medical student , and as a researcher , you have to make some sacrifices if you want to do some good for this country . i amprsquom willing to make these sacrifices because i think it amprsquos a very good thing to do for the people . we have very much to offer for our people and for the country , but this energy is wasted , so we need to collect it . collecting energy , harvesting brainpower and putting it to productive , local use . that amprsquos what the initiative amprsquos all about . it amprsquos a long term endeavor , as everyone acknowledges . we amprsquore starting a new generation of not only good medical students , shalabi says , but also motivated young researchers who are willing to do something good for this country other than just prescribing medicine . and for some students that means sacrifice giving up potentially lucrative jobs elsewhere , declining the clear path to becoming just a doctor , and dedicating themselves to a project the provokes skepticism in even their fellow medical students . i think as a doctor , as a medical student , and as a researcher , you have to make some sacrifices if you want to do some good for this country . you have to have faith to do this . without hearing anybody , you have to go with your inner voice to do things , especially in palestine , says aya imam , a sixth year medical student from east jerusalem . she was among the first to join the lab in she saw it as an opportunity to study abroad , and later spent two months as an intern in switzerland . during that time , she says , all i was thinking about was going back home . because whatever you do outside , okay , you re benefiting , but you don t feel like you re giving . she wasn amprsquot giving until she was back home , doing her part for the people around her . currently she amprsquos working on antidepressant research , looking for impairments in cognitive function among patients taking ssris . amplsquoyou want to do what in palestine ? you know , we don amprsquot have roads , amprsquo laughs mousa hamad , describing the skepticism he often still encounters when talking about the initiative . he works alongside mohammad herzallah at rutgers ampndashnewark , doing research and helping to publicize their work . it can sound crazy to outsiders . even herzallah amprsquos father still thinks he amprsquos crazy ampmdash if maybe a little less so than before . maybe you have to have that inner voice . for his part , herzallah says , i m not against the idea of being crazy , because everyone who achieved something important in history was crazy . we don t lack the brains . we don t lack the ambition . we don t lack the availability of smart people . looking to the futurelooking to the futureof course , not everyone thinks he amprsquos crazy . herzallah can point with pride to the partnerships with prestigious universities worldwide he can talk about the students trained on cognitive neuroscience research methodologies , about the working with partner institutions such as columbia and nyu he can offer the four published research papers and the other four under review . he can talk about the nih grant and about being on campus at am every monday to skype with his students , seven hours ahead of him in abu dis . call him crazy if you want , but for him there amprsquos no reason to think neuroscience can amprsquot come to palestine . we don t lack the brains , he says , we don t lack the ambition . we don t lack the availability of smart people . and the initiative continues to grow , with more students applying every year . with that success comes hope that as ibrahim mughrabi puts it , they will inspire our colleagues to start their own initiatives and maybe help channel and train future graduates into the much needed specialties in palestine . the crazy idea just might spread . meanwhile , omar danoun is leaving his small village , rantis . but not forever . he amprsquos leaving to learn more , heading to the university of detroit mercy to study . his relatives can amprsquot resist making jokes about sending him off to detroit with a bulletproof vest . he will go there to learn , and then he will come back , bringing with him the knowledge he amprsquos gained . back to his culture , to his family , and to the people who call him doctor . lt ! var s skrollr . init smoothscrolling true gt