 federal officials released ampnbspa new set of dietary guidelines today that could have set a new path for americans by encouraging people to eat less red meat and less sugar sweetened beverages . but instead the us government released a report that many experts say shows just how much it succumbed to pressures by the meat and the soda industry yet again . for some nutrition experts , the disappointment that follows the release of the latest dietary guidelines is familiar . every five years , the us government publishes a revised set of the us dietary guidelines for americans and every five years i m disappointed , says christopher gardner , a nutrition scientist at stanford university . the guidelines focus is on disease prevention , and they re very influential they have an effect on everything from how companies label their food , to what types of food are included in school lunch programs . so , whatever the us government tells americans to eat is bound to be controversial and this latest set of guidelines was no exception . the meat lobby is very powerful in congress . even though a panel of experts convened by the government called the dietary guidelines advisory committee ampnbspsaid that a healthy dietary pattern is lower in red and processed meats the new guidelines make no mention of red meats . in addition , the new guidelines ignore the advisory committee s analysis that concluded that a healthy diet should be low in sugar sweetened drinks . there are clear benefits of replacing red meat with almost any other protein sources but the meat lobby is very powerful in congress , says walter willet , chair of the department of nutrition at harvard university . the dietary guidelines committee was also quite explicit in their recommendation to limit sugar sweetened beverages , and that s not talked about in the guidelines at all . willet isn t the only one who feels let down . as expected , due to strong lobbying by the meat industry and the resulting strong pressure that congress put into the developers of the dgas , the recommendation to reduce consumption of red and processed meats was not included , says rafael perez escamilla , an epidemiologist at yale university and a member of the dietary guidelines advisory committee . in my view , this is a major gap . in my view , this is a major gap . one of big points of contention in was the guideline committee s decision to include a section on environmental sustainability in their report . that angle on nutrition advice had never been included in the committee s report before , and it rubbed a lot of people the agriculture and meat industry , ahem the wrong way . so , after months of lobbying and letter writing by republicans and agricultural lobbyists alike , the idea that a healthy eating pattern should also be sustainable one was nixed . us department of agriculture secretary tom vilsack and sylvia burwell , secretary of health and human services , even released a joint statement in october in which they promised that the guidelines would remain within the scope of our mandate . . . which is to provide nutritional and dietary information . there was more tomfoolery in september when the british medical journal published an investigation that went after the advisory committee , suggesting that it hadn t followed a proper methodology while conceiving its report , and accusing it of deleting meat from the list of recommended foods . but the verge s own reporting showed that the bmj s accusations were misleading and false they seemed designed specifically to serve as ammunition for the meat lobby . a month after its initial publication , the bmj issued a correction for the article . finally , in november , scientists signed a letter asking for the retraction of the story . the article can still be found in the bmj s site today . the fact that a lot of the advisory committee s more radical recommendations were ignored doesn t mean that the guidelines are a failure . the new guidelines appear to slip in some language that under the right light suggests that eating less meat might be beneficial . take this summary on how americans should shift their eating patterns the u . s . population , across almost every age and sex group , consumes eating patterns that are low in vegetables , fruits , whole grains , dairy , seafood , and oil and high in refined grains , added sugars , saturated fats , sodium , and for some age sex groups , high in the meats , poultry , and eggs subgroup . . . . the guidelines almost never explicitly say that people should eat less meat and certainly make no mention of eating less red meat . they do state that some people are eating too much meat , though . here s another example . . . evidence from food pattern modeling has demonstrated that lean meats can be part of a healthy eating pattern , but as discussed in chapter , average intakes of meats , poultry , and eggs , a subgroup of the protein foods group , are above recommendations in the healthy u . s . style eating pattern for teen boys and adult men . for gardner , that small change is a positive one , even if it s hard to decipher . they actually said that ! it s not explicit , but it s as close as they have come to saying eat less meat , poultry , and egg . the guidelines also make a point of stating that people do not eat food groups and nutrients in isolation . rather , the different components of a person s eating pattern can have interactive and even cumulative effects on their health . so this year s guidelines shouldn t be seen as a rigid prescription , the guidelines state , but rather , an adaptable framework in which individuals can enjoy foods that meet their personal , cultural , and traditional preferences and fit within their budget . the stuff you ve heard for the last five years still standsso , what does this all mean for the everyday american who just wants to eat well without consuming too much crap ? it means that most the stuff you ve heard for the last five years still stands the guidelines recommend a variety of sources of protein , vegetables , fruit , oils , whole grains , and low fat and fat free dairy . they also recommended limiting the intake of sodium , trans fats , and saturated fats . finally , the report says for the first time that less than percent of calories consumed each day should come from added sugars . and all that other , more radical stuff will have to wait . the dietary guidelines advisory committee report has planted a very important seed that i hope others will see blossom and thrive , says perez escamilla . a lot of the advisory committee s recommendations didn t make it into the guidelines , and the health professional community is disappointed , gardner says . however , we realize that dietary guidelines are hugely political issues , and making huge changes is honestly not realistic so there are silver linings . 