 no company has done more to change the way americans drink coffee in the last several years than keurig green mountain . its method of brewing coffee by injecting hot water into prepackaged plastic pods has quickly grown to rival drip coffee as the preferred means of getting a quick hit of caffeine . it was slow to start , but now it s growing by leaps and bounds , says joe derupo , communications director at the national coffee association . it s the biggest change in coffee brewing technology since mr . coffee was introduced in the s . one of every four dollars americans spend on coffee to be brewed at home is now spent on pods , and keurig , which pioneered the process in the us , dominates the market . but keurig s hold on the industry is not as secure as it once was . in september key patents on its k cups expired , and ever since third party companies have been making pods and selling them at lower prices . in the second half of last year alone , private label cups went from percent of the market to percent . a report from credit suisse published this month found that sales of private label cups grew by percent over the last year , while keurig s green mountain cups grew by only percent . this is a particularly threatening form of counterfeiting for keurig . like printer companies with their inkjet cartridges , keurig s business model is built on selling machines cheap and then reaping huge profits on the refills . now , bereft of a legal monopoly on pod making , keurig is trying to establish a technological one its new brewer , which goes on sale this fall , has a mechanism that scans each pod for keurig s markings and locks out any unapproved capsules . it s essentially digital rights management drm a mainstay in music and video adapted for coffee . it s the biggest change in coffee brewing technology since mr . coffeeat a keurig tasting event in new york last week , an employee showed me how it worked . or , rather , he showed me that it worked . keurig isn t saying much about the mechanism itself , presumably in the hopes of obscuring it from aspiring coffee pirates . when the keurig employee tried to use an old model pod , one without a new ink marker on the foil top , the brewer wouldn t run . oops ! read a message on the touchscreen display , explaining that the machine only works with specially designed pods and directing the user to a keurig website and helpline . the employee wouldn t elaborate on how it worked , except to say that the ink is proprietary and inspired by counterfeiting technology used by the us mint . ian tinkler , keurig s vice president of brewer engineering , went into a bit more detail , explaining that an infrared light shines on the ink marking and registers the wavelength of the light reflected back . keurig s reticence is understandable . in addition to copycat pod makers , keurig must contend with the many gigantic food conglomerates that are angling for a piece of the lucrative single cup coffee market . starbucks , nestle , kraft foods , and other companies have all taken stabs at the single cup industry . many would be competitors ended up partnering with keurig to package their grinds in its k cups . that keurig , a far smaller company , has been able to keep them at bay is a testament to the fact that though it only does one thing , it does it well and to the power of the first mover advantage . keurig s first beachhead was in the office in the early s , according to murray carpenter , the author of caffeinated , where the machines provided a welcome alternative to the bitter overcooked coffee everyone dreaded . a single cup machine is the aesthetic opposite of the pour over method currently popular in high end cafes , but an important part of the appeal is the same you know the cup you re drinking is fresh . where a barista achieves this freshness by grinding the beans in front of you and pouring scalding water over them immediately , keurig achieves it by grinding beans in a factory , flushing them with nitrogen , and sealing them into airtight capsules . oxidation is what makes coffee go stale , so even though months may pass between grinding and brewing , k cup coffee still tastes fairly fresh . the other appeal , of course , is convenience . there is nothing really required of you but popping in the pod , pressing a button , and tossing the spent cartridge in the trash . the results are rarely spectacular , and the entire concept is an ecological nightmare but the user friendliness is hard to beat . it s impossible to mess up . as people became acquainted with the pods in the workplace , they started buying machines for their homes . the trend caught the attention of green mountain coffee roasters , which bought the company in , at a valuation of million . it was a bargain . the pod business boomed , even through the recession , despite the fact that pod coffee is relatively expensive . in pod form , coffee can cost roughly the equivalent of a pound , depending on the variety . thanks to its purchase of keurig , green mountain went from being a midsize regional roaster to doing over billion in sales last year . ninety two percent of that revenue came from pods and brewers . reflecting its new focus , it changed its name to keurig green mountain last march . with its new machine , keurig is combining its two main product lines , the single cup brewer and the carafe brewing vue . keurig has also made a few smaller improvements , like the ability to adjust the strength of the coffee and an air pump that makes fluffier hot chocolate . the touchscreen interface is simple and intuitive . despite having about different types of pods , and now carafe and single cup sizes , you still just pop in a cup and push a button . it s digital rights management for coffeethe anti counterfeiting system doubles as a way to distinguish between carafe size pods and regular ones . if the sensor detects the green dot that marks carafe cups , it brews a large pot . if it detects the ring of black symbols on the standard pod , it brews a smaller cup . if it doesn t detect a keurig approved marking at all , it tells you oops ! when keurig first announced its intention to design a lockout mechanism earlier this year , two companies that make unlicensed pods sued it for anticompetitive practices . the ceo of treehouse foods , one of the third party pod makers , has promised to reverse engineer the brewer and design compatible pods within months . mitch stoltz , a staff attorney with the electronic frontier foundation , told ars technica that making pods more technically difficult to mimic would probably be only a short term fix . if this thing goes to market , probably within a day people will have figured out how to break it , stoltz said . they will take it as a challenge . fortunately for keurig , the expiration of its cup patents doesn t appear to have fazed its major corporate partners , which so far seem to still find it more lucrative to work within keurig s ecosystem than to tear it down and build their own . keurig recently signed a deal with coca cola to make a pod based brewer for cold carbonated beverages , and another deal with campbell s to make soup . in a credit suisse report for j . m . smucker this month , it said that management chose to continue its licensing agreement with keurig because it gave them access to a low cost k cup manufacturer and because it gave them a peek under the tent for the upcoming closed . system . keurig s patents may have expired , but it s still the company with the biggest pod making infrastructure and the most machines in the most homes . would be competitors trying to capitalize on the apparently insatiable thirst for instant caffeinated beverages and possibly soup may continue to find it easier to partner with keurig instead . in that light , the new machine s drm doesn t have to be unbreakable it just has to be good enough to make it easier to work with keurig rather than against it . 