 in july , a bitcoin startup named xapo announced it was raising million , bringing its total backing to million . it was using this funding for an unusually intense security setup . xapo tells users that they can feel secure because their bitcoin will be stored in offline servers , scattered across multiple continents , in secret underground vaults , with armed guards , and biometric sensors . we sat down with xapo ceo wences casares to discuss why he thinks such extreme measures are necessary and how he sees bitcoin changing the world . this interview has been edited and condensedwhat makes you so passionate about bitcoin ? when i was growing up , i saw them lose everything , three times . my parents were sheep ranchers in patagonia , and when i was growing up , i saw them lose everything , three times . a lot of people in america don t understand what it s like when your family loses everything . and when it happened in argentina , you see your parents have all this anxiety , it has consequences that are more than just economic , something happens to the whole society , it takes a long time to build back , to recover . there is only about . billion people who have a bank account the way you and i do , with a credit card and checkbook , so there are more than billion people who don t have that . basically they don t have the right to safekeep the fruits of their labor . they work very hard all day , they get for that , and then they are forced to keep it in cash . i think that bitcoin is going to change the world more than the internet did , and i m very conscious of what i m saying . i know that it s hard to imagine , but i truly think that it touches something that matters more to a huge percentage of the world . we don t see the problem here in america . i think it will take longer to develop , but it will have a bigger impact , by giving the majority of people in the world the ability to affordably safekeep their money . how will bitcoin enable people to get bank accounts who couldn t before ? bitcoin is going to change the world more than the internet did . think of the cellphone . there were never more than . billion landlines . then the cellphone came and we re at . billion . why ? it s not because only those people wanted to communicate . the landlines were all post pay . you need to have credit to get one . the cell phones were pre paid . suddenly you could get one with cash . it had nothing to do with technology . it was an economic restriction . now there are . billion bank accounts , same threshold as land lines . i think bitcoin will allow us to see . billion people banking on their cell phones . that s what s so exciting to me . that s a much better world than we have today . so if bitcoin is so safe and affordable , why are you going to these crazy length with security ? we take the private keys of those coins and put them in offline servers in underground vaults , with armed security , and biometric sensors , and all that stuff , because that was the only way we could get it insured . in fact , it s worse than that . there are several servers , each one in a different continent , with different keys , and you would need to break into all of them , within hours . it s a little bit extreme , actually ridiculously extreme . i wouldn t keep my coins any other way . i know what the bad guys are doing . i wouldn t keep them on my computer , or my phone . it takes building things . unlike with banks , you have a piece of code that is worth money . for us to get the insurance , we wouldn t get it if there was a high risk of a hack . if you re not thorough with your security the insurance guys won t touch you . it s a little bit extreme , actually ridiculously extreme , but you do all this work up front so you can play this game for the long haul . but doesn t it defeat the purpose of a fast , safe digital currency if you have to keep it in an offline bank vault ? we designed it so that you can have the best of both worlds . you have two accounts that are coupled . if you are using bitcoin for payments , you keep some in your wallet , which can be accessed anytime . you can send and receive bitcoins in real time on the web , over email , text message , twitter , facebook , whatever . whatever you want to insure you send to the vault . because we don t have to have that bitcoin readily available , it takes hours , we can do things that would otherwise be impossible . it s like a checking and savings account . convenience and security . what is the state of bitcoin right now ? there are million people in the world who have used bitcoin , and only , of them have ever actually used it to pay for something . so most people are using it as a store of value . i believe that this is the perfect native internet currency . it has all the attributes to flow across the web and mobile just as bits flow , as information moves . and that can change the world , but not with only million people . maybe with six hundred million . it has all the attributes to flow across the web and mobile just as bits flow . what would it take to get there ? what s happening right now with bitcoin is very much like what was happening with the internet in . before the browser , someone looks at tcp ip and says , oh my god , this thing moves information from anywhere to anywhere real time and for free ! it s going to change information forever , so i m going to launch netflix . well , hold on . yes , but not now . not for years . first we need much better computers , more broadband , lots of things have to happen . same thing with bitcoin . yes , it will change everything , but not now , not yet . email with million people wasn t email , it was a curiosity . it seems like a lot of big e commerce sites are now accepting bitcoin . aren t people paying for goods with it right now ? it s a sideshow to distract the idiots . a good currency has two main use cases , a store of value and a payment mechanism . right now what we are seeing with bitcoin is most people using it just as a store of value . a lot of people like to write and talk about using bitcoin to buy things , but they confuse the way they would like things to be with the way the world really is right now . they are writing about this fantasy . i don t see it happening with my users . i look at the blockchain and i don t see it happening there . even though there are some big name merchants that accept it , show me anyone that is doing more than percent of their transactions in btc . it s irrelevant , it s just a press release . that s not where the btc action is happening . it s a sideshow to distract the idiots . if you re in the industry and you know what s going on , it has nothing to do with that . so how will it happen ? trying to push payments now , trying to replace credit cards , i think would be a mistake . like trying to push video in . dogecoin taught us a lot . the kind of things they were doing , five cents here , five centers there , are where bitcoin can thrive . no fighting to replace credit cards right now . enable the flow of tips and small transactions around the internet , that is the more natural entry point . we play tic tac toe online i put down bits , you put bits . i win and buy a song . you leave me a little tip on an article because you like my comment . it s whatever , but it flows . what is truly remarkable is the story of zero to million . when people write the history of this thing , of bitcoin , they are not going to write the story of million to a billion . what is truly remarkable is the story of zero to million . it has already happened ! and we re not paying attention ! that s incredible . that s what had one chance in a million and it already happened . bitcoin , the community , we are going to add more than million this month , we will be at million by the end of the year , and if it keeps growing the way it has , it will be at more than a billion within five years . each one of those people are infecting new people so that a few more join each month , and it s then that payments start to happen organically . 