 keith cowing and dennis wingo are racing gravity . international sun earth explorer isee , an abandoned s spacecraft that once measured solar winds and flew through the tail of a comet , is headed back towards earth . and last month , the pair of citizen scientists began an effort to make contact . after a successful crowdfunding campaign , their team is poised to take control of isee , with the chance of restarting a data gathering mission that s been dormant for almost years . earlier this week , the isee reboot project reached an official agreement with nasa , the first time the agency has approved an outside team attempting to resurrect a spacecraft that it never planned to use again . now , cowing , mingo , and their team have until mid june to fire the thrusters , diverting it into an orbit close to earth . if they fail , isee will swing around the moon instead , continuing its solar orbit . it will not near earth again for decades . isee was launched in august of , almost exactly one year after voyager . equipped with sensory instruments , the craft settled around lagrangian point , a gravitational sweet spot where objects can be held in orbit directly between earth and sun . over , miles away , scientists at nasa used it and two closer craft to measure solar winds . but three years later , isee would get a new name and a new mission . under flight director robert farquhar , it was dubbed the international cometary explorer ice and sent in dizzying orbital loops towards comet giacobini zinner , which it would intercept in . though it was several years old and carried no camera , ice would become the first craft to ever fly through a comet s tail , beating out more sophisticated machines racing to reach halley s comet . for the next several years , nasa would continue to gather data , but as isee ice drifted farther from earth , operations slowed , and the mission was officially terminated in . after a brief check in , communications ceased altogether . isee s orbit . image credit nasathen , isee reappeared . in , the deep space network found that the craft was still transmitting a signal nasa would later explain that by the time the mission was terminated , it was simply too far away to issue shutdown commands . more importantly , it was scheduled to fly close to earth in . originally , farquhar and others were optimistic about at least taking control of the craft . but as the date of arrival drew near , a goddard space flight center team realized that they couldn t even communicate with it . the transmitters of the deep space network , the hardware to send signals out to the fleet of nasa spacecraft in deep space , no longer includes the equipment needed to talk to isee , said a facebook post . these old fashioned transmitters were removed in . could new transmitters be built ? yes , but it would be at a price no one is willing to spend . that s where amateurs and citizen scientists , including cowing and wingo , stepped in . after reading an interview with farquhar , we just got to talking about it , says cowing . one thing led to another , we both made some phone calls and did some calculations , and we realized that this was actually quite doable . if they could recreate the language used to talk to the spacecraft and get access to a powerful enough radio telescope , they would be able to bring it back . you keep saying it ll be important someday ! well , it was . before isee reboot , the pair operated the lunar orbiter image recovery project , a highly successful effort to recover lost photographs from s lunar satellites . this experience , as well as their nasa connections , served them well they were able to collect reference material from some of the original mission team . typically , after or years , your wife says , why don t you throw that crap out ? and you keep saying it ll be important someday ! well , it was , cowing says . they kept many of the documents that were required to tell the spacecraft what to do , because a lot of them knew that it was coming back to earth in . software defined radio could compensate for hardware that no longer existed , making it possible to speak to isee once again . nasa couldn t fund a recovery mission , though it provided advice and documents to winger and cowing . but the public , it turned out , could . a crowdfunding campaign reached its goal of , after a month , ultimately getting over , . with that money and direct equipment donations , the team got two power amplifiers and set up ground stations at morehead state university and the arecibo observatory in puerto rico , which houses the world s largest and most powerful radio telescope . so far , they ve detected a signal from isee , and cowing believes they stand a very good chance of communicating with it in days or even hours . if they re able to send it commands , they ll ask for a status update and may alter its spin speed or orientation . once they re convinced it s safe , they ll attempt to push it towards its new orbit as soon as possible . the sooner we fire the thrusters , the less fuel we need , says cowing . these engines haven t been fired in decades , so we d rather not fire them any longer than we have to . as of , of the instruments aboard were workingif they can take control of isee , then what ? it s possible that it could start a new mission . as of , of the instruments were known to be still working , and almost three quarters of the original fuel supply remained . though its battery is dead , the solar panels must be functioning at least enough for it to transmit a signal . maintaining such a mission , however , would take money that the team doesn t have right now . instead , one of the project s greatest findings could simply be that it s possible to bring an abandoned spacecraft back under control , and that nasa will give its blessing to these unofficial projects . citizen scientists of the future , for example , might want to resurrect the spitzer space telescope , an exoplanet probe that s facing shutdown as part of nasa budget cuts . people said , why don t you take control of that ? well , one lost spacecraft at a time , says cowing , noting that spitzer is a more complex craft that would take more work to capture . but it s only a couple million dollars a year to run these things , so all it takes is somebody with a little philanthropic intent to either write a big check or look , we ve raised more than a tenth of a million dollars . we re like percent of the way there to running a far more sophisticated spacecraft . so if we can do it , others can . as nasa pursues an ambitious mars mission in the face of constant budget crunch , cowing hopes that everyday citizens will be able to build new spacecraft , not just commandeer old ones . he s optimistic about the rise of cubesats , which can be made cheaply and relatively easily though the cost of launching them is still significant . smaller isn t necessarily better , but smaller often means that you can think in different ways than if you have one big spacecraft that has everything in it . and smaller also means that you have a way to engage more people than just the traditional builders of satellites , he says . i just think it would be cool if every school in america had a class on how to build a satellite . despite its age , isee itself may still have new things to teach us . cowing and wingo s lunar orbiter project , for example , produces images in higher resolution than was possible in the s , and this mission could do the same for space data . we don t know what else we can learn from the isee mission . we don t . there may be some way to analyze the signals coming back from the sensors to derive new information that nobody in the s or s would have ever thought to ask , he says . to me , at the end of the day old stuff still works . 