 from the outside , i look like the worst stereotype of a vr user as i walk around the virginia tech cube . not only am i blindfolded by an oculus rift as i feel my way around , the headset is sporting a inch high , slightly wobbly d printed antenna . the rift isn t wireless , so i m tethered to a laptop , which a research assistant is carrying around behind me . my gait lurches from tentative single steps to single minded strides to sudden stops sometimes because i ve clipped through a wall in virtual reality , sometimes because i m about to run into one in real life . a x foot box isn t even big enough to fit the scoreboard in virginia tech s lane stadium . but for me , the room looks like the giant venue , full of , spectators in the midst of evacuating . the audience is represented by tiny boxes , torrents of them streaming through a simple replica of one wing , mixing and jostling each other as they pass . if i walk slowly , i can match their pace . a little faster , and my speed multiplies , until walking briskly in the cube shoots me through the stadium and straight into empty blue space . these digital seven league boots are just one piece of the massive puzzle that benjamin knapp , director of virginia tech s institute for creativity , arts , and technology icat , and other researchers are trying to put together . in most of the tech world , virtual reality is slimming down and becoming more accessible , as developers learn to create simple experiences that anyone can enjoy . inside the cube , it s messy , complicated , and ambitious . the cube is a new initiative , but it fits with virginia tech s long history of virtual reality research . in the mid s , the school unveiled a cave a recursive acronym for cave automatic virtual environment , a x foot enclosure with stereoscopic d images projected on every side . a successor to the cave now called the visionarium ampnbspviscube is still around on campus , and two cube researchers have previously worked on visionarium projects . you can almost feel the tremors as wind rips away nails and woodoriginally built as a black box theater , the cube is shared between icat and virginia tech s center for the arts , used for both art projects and scientific research . this doesn t necessarily have to involve vr in , the cube theater hosted a live performance called operacraft , where k students used minecraft avatars projected onto a wall to perform an opera sung by virginia tech musicians . one of the cube s biggest selling points is its sound system , which creates deafening degree audio with standard speakers , four subwoofers , and nine additional speakers that project hyper targeted sound , like the aural equivalent of a spotlight . it s possible to create things that could never be replicated with an ordinary sound system , like an experimental composition by icat media engineer tanner upthegrove that sends metal and chainsaws whirling around the room and wouldn t feel out of place in hellraiser . close your eyes in another demo a recording from inside a tornado and you can almost feel the tremors as wind rips away nails and wood . rigid body targets like these provide markers for the cube s tracking cameras . the oculus rift tracks head movement with a single webcam , which reads an array of leds embedded in the headset . alongside the speakers , though , the cube is lined with cameras , which read up to rigid body targets small constellations of dowels and reflective balls . tape one to a tablet or headset , and the wall cameras will be able to see visitors as they explore anything from a very large molecule to a very small tornado , mapped onto the dimensions of the room . the beauty of the space is that you now move through a virtual world by walking , says knapp . i can explore this area in this space , and the model in this space , with you in there and with anybody else . a non vr project called futurehaus , for example , uses an old augmented reality trick by holding up a tablet , you re given a window into a simply rendered three story home , its dimensions mapped roughly to the room . unlike most other virtual rooms , though , whole groups of people can mill around the house , where they ll appear as prisoner esque white spheres . futurehaus drives home the loose connection between physical and virtual space in an almost eerie way . you can explore the house by climbing virtual staircases , sending your avatar up or down while you traverse the exact same space in the cube . if you head to another floor and a companion stays behind on the lower level , you could hold hands and chat while your avatars walk several stories apart . a tornado visualization tool unrelated to the audio installation works with space in another way . put on the rift and you re standing in a room about the size of the cube , getting a bird s eye view of a flat map . instead of empty space , though , you re looking at a bright , abstract funnel made of reds and yellows , representing the temperature of the air as a tornado sweeps across the ground . you can walk through it or kneel and see tiny topographic lines , while rocks and wind whirl around you in a small artistic flourish . right now , it processes pre recorded weather data , but one day it could provide a live feed , creating a real time record of a disaster . the most interesting part , though , isn t the image , which feels about as informative as a normal d render . it s the sense of place . the simulation represents users as hovering green pyramids , tipped forward like an arrow . as i stood on the map , another pyramid floated toward me , representing virginia tech department of geography head bill carstensen . when carstensen pointed out the eye of the storm by staring at it , he could have been poking at a screen , or drawing a red line in ms paint . but actually peering through the d landscape , i could respond with the most intuitive interface of all my own body . the demo was simplistic , but where so much vr feels like a blown up version of a thing i could get on a screen , it gave me a real reason to use it . virginia tech s moss arts center , home of the cube . designing for the cube , though , presents its own set of challenges . there s a tremendous amount of space to track , and since everything has to be portable , you can t rely on having a super high powered pc to render environments . normally , being able to walk around is a great way to avoid motion sickness . but the clunky futurehaus demo sometimes ran at only a few frames per second , and the lane stadium evacuation simulator could get nauseatingly laggy . the oculus rift is currently hooked to a thinkpad , which must be carried around , open , at all times . the next step will be putting the thinkpad into a backpack , and after that , the team is looking at streaming video through a raspberry pi , which would make the headsets truly mobile . if you want to track fine motion , like hands , you d have to strap on a leap motion or some other controller . for now , walking around in the cube in a headset feels simultaneously retro and futuristic you re using a system that overwrites real space in a way that valve and oculus and sony will never match , but in a bulky , awkward format straight out of a s x files episode . knapp is aware of these limitations . but even as researchers work to fix them , he s imagining huge conceptual leaps . one virginia tech student , for example , is working on a system that could detect muscle movement and translate it into motion controls instead of having to look for a gesture , the room would know that you d flexed to pick up a cup . and unlike oculus and many others , knapp doesn t just want virtual or augmented reality glasses to get smaller . he wants them to disappear altogether . the crazy distant future is to shine laser light into the eyes themselves . the crazy distant future is to shine laser light into the eyes themselves , he says , while we re talking about interfaces . at first , this sounds like a virtual retinal display , the same technology that s thought to be used in microsoft s hololens and the mysterious magic leap headset . in reality , it s a lot weirder putting projectors on the walls , not a headset and using sophisticated tracking to beam images directly into your eyes . just like the aural environment doesn t touch you you don t have to wear anything to get the aural environment wouldn t it be neat if you didn t have to do that with the visual environment ? right now we ve moved from a screen onto commercially available devices like the oculus , or next generation headsets like magic leap . but the eventual goal is to move all of that off body . is that the future ? a virtual reality theater where speakers are targeted to your precise location and sensors track your muscles , while the walls shine lasers into your eyes ? not for most people . maybe not for anybody . but as far as wild vr experiments go , things don t get much better than this . 