 as publicity stunts go , virtual drift is a pretty complicated one . here s how it works start with a driver from formula d , a professional drift racing league . build him an absurdly heavy custom helmet with an oculus rift instead of a visor . wire his car up with a directional sensor and a server . on that server , load a racing game built with custom designed , hyper realistic physics . instead of a mouse and keyboard , feed all the car s controls steering , gas , brake out to the game . send your driver into the middle of a parking lot where a surveyor has spent days mapping gps coordinates . ask him to drive , wearing the virtual reality headset , until the sensor is too confused to know where he s going . stop him , realign the car , and do it again . film the whole thing . turn it into a minute degree movie . then put that movie on the gear vr and use it to advertise motor oil . get all that ? if not , that s okay . even in the world of experimental vr , blindfolded drifting stands out as particularly niche . but attacking a bizarre problem could help developers solve a much more mundane one the question of how to blend the virtual world and the real one . i love gaming , and i hate the idea of sitting in my room for months playing the same game , says glenn snyder , one of two designers that oil company ampnbspcastrol hired to create its rift drifting sim . i really want to go out in the real world and just modify the visuals a little bit , you know ? just see something different . along with fellow technologist adam amaral , he essentially created a video game tuned to mimic real life , hacking a roush stage mustang into a giant controller . virtual drift , granted , does more than change the world a little bit . instead of a parking lot , pro driver matt powers sees what looks like a giant ocean made of coal , where waves and crumbling cliffs indicate that he should turn or slide . but the basic principle holds . we show up for the first testing , and we re like , oh my god . nothing s working . the computer in powers car tracks which direction he s turning , how fast he s going , and what kind of inertia he s probably experiencing as he races across the lot . existing location sensors aren t fast or accurate enough to correctly plot where he is , so all this other data is used to estimate where he s probably headed in the game . but unless those calculations are perfect , what s happening on the course only matches the game for short periods of time . in order to translate powers driving into virtual motion , the team had to tweak a physics engine that in other games is basically meant to make amateur drivers feel awesome . cars move faster , change direction at the tap of a button , and treat the conservation of momentum as more of a loose guideline than a law . when you play grand theft auto or anything like that , you can basically flip the car back and forth and it ll just do whatever the heck you want , says snyder . the physx engine s momentum is just awful . that s an especially large problem for drifting , says ben conrad , who directed the virtual drift video . it breaks physics . if we were doing laps , i think we would have been done . and then matt gets into the car and starts doing countersteering . even in an oculus rift experience where players only move a couple of inches , the internal sensors or external tracking camera can make subtle mistakes . so your in game perspective can slowly drift out of sync no pun intended you might find yourself twisting your head to look straight forward in a game . traveling longer distances amplifies this effect . constantly changing direction amplifies it even more . while most games can pop the camera back in place without much trouble , reorienting the entire world around a car might be the ultimate form of distracted driving . and many of these problems didn t come to light until powers started actually test driving the system . three weeks out , we were like it s done , it s good , we ll just hang out till the shoot date , says snyder . then we show up for the first testing , and we re like , oh my god . nothing s working . so powers ventured into a world that got further from reality by the second , just to measure how bad it could get . i d listen to them no , don t turn yet , you re fine , you re good , okay now turn . but in the virtual world , i m way off course , he says . the turn is still way up there , or i d passed it . eventually , amaral and snyder matched the virtual and real controls well enough to last for a few minutes at a time . between laps , powers drove the car to marked gps coordinates , so the team could figure out where he was and reset everything . we were just lining up landmarks so they can place me exactly in the virtual world where i am in the actual world , he says . it s more of a location extrapolator than a location trackerunfortunately , it can be hard to see all this work and its results in either conrad s youtube short or the immersive gear vr version . the video jumps quickly between an in game view , a camera in the front seat of the car , and more traditional racing shots from outside . it s pleasantly dizzying , but it doesn t fully take advantage of vr s greatest strengths like its ability to make someone feel like they re really in something that s moving simultaneously through two worlds . the real draw is just the fact that powers did it at all . like so many other virtual reality experiences , virtual drift is unabashedly an advertisement . the technical pieces are largely hacked together , and it s really more of a location extrapolator than a location tracker in more concrete terms , imagine a vr system that guesses how the world should move based on how fast you re walking , not where your head actually is . and companies like google and microsoft are already doing similar but far more advanced work in fields that range from augmented reality to robotics . would the system , for example , be any good in google s self driving cars ? i think they re a little ahead of us , says snyder dryly . just a bit . they re pretty good . creating a cheap system that can make vr work over large distances at high speeds , though , is more than just a stunt . even small scale positional tracking took a long time to get right . valve , for example , spent a long time working with qr code wallpaper before switching to the laser boxes it uses now . i feel like valve has it down . their laser tracking is on point , says snyder . i m really big on taking vr out of the world where it s small enough to use laser tracking , and bringing it out to just anywhere . throw it in the back of a car , throw it on a skateboard or bike or put it in a backpack . very few people are willing to temporarily blind themselves on the road to see a different reality . but it s symbolic of the weird , anything goes place in which vr still exists . if things go well , maybe we ll all drive with heads up displays in years . they ll just rewrite the world instead of covering it up . and they probably won t fill everything with burning fields of coal . 