 it s a little after am on a monday morning and i m in the front seat of a black mercedes , cruising around a brussels neighborhood that has become known in the media as jihad central . it was here , in molenbeek , that isis affiliated terrorists hatched plans to attack paris in november and brussels last month . and it was here that salah abdeslam , recently regarded as europe s most wanted man , was captured by security forces in a march raid . but on this bright morning , as i drive around with ibrahim ouassari , a year old lifelong molenbeek resident , the neighborhood seems entirely calm . veiled women walk along narrow streets and colorful storefronts , returning home after dropping their kids off at school elderly moroccan men drink mint tea at a corner cafe . and at one point , an older man flags our car down , asks for a ride to his doctor s appointment , and hops in the back seat . after we drop him off , i find out that he and ouassari didn t know one another . it s not very jihadist , is it ? ouassari says . it s not baghdad or syria . parts of molenbeek hardly feel like europe , either . the municipality covers a sprawling area of about , residents , with large immigrant populations from morocco , turkey , pakistan , and africa . it s not far from central brussels , home to soaring bureaucratic buildings and pristine tourist attractions , though it faces a very different set of problems . high unemployment and crime have plagued molenbeek for years , and many young residents have struggled to find new opportunities conditions that may help explain the neighborhood s connections to terrorist attacks . ouassari wants to change that . last year , he launched molengeek , a working space and pre incubator for young entrepreneurs in the neighborhood . located in a converted office building on a quiet cobblestone square , the space is open seven days a week , and regularly filled with young people hunched over laptops or sipping tea . there s no entrance fee or application process , and participants cover a wide range of ages and skill levels . some come to work on their own projects others come to collaborate or attend workshops . a dedicated coding school is in the works . the converted office space that houses molengeek . amar toor in the working space , ouassari and his small team help participants to shape and market their ideas , before connecting them with incubators that would provide the resources needed to develop a startup . the aim , he says , is to help demystify the startup world for young people in molenbeek , and to open doors that would have otherwise remained shut . ouassari was born in molenbeek to moroccan parents , and he grew up a few doors down from the home of abdeslam , one of the paris attackers . he dropped out of high school at the age of it didn t interest me and worked in local social organizations until the age of , when he bought his first computer . he taught himself how to code , and eventually launched an it consultancy . later , he created a site called ampnbspcrowdfly , where job seekers can post their resumes without disclosing their gender or name an attempt to mitigate discrimination against women or applicants with muslim last names . we just want to give them the right tools . if i can do all this without any academic background , everybody in molenbeek can do this , he says . we just want to give them the right tools . ampnbsp molengeek has secured funding from microsoft s innovation center and other local groups , and has held a handful of events since launching last may , including a january ampnbspcompetition where participants presented their startup ideas to a jury of entrepreneurs , businesspeople , and politicians . one of the winning teams from that event , a startup that would allow people with different sized feet to purchase individual shoes , is now working to develop their idea with a brussels incubator . at the end of this month , molengeek will hold its first hackathon . announced a few days after last month s terrorist attacks on the brussels airport and a metro station , the event aims to develop new ways for the city s emergency services to coordinate and communicate with the public . co founders julie foulon and ibrahim ouassari . amar toor we really wanted to respond to the attacks with something positive from molenbeek , says julie foulon , who co founded molengeek with ouassari and continues to work at an incubator in brussels . she says young people from molenbeek are too often alienated from the startup scene because they don t see themselves in it . the tech community here is very closed off , it s very belgian , says foulon , who also created ampnbspgirleek , a tech and startup site for women . here in brussels , people of maghreb origin make up one third of the population , but they re sidelined . they are never part of the tech ecosystem . when i visited molengeek this week , the activity was limited to one room it will span the entire ground floor once renovations are completed , and the scene was pretty quiet . at one end of a long table , a veiled woman in her s worked diligently at a desktop computer next to a white man of about the same age . at the other end , a man in his late s , named charife , spoke with ouassari about his idea an app for organized races and other athletic competitions . it allows us to become vectors of change in society . hamza el mokhtari , a year old web developer , was in another corner of the room , finishing up the online delivery menu for a local halal fast food chain . el mokhtari has been working at the space since its launch , and was part of the team that won top honors at the first molengeek jury event . their pitch modular clothes . for him , molengeek has opened up a new perspective . when we re at school , we re taught to conform to try to be hired by a company or work at an office all day , says el mokhtari , who s originally from morocco and spent much of his life in molenbeek . but entrepreneurship is a different way of thinking , it allows us to become vectors of change in society . . . it really opens your eyes to new things . molenbeek is home to around , people , including a large population of moroccan immigrants . amar toor yet the outlook for many other youth in the neighborhood remains grim . unemployment among molenbeek residents aged to is at percent , compared to percent for all of brussels , and many muslims who make up between and percent of the neighborhood s population have struggled to integrate within mainstream belgian society . experts believe that may help explain why isis has been able to find so many recruits there . on a per capita basis , belgium has the highest number of citizens who have left to fight in iraq and syria , and molenbeek has had connections to several terrorist plots over the years the madrid train bombing in , a foiled attack on a jewish museum in brussels last year , and the most recent attacks in paris and brussels . even the mayor of the municipality , fran oise schepmans , has described it as a breeding ground for violence . johan leman , an anthropologist who has been working in the neighborhood for more than years , says that some of the blame can be laid at the feet of the government . here in molenbeek , clearly there has been a neglect of the education system , leman says , adding that the state continues to focus more on policing the neighborhood , rather than addressing more deeply rooted socio economic issues . following the attacks in brussels and paris , there has been no real response at the level of prevention or social initiatives . the neighborhood has been connected to several terrorist plots in recent years . amar toor leman acknowledges that molenbeek s chronic crime and poverty likely makes it easier for isis to recruit in the area , though he says it s difficult to draw generalizations based on those who have left for syria or iraq . a fundamental problem , he adds , is that young people in molenbeek often feel they have no chance to succeed because there are so few role models they can look up to . we need more models who are successful , and with whom the kids can identify , he says . molenbeek is too often a place where talented people are born , they grow up here , and then they leave . ouassari hopes that molengeek will give rise to a new generation of role models in his neighborhood , though he believes his efforts could energize the broader belgian tech industry , as well . sitting at a cafe terrace near the canal that separates molenbeek from the rest of brussels , he bemoans the lack of diversity at belgian incubators and startups , and the racial or gender based prejudices that have allowed it to persist . thanks to molengeek , we re introducing people who , you can tell , have all this energy they sparkle , he says . we re doing it for molenbeek , ok , but we re also doing it for the tech ecosystem . because right now things are going well , it s really hot . but if the industry doesn t continue to grow and bring in new perspectives , that s it , you re dead . 