 at first glance , mafia iii doesn t look all that unique . it s yet another crime focused open world game that has players starting from the bottom and building up an underworld empire from scratch . it takes place in a fictionalized version of a major american city in this case , new orleans and has lots of shooting and driving . but mafia iii isn t the grand theft auto clone it seems , something that i came to understand after playing through a handful of missions in the game . everything you re doing in the open world is driving you forward , explains creative director haden blackman . lincoln doesn t go off fishing or something everything furthers his goal . when you take on the role of protagonist lincoln clay in his attempt to build a new crime organization to take on the italian mafia , everything action you perform whether it s a wild car chase or tapping a neighborhood s phone lines feeds into that larger motivation to take control of the city s vast criminal underworld . mafia iii takes place in new bordeaux , a virtual version of new orleans in , and stars clay as a vietnam veteran who gets mixed up in the black mob when he returns home from duty . early on in the game the entire organization is killed by the italian mafia , and clay is the sole survivor . with the help of a trio of allies including mafia ii protagonist vito scaletta clay sets to rebuilding a new mob to get revenge . the story is told in part through cutscenes structured to look like an old documentary , so that it almost feels like you re watching events unfold that already happened years ago . everything furthers his goal . after playing an hour long demo of the game , i was struck by how cohesive mafia iii s world and story felt . in most open world games , the narrative and actual game experience are largely separate . your character may be facing inner turmoil about his crumbling life , but that doesn t stop you from stealing cars and joyriding while tuning in to easy listening radio stations instead of continuing on with your violent endgame ambitions . that s not the case in new bordeaux . take clay himself , for instance . if you play uncharted or gta , you might wonder how a regular person can wield a gun like a soldier , and take down dozens of enemies with ease . for clay , it makes a lot more sense he was trained to use a variety of weapons both by the army and the mob . before the game begins , he s had experience in life or death situations . he s familiar with extreme violence . his history also has narrative benefits , allowing the writers comment on the culturally turbulent time during which the game is set the same year as the civil rights act of . the idea that the player might think about race a little bit as they play , to me is important , says blackman . you ll hear things in the game that lincoln would hear as a black man in . the city s police officers will often cast you a suspicious gaze , and in some neighborhoods , store owners will call the cops just because you re hanging outside for too long . this thematic consistency extends to the structure of the game . what you re doing in mafia iii isn t all that different from other open world games driving , shooting , collecting money , upgrading your character . the difference , at least as developer hangar pitches it , is that these are the things clay would really do in his quest to take down the mafia . they re not filler violence . the thematic consistency extends throughout the gameblowing up cargo trucks is fun , sure , but it also is a way to hinder the operations of the mafia . the same goes for wreaking havoc in a mafia owned restaurant or hideout . they re side diversions that also serve a purpose . when you steal cash from one of these establishments , you re not just putting it in your own pocket , you re taking it out of theirs . even character progression is tied to the theme instead of earning new abilities and gear through gaining experience points , you get them by making money and taking control over parts of the city . in order to tell that story in an open world , the team at developer hangar had to redesign and condense the city that inspired it to better facilitate the game experience there s a reason it s called new bordeaux , not new orleans . streets are wider , and the layout eliminates the plentiful degree turns found in real new orleans . the bayou is moved a bit closer to downtown , and the developers also introduce elevation to the relatively flat city in order to make driving around more fun . a high speed car chase isn t the same without a few jumps . that said , there s attention to real details in this fictionalized version of new orleans . you ll hear news broadcasts on the radio that tell not only of your exploits , but also real world events from the time . new bordeaux s many varied districts include not just well known spots like canal street and the french quarter , but also smaller , working class neighborhoods , all designed to look like they did in real life . all of the elements you d expect from new orleans from the neon light signage to the mausoleum like above ground tombs are here , as are some you likely don t even know about . there s so much more to it , says blackman . there s an obligatory scene with mardi gras , but it takes place in the aftermath of the event , so you can see it from a different side . there s so much more to it . getting those details right involves a lot of research . in addition to taking several trips to new orleans over the course of development , the team also read plenty of books and watched a number of documentaries from the period . blackman estimates that he s read a few dozen books on the mob alone , not to mention topics covering everything from the history of voodoo to the city s varied architecture . those specific details were then used as a form of guidance . a lot of it was making sure we could be inspired by it , but not so beholden to it that we had to build the city block for block , blackman says . even after only playing the game for a relatively short period of time , it s clear that when these different elements work together as intended , mafia iii feels distinct and fascinating . the actions i was taking weren t especially unique a lot of shooting , tossing grenades , and hiding behind cover but the reasons for them were . at the end of the day , almost every game boils down to just a handful of mechanics , says blackman . you re shooting , you re driving , you re stalking , depending on the game . so how do you keep that fresh ? for us , we had to make it tied into the narrative . mafia iii is coming to the pc , ps , and xbox one on october th . 