 scientists have identified people who carry genetic mutations that should cause severe diseases , but who are surprisingly healthy . because of this , researchers think their dna , or the environment in which they live , might hold keys to treating conditions that are currently thought of as untreatable . these people were never diagnosedin ampnbspthe study , published today in nature biotechnology , researchers at mount sinai sifted through more than , genomes in search of people who are resistant to the effects of severe mutations , a characteristic that scientists refer to as resilience . they identified people who survived to adulthood despite displaying genetic mutations that are known to cause one of eight severe childhood diseases . among the diseases were cystic fibrosis a chronic lung disease that carries an average lifespan of years and smith lemli opitz syndrome , a disease that causes malformations and behaviors resembling autism . but , for reasons unknown , these individuals were never diagnosed . in recent years , researchers have discovered a number of genetic variants that allow people to remain healthy , despite being at a high risk for disease . ampnbspin , for example , researchers announced that they had identified a young woman with surprisingly low levels of cholesterol in her blood . these low levels were the result of two mutations on a gene called pcsk mutations that eliminated an important cholesterol regulating protein . since then , drug companies have studied the mutations to develop new ampnbspcholesterol lowering drugs . the knowledge that such resistant people exist inspired the researchers at mount sinai to perform a large genetic search to identify more of them . instead of looking for ways to fix the effects of a disease causing mutation , we came up with the idea of trying to identify those individuals who have the mutations , but didn t manifest the disease , says eric schadt , a biologist at icahn school of medicine at mount sinai who co authored the study . the long term goal of the research would be to mimic whatever s protecting those people in others who show symptoms . however nature overcame that defect , that becomes your therapeutic , schadt says . the search for resilient individuals started with gathering a ton of data . through various agreements , the researchers obtained medical and genetic information collected during previous studies including data gathered from the personal genomics company andme for a total of , genomes . then , the scientists used computer programs to search for people who are resilient to serious conditions that manifest in childhood and that can be caused by a single mutation , or illnesses known as childhood mendelian diseases . by weeding out bad and incomplete data , the scientists identified candidates that met their criteria . the group then parsed through their genome and medical files by hand . in the process , researchers found that some candidates had actually been misdiagnosed with other diseases . their illnesses would have been impossible to miss eventually the scientists settled on adults whose illnesses would have been impossible to miss , schadt says . all carried severe mutations for at least one of the following illnesses cystic fibrosis , atelosteogenesis , familial dysautonomia , epidermolysis bullosa simplex , pfeiffer syndrome , autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome , acampomelic campomelic dysplasia , and smith lemli opitz syndrome . schadt admits that people is not a large enough number to determine what s allowing each of them to remain healthy , but it s an important starting point . the study is sort of a wonderful reversal of the way we ve been looking at mendelian disease for the past years , says dietrich stephan , a human geneticist at the university of pittsburgh who wasn t involved in the project . the researchers went through this whole triage process to ensure that these people had mutations for really nasty diseases that are obvious in adulthood , and they built a very convincing case that says that if these people had these diseases , we would know about it . because of this , the study introduced the notion that there are other drug targets besides the disease causing mutations that scientists could use to treat people who are sick , he says . not everyone was impressed by the findings . andrew wilkie , a geneticist at the university of oxford who studies pfeiffer syndrome , says that scientists have already ampnbspdocumented cases where , despite having the mutation mentioned in the study , some members of the same family never develop symptoms . that means that the pfeiffer syndrome mutation doesn t meet the researchers requirement for a genetic variant that unambiguously causes a disease , he says . the implications for pfeiffer syndrome are quite clearly over hyped , he says . in response , schadt told the verge that his team was aware of the case wilkie mentioned . he also thinks the example is a good demonstration of why this type of search for resilient individuals is justified . for him , it highlights the search strategy we advocate in the paper , to search for resilient individuals in extended families with individuals that have the disease , he says . i am a bit surprised it got into nature biotechnology ! but that s not the only problem with the study , wilkie says . one of the biggest limitations is that the researchers couldn t verify their own findings by contacting the individuals . the reason for that has to do with the consent forms that each participant signed when their dna was collected . all consented to sharing their data with other research groups , but many had not given permission to be recontacted by those researchers . that means that there s no way to corroborate the scientists conclusions , wilkie says . sorry not to be more enthusiastic about this work i am a bit surprised it got into nature biotechnology ! david cutler , a population geneticist at emory university , also questions the importance of the findings . the study essentially points out that the disease risk associated with some of the mutations isn t as high as scientists thought , and that isn t surprising at all , he says . the original evidence supporting that each of these mutations always causes a disease was so weak that it would almost be improbable that the authors couldn t find evidence to the contrary , he says . it is a nice little paper , but perhaps more trivial than it sounds . the scientists will launch a researchkit study this yearschadt knows the study has its limitations . he worries , for example , that someone may have sent their sick child s dna to andme under their own name , likely for privacy concerns . if that happened , it would explain why someone would appear to have reached adulthood without becoming ill , he says . it s also possible that someone may be a genetic mosaic a term used to designate people who , by a genetic quirk , have different genetic information in different parts of their body . if that were the case , it s possible that someone s blood sample contained the mutation while the part of their body that should be affected by the resulting disease does not . but for schadt , the take home message of the study isn t that people who are resilient to these diseases exist . the real revelation is that finding resilient individuals by looking at healthy people is possible and it should be done again , he says . to that end , the mount sinai researchers will be launching a new genetic study this year . this time , the researchers will gather their own data using , in part , an app created using apple s researchkit , a software platform that aims to help researchers recruit ios users to participate in studies . people will be able to sign up for the study through the app and even electronically consent to having their dna collected the researchers hope to enroll one million people , schadt says . and this time , the consent process will include a clause about recontacting folks who might be resilient to severe childhood mutations . it s a positive thing your genome could hold the secret to a treatment for others , schadt says . 