 playing star wars battlefront can be like stepping into a scene from the empire strikes back or return of the jedi . the iconic ships , characters , the weapons they re all there , and while the visuals are undoubtedly impressive , it s what you hear that makes it feel like a cohesive part of the star wars universe . the original films were landmarks in sound design , using innovative sound effects and recording techniques along with john williams score to create an aural landscape that has become ingrained in our cultural consciousness , whether you re a fan of the movies or not . bringing that to a video game was a massive undertaking on the part of developers ea dice , one that went well beyond just pulling up a bank of pre recorded sound effects and music cues . as dice audio director ben minto and sound designer david jegutidse explain it , it required them to turn back the clock and uncover the original methods used to create some of the most memorable sound effects in movie history . the audio direction for the project was don t go and create anything new , minto tells me over the phone from dice s headquarters in sweden . all these ideas are already there , so if anybody was adding anything to the game , it was always challenged . where did you get this from ? how have you broken this down ? and if it didn t stick to the star wars way of doing it , it was no . to make that happen , dice first went back to where it all began the sound library at lucasfilm and skywalker sound . initially we were given about hours worth of sound effects , minto says . a lot of these were the original recordings . they have what s called the slate at the beginning , where somebody talks into a microphone and says , doing jawa recordings by shouting in a canyon , or something along those lines . those recordings , along with the broken down sound effects track from the movies themselves , gave minto and his team the raw ingredients to start with . but movies and games are obviously very different mediums , and a sound effects sequence tailored to a specific action scene in a film isn t going to have everything a first person shooter will need . say , for example , the blasters . in the film pretty much every blaster you hear is third person , minto explains . while that can serve as a definitive example of what the weapon should sound like , the various conditions of the game require permutation upon permutation what the blaster will sound like up close , far away , or yards off to the right inside a hanger on hoth . we already have that learning from taking a gun and putting it into the battlefield world . so then we also knew what techniques we had to apply to take a blaster and put it into the battlefront world . i spent a couple of days recording wire fences in iceland . balanced with that was the fact that battlefront has a much wider array of space age weaponry compared to the original films . there s maybe about four different blaster sounds in the movies , jegutidse says , but we have or something infantry blasters , plus additional abilities . so it s important that we build those new blasters from elements that are familiar to the star wars soundscape and make it seem seamless when next to a familiar blaster . that meant going back to the same techniques star wars sound designer ben burtt used to create some of the sound effects in . we started off with the slinky spring , which is probably the common one , where you just throw that up and stick it to the roof , and twang it , minto says . i spent a couple of days recording wire fences in iceland . and i also went to the largest free standing antenna in western europe , which is about . kilometers high , because that had the longest guide wires , which is the way ben burtt originally did the blasters . i sort of snuck up and tried to twang it , and it didn t make any sound at all . so that was an hour round trip to get nothing , he laughs . a clip from the wire recording , which became ambience for the planet sullust . jegutidse also incorporated things like mechanical movements , ice pings recorded underwater , and metal slides to create the many blasters of battlefront . just using organic sources , not really synthetic nothing digital , he says . that s usually avoided , because that s not part of how these sounds were originally created . as the pair talk , it s clear they have a real reverence for the work burtt and the original star wars audio team came up with minto goes so far as to call star wars the audio holy grail , saying it s one of the reasons the modern concept of a sound designer exists in the first place . but their insistence on mimicking the techniques used in a film that was made years ago isn t just fan service it s actually the best way to create things that actually sound like they re part of that world . taking the pitch up or down gave you that star wars feel instantly . we have access to so many tools these days , minto says . and you think , right star wars ! i m going to do this , this , this , and this ! and you ve got all those software plug ins and it didn t sound like star wars when you did it . and if you go back and look at the old documentaries or the making of specials , you pretty much had a reel to reel tape machine . you could record a sound and play it at half speed or twice as fast , as those were your options . the screech of the original tie fighter , for example , was the sound of an elephant , slowed down , and mixed with the sound of car rolling on wet pavement as recorded through a long tube . actually getting a good recording and taking the pitch up or down gave you that star wars feel instantly , without going over the top . so it was almost like keep it simple stupid , and trying to stick to the old processes would actually be a better way . it s an example of using the right tools to create the most authentic sounding result , even if the technology is outdated by modern standards . well designed films have their own visual and aural vocabulary a specific way their worlds look and sound that makes them recognizable in an instant , and for battlefront to feel like star wars it needed to pick up on all of those nuances including the in jokes . remember in the original star wars when luke shoots a stormtrooper , who then falls into a vast chasm with a ludicrous , nearly comical cry ? that s called a wilhelm scream , and shows up in every star wars movie , indiana jones movie , and pretty much anything ben burtt has ever touched . and while it wasn t present in the public beta of battlefront , minto and jegutidse assure me it s definitely in the shipping version of the game . in the original wilhelm recording , which i think was done for a film called distant drums , there s six different takes of it . we actually use all six of those , minto says . but my favorite scream to be added there s a bit in return of the jedi where chewie swings between the trees , and he does that mimics tarzan call . that s called a weissmuller . so when people ask about the wilhelm i say yep , we ve got the wilhelm , but we ve got the weissmuller , which is named after johnny weissmuller , the original tarzan actor . what was interesting was in the open beta we actually didn t have the wilhelm scream in there yet , but some people on reddit said they thought there was too much wilhelm in the game , jegutidse deadpans . i can practically hear minto shrugging over the phone . people hear it when they want to . read next star wars battlefront is perfect for couch co op 