 every january , tech makers come to the consumer electronics show in las vegas to promise disruption and revolution . before we embark on the edition of ces , which is less than a week away , we re taking a look back to see how the last batch of hyped up announcements has fared . how have the past months gone for the innovations and products that grabbed the headlines of ces ? dell xps let s start off with the least controversial of all the products introduced at ces . dell s xps came in looking like the future of windows laptops , and it spent the year as the top choice in that category . it made a great first impression with its practically nonexistent display bezels and high end construction materials , and backed it up with good performance and ergonomics . none of the xps s aluminum clad luster has faded , and a refresh late in the year with intel s updated skylake processors only made it better . dell also extended the edge to edge infinity display to its xps model , underlining the success and popularity of its ces debutant . gogoro smartscooter the verge s best in show from ces did not disappoint . gogoro s grand plan is rather more ambitious and holistic than being a mere scooter , but that s where it all starts . in january the taiwanese startup stirred imaginations with its irresistibly cute personal transporter , and by july it was being warmly received in its native capital of taipei . a city teeming with scooters of every type and price was nevertheless smitten with the electric gogoro . from taipei to amsterdam and beyondfollowing its winning pilot scheme in taipei , gogoro announced it will expand to europe in , starting with amsterdam . due to the scooter s design it only exchanges battery packs and cannot be plugged into a conventional electric charging station gogoro has to roll out on a city by city basis , building citywide grids of battery exchanges as it goes . that s not an easy or cheap process , but the company is making rapid progress and its future looks bright . americans can probably expect news about a san francisco expansion before is through , perhaps even as soon as the upcoming ces . asctec firefly one of the big themes of ces was the rapid improvement in drone technology and capabilities . numerous companies showed off flying devices capable of following their user , with some even touting degree selfies . german company ascending technologies brought the most impressive example to the show with its obstacle avoiding firefly hexacopter , which played a starring role in intel s keynote presentation . quadcopters , hexacopters , awesomecoptersas the year has progressed , it s been encouraging to see asctec s products which are intended for industrial and research purposes being matched by drones that are closer to commercial availability . the dji matrice , which was introduced in the summer , laid claim to being the first consumer drone with the ability to see and avoid objects in its path . most of the other future facing demonstrations of ces have also made their way into mainstream drones by now , setting the stage for another big jump forward at the show . asctec will no doubt want to show improvements too , as its obstacle avoidance tech was surpassed a month ago by an mit drone that autonomously weaved its way through tree branches at a formidable mph . lg g flex lg did almost everything right with the curved g flex . it took the flawed design of its original g flex smartphone and refined it smartly . the flex was a smaller , more manageable device that nevertheless retained a unique look and a very high end spec sheet . capable of withstanding great bending pressure , it was also one of the more durable devices introduced in . its fancy back cover featured the second generation of lg s self healing plastic , which can recover from scratches in about seconds . and yes , you could buy the g flex in a sumptuous shade of candy apple red . has there ever been a successful smartphone that launched at ces ? by lg s own account , the flex series has always been a design exercise more than anything . it represents the korean conglomerate s most advanced technologies , such as the flexible plastic oled display from lg display and curved batteries from lg chem , and it hints at things lg might do with its future flagship smartphones . but what held the g flex back wasn t so much its experimental nature as it was the rather prosaic issues of price and performance . for all its specs , this smartphone didn t perform as quickly and beautifully as it promised , and with a limited release and high cost , it never saw any great adoption . the future of curved phones is far from certain , following the underwhelmed response to lg s efforts and to samsung s galaxy round . on the one hand , current consumer demands are clearly geared toward obtaining more performance and battery life from phones , not more quirky form factors on the other hand , these handsets are pushing design boundaries and thus are always on the brink of delivering something groundbreaking . for now , at least , the curves seem to have been shelved . zboard with the breakthrough of so called hoverboards into the mainstream , has been a big year for electric rideables , but not for the one that garnered the most attention at ces in january the zboard electric skateboard . it arrived in vegas seeking support for a crowdfunding campaign , and it promptly secured nearly , from indiegogo backers . alas , its development has been slow , and the company only recently started shipping boards to beta testers . a year after its big moment in the spotlight , the zboard is still a work in progress . the ignominy of being overshadowed by hoverboardsthe advantage hoverboards enjoy over more serious projects like the zboard is one of price and convenience . they re hastily put together and questions have arisen about their safety , but their lower price has prompted many to buy them on a whim . to compete with them , the zboard and other electric skateboards like it will have to prove their superior reliability and quality over the long run . pono player looking like a segment from a toblerone chocolate bar , the pono player was one of the most charming and fascinating launches of ces . neil young s high res audio player was built around simple controls , a simple display , and a simple mission delivering high fidelity music to a wider , more mainstream audience . it was such an appealing proposition that over , people contributed in excess of . million to its kickstarter campaign before it even arrived in las vegas . the reception to the pono has been decidedly mixed and its future is uncertainbut the pono player s fortunes this year have been mixed . it launched to a chorus of critical disapproval , which revolved around the simple fact that regular music listeners just couldn t hear any difference between the pono s high res tracks and conventional , compressed mp s . for a music player tied to a pono music service where users have to purchase high res versions of songs they already own for more than each the pono s failure to display clearly superior quality seemed fatal . financial struggles hampered the company in august , by which point its chief , neil young , admitted that he and his team were doing everything they could just to keep pono alive . at the same time , though , he did point out that tens of thousands of pono players and hundreds of thousands of tracks had been sold , and later in the year he had news of an expansion to canada and the uk . pono closed off the year by collecting a pair of awards , so its promises of higher quality playback appear to have been justified , even if the benefits of high res audio remain dubious at best . audeze el the pono player could also be found at the audeze pronounced like odyssey booth at ces , serving as a bright yellow marker to attract people to this boutique headphone maker s stand . those who perused audeze s offerings were rewarded with a listen to the excellent el planar magnetic headphones that the company had just launched . costing , they actually represented a significant move down in price class for audeze , whose flagship lcd collection is often compared against sennheiser s hd for the title of best overall headphones available . audeze made further progress in by introducing a lightning connected pair , called the el titanium , which integrates an amp and a digital to analog converter into the cable . this makes it possible to get the best and loudest sound from a pair of true audiophile headphones while relying on just an iphone as the music source . big headphones and big sound at a big , but declining , pricethe el has been a clear success for audeze , which has spread its name further than ever before by making its products more accessible and friendlier to mobile devices . the company has asserted its position as a pioneer in the movement to take high end personal audio on the move , and ces is likely to show many competitors introducing their efforts at catching up . mercedes benz f the self driving car seemed to be everyone s darling at ces , but mercedes went furthest in its embrace of the futuristic motoring experience . its f concept car , subtitled luxury in motion , featured four swiveling passenger seats , an array of touchscreen displays , and extra advanced features like gesture and eye tracking . running on hydrogen and built out of carbon fiber reinforced plastic , it s an all out rejection of everything conventional and a true vehicle for research and experimentation . mercedes benz offered test rides inside the functional f a couple of months after its big ces unveiling , and the car has gone on to set the design language for all of mercedes concepts that followed . the entire f package is very far away , but its most practical elements are likely to start appearing in production cars before too long . lg webos smartwatch before samsung s gear s which was as much a treatise on the benefits of round watches as it was a great product in its own right the most exciting and interesting smartwatch out there was lg s webos timepiece , briefly teased at ces . introduced by audi rather than lg , it was demonstrated as a futuristic way to unlock your car with the effortlessness of wireless nfc communications . its appeal was that it was a watch , a key for your car , and a smart device with cellular connectivity that could perform a variety of advanced tasks . audi s focus on automotive applications , such as checking and controlling the status of a car remotely , didn t discourage curiosity even from public transit users the watch was just too attractive and , at the time , unique . webos isn t deadthe good looks of the watch itself were carried over in the software within , which was tailored to make the most of a round face and already included a number of apps designed for a circular interface . everything worked smoothly and quickly , with webos making its android wear competition feel unwieldy and sluggish by comparison . much of what made this watch stand out in january has now been either matched or surpassed by samsung s gear s , however there s still plenty of room for attractive , nicely designed smartwatches . audi s teaser for this watch promised it for , and the latest word from lg is that it s still on track . expectations are that lg will also be introducing webos smartwatch models under its own brand in the new year . the ces appearance can , therefore , be deemed a success it whetted appetites and confirmed consumer interest in developing a geekily beloved operating system into a new smartwatch platform . htc s connected future not a singular product , but the vision of a connected future described by htc was one of the bigger announcements at ces in terms of potential impact . the smartphone maker was on the brink of a transformation that would turn it into the vendor of connected devices and experiences . it was emblematic of the connect everything ! theme that pervaded much of ces , with every company having its own take on the internet of things and its own philosophy on how to turn it into reality . none have made any huge strides in this direction since then , and htc is once again an instructive example of it . the awesome stuff htc promised for has been bumped to htc s plan included the connected home , the connected life and self , and connected entertainment . it wasn t known at the time , but ces marked the company s first , cagey hint at the htc vive vr headset that would be revealed a month later at mobile world congress . regrettably , the vive s release date was bumped from the holiday season of all the way to april in the new year , and a similar fate befell the accompanying htc grip fitness wearable . by this point in the year , htc would ideally have realized a range of re branded devices , putting hardware behind its promises of fundamental change . that hasn t happened for the taiwanese company yet , and its struggles to diversify are illustrative of the broader industry challenge of tackling unfamiliar sectors . car companies are getting involved in personal tech and connectivity , while phone makers are dabbling with auto technology , and everyone is experimenting with the potential of novelties like drones and vr . ces was like every ces that came before it and like every ces that is yet to come . it had obvious hits like the dell xps , unlikely successes like the gogoro , and a fair share of both predictable and surprising disappointments . what distinguishes every year from the next , however , is the specifics of those winners and losers . gogoro s strong development and expansion are nudging the entire electric vehicle industry forward , while companies like pono and audeze are making audiophile technology more accessible to the masses , with varying degrees of success . everything that happens at the upcoming ces in a week s time will be informed by the fortunes of the products first revealed at ces a year ago the successes will breed imitators and emulators , while the failures will be taken as lessons for what not to do . such is the circle of tech life . 