 it was the mid s , and to many people , video games were synonymous with derivatives of doom and quake . zip through the aisles at the local computer store and the mayhem mounts quickly , the new york times wrote , assessing the computer gaming landscape . ravage , no flesh shall be spared , and assassin shoot first , think fast . . . or get smoked are typical cd rom titles . but a charismatic designer named theresa duncan offered something different . in , duncan and artist monica gesue created chop suey , a whimsical point and click adventure game that provided an alternative to both gritty shooters and pink drenched barbie adventures . over the next two years , duncan would follow up with two more games , smarty and zero zero . aimed at young girls , the games were clever enough to appeal to adults of all genders . narrated by a young david sedaris , their non linear stories , folk art stylings , and cultural references were cute without being condescending . we like dime store , homemade looking things , duncan told entertainment weekly , which named her and gesue s chop suey its cd rom of the year in , things that look like they might be made by kids for the school play . the discs are more a series of magical realist vignettes than a traditional video game . in smarty , for example , players experience the summer vacation of protagonist mimi smartypants . every scene , whether it takes place in a cinema or a bubble bath , is full of hidden animations and opportunities for play . the tiny garage holds a jewelry making kit , a paint by numbers set , a working pinball table , and a coconut that briefly transports the player to hawaii . but as even entertainment weekly noted back in , the interactive cd rom industry hadn t lived up to its hype . after zero zero , duncan moved from game making into film and blogging , and like many old games , chop suey and its follow ups fell into obscurity and unavailability . in , she became better known for a sudden , mysterious suicide , especially after her longtime partner jeremy blake who helped illustrate the games killed himself a week later . since then , chop suey has been discussed on forums and in retrospectives , particularly a piece by critic jenn frank , but it and the rest of her work remained inaccessible to the vast majority of people . last year , though , art organization rhizome launched a kickstarter to put duncan s games online for free . the campaign is only the latest in a series of projects addressing the real , pressing need for digital preservation . groups like the library of congress and the internet archive have made strides toward capturing large swathes of modern media , addressing the thorny problems of capturing something that s dependent on increasingly obsolete technology . and a great deal of this work has gone beyond just storing things behind locked doors . over the past few years , for example , the internet archive has released thousands of old arcade , atari , and ms dos games , all of which can be played in a browser . if it s small , it looks old . the theresa duncan project is led by rhizome archivist dragan espenschied . starting today , all of duncan s games will be available online in fact , you can play all of them at the top of this page . unlike the internet archive , which essentially offers a sophisticated emulator for games that players download , rhizome is streaming the work from its own cloud servers . the somewhat laggy process only works because duncan s games don t require the twitch reflexes of an arcade title or shooter , but it makes it easier to preserve their luxurious interactive art , full of sound effects and hand painted tableaux . streaming the game also lets espenschied add little touches that would be awkward or impossible in a downloadable version . when players select a title , they re treated to the sight of mac os booting up , then a mouse navigating to launch one of the games they re being emulated inside the operating system . it s not the same as using an actual s computer , but it helps remind players how the original audience would have seen it . and it can help contextualize the other differences . espenscheid describes the little emulation window as a kind of theater , reminding people of the limits that helped shape the look and feel of the games like their bright , flat toned graphics . they only had colors , yeah ? and they threw everything in photoshop with bit color , and then it was dithered down , he says . so it s easier then to understand that this was maybe not an artistic choice , but just a necessity , if you present it small . if it s small , it looks old . if the fonts are not smooth , but if they re blocky and pixely , it looks old . if the mouse cursor is just black and white . it looks old . . . . it just enhances the perception of the piece . before chop suey , rhizome used a similar technique to host artist cory arcangel s bomb iraq . originally exhibited in a gallery , bomb iraq recreates the contents of a s macintosh tv that arcangel found at the salvation army , including a homemade hypercard game of the same name . while the game was the original focus , the emulator lets users explore the entire computer minus some identifying details , finding a window into the lives of its unknown users . as our records move from physical documents to computers , and local computers to social networks like twitter and instagram , dedicated archival work is what will let future generations experience the flow of our lives , and the things we played , read , or watched during them . it is not like this is the first time women were into games . it s entirely possible to play theresa duncan s games as beautiful little experiments , without worrying at all about their social context . but the project is also meant to highlight something that s been lost as history was rewritten and streamlined . specifically , the rhizome team was inspired by gamergate , a political movement that accuses feminists of attempting to destroy video game culture with less violent or woman focused work . when you can play a game from the doom era that , as frank puts it , is richard scarry s busytown as revised by bratmobile , it s slightly harder to see gone home an exploration game about s riot grrrls that is reviled by gamergate as a new and threatening idea . more generally , rhizome is chipping away at the overgeneralized view that technology is a historically male field , where women are just now struggling to get a foothold . it is not like this is the first time that women were into games , says espenscheid . it s not the first time that women are active on the internet . if you look , there have been all kinds of people making web pages when there were no graphical editors , when you had to type in html code , actually . when you say , oh god , nobody can do that , we need some white boys in hoodies to do this for us ! every kind of person has been doing that , in the s for example . but this is very easily forgotten . by putting duncan s games online , espenschied and rhizome want to create their own narrative , in which pastel picture books can sit comfortably alongside guns and gibs in gaming history . we want to kind of progress the discussion by bringing a continuity into it , he says . so that you don t have to start from zero every time . update april , the original version of this article did not mention chop suey co creator monica gesue . we regret the oversight . 