 after companies shut down and collectors lose interest , the library of congress is supposed to keep our cultural history intact . but digital media has turned our understanding of preservation on its head . it s no longer enough to just get a copy of something an ebook can be set to self destruct , an mmo can be nothing without the people who play it , and a streaming video can have a million digital copies and no physical ones . when buzzfeed journalist joseph bernstein profiled the library of congress video game collection , he included a tantalizing reference to how new media and traditional archival can collide the library s processes are , by the standards of st century media consumption , antiquated . netflix has to print special vhs copies of their streaming hits like orange is the new black and house of cards for copyright consideration . it seemed too weird to be true . does netflix , a company that s paved the way for online only tv and super high definition video , really have to ship its material for long term preservation on a storage medium that s barely been relevant since the s ? netflix wasn t able to provide the verge with details of its submission process . as it turns out , though , the library of congress was as bemused as we were . director of communications gayle osterberg told the verge that netflix isn t submitting its shows on vhs , but it is sending some on tape and the process is part of a long , complicated relationship between media producers , copyright registrars , and digital conservationists . netflix s submission process isn t so different to broadcast tv snetflix might stream its shows online instead of broadcasting them over cable , but its submission process is fairly normal , says library of congress moving image section head mike mashon . writers , musicians , filmmakers , and other artists regularly register their work with the us copyright office in order to make it easier to sue for infringement , and as part of the process , they send a copy for video , a physical copy that s examined by registrars and then stored by the library of congress . it s in studios interest to do it as quickly as possible , in whatever format is available , well before a show is pressed to blu ray and put on store shelves whether we re talking about netflix or traditional producers . two and a half men , i m sure , is shot digitally , edited digitally , distributed digitally , and the only time it ever sees a hard copy during its initial run is when it s registered for copyright , says mashon . these physical copies aren t the final storage method they re a way to get the file to the library , which then uploads them to its database . netflix sends house of cards on dvd r , and orange is the new black comes on betacam sp , a professional level and far more successful successor to the betamax the orange is the new black tapes are slightly larger than vhs cassettes , but as seen above , they re similar at a glance . standard definition betacam and its high resolution cousin hdcam are used to make master copies of videos for distribution among broadcasters , and the library prefers them to dvds and blu ray discs aimed at consumers . feature films are submitted in mm whenever possible , regardless of how they re shot . but video , from major tv shows to home movies , comes in a variety of formats , and not always the ones that the library would like . we really don t see that much vhs anymore it s just not out there . lots of dvds and dvd rs , says mashon , who admits he s not delighted to get house of cards a show subscribers can watch in k ultra high definition on a standard definition disc . it s especially galling because no matter how they re submitted , they re just headed for the data banks as soon as possible . writing orange is the new black to a lower resolution cassette means that a slightly substandard version will be the one that gets stored in perpetuity . the originals are kept as long as possible in case there are problems with the transfer to digital storage , although formats like dvd r start to decay after a couple of years . the oldest tape , by contrast , is over half a century old it s a recording of president dwight eisenhower , the first known videotape recorded in color . the library is not delighted to get house of cards on a dvd rtoday , asking tv studios to deliver digital files on potentially lower quality tapes and discs instead of transmitting them directly is an awkward stopgap . mashon says he s nearing the end of a pilot program that allows studios to transfer files directly to the library of congress and the us copyright office . it makes sending the highest quality version of a file easier , and relying less on physical storage could insulate the library from disasters like the japanese tsunami of , which shut down production of hdcam cassettes and caused a temporary frenzy of hoarding and rationing in hollywood . we had copyright registrants calling us up and saying hey , we usually register on hdcam , but we can t get hdcam stock anymore . can we give you a dvd ? and we had to say yes , says mashon . that s one reason why we really got the program going pretty seriously . while he wouldn t disclose the names of any partners , he said the library isn t terribly far away from being able to launch it on a limited basis . until then , the library of congress owns a st century streaming tv show in a format first released in , with printed labels that look like they re meant for a high school a v collection . for posterity , the fact that the library of congress is working off this instead of a direct , full resolution copy of the show isn t ideal . for now , to anyone not intimately familiar with the world of film , it s like discovering an alternate cyberpunk continuum where streaming doesn t exist , netflix refers to a complex sneakernet of cassette tape couriers , and reed hastings is probably fighting for faster access to bike lanes . 