 do you remember second life ? set up by developer linden lab in , it was the faithful replication of our modern world where whoring , drinking , and fighting were acceptable . it was the place where big brands moved in as neighbors and hawked you their wares online . for many , it was the future ampmdash our lives were going to be lived online , as avatars represented us in nightclubs , bedrooms , and banks made of pixels and code . in the mid s , every self respecting media outlet sent reporters to the second life world to cover the parallel universe beat . the bbc , now bloomberg businessweek , and nbc nightly news all devoted time and coverage to the phenomenon . amazon , american apparel , and disney set up shop in second life , aiming to capitalize on the momentum it was building ampmdash and to play to the in world consumer base , which at one point in boasted a gdp of million . of course , stratospheric growth doesn amprsquot continue forever , and when the universe amprsquos expansion slowed and the novelty of people living parallel lives wore off , the media moved on . so did businesses ampmdash but not users . linden lab doesn amprsquot share historical user figures , but it says the population of second life has been relatively stable for a number of years . you might not have heard a peep about it since the halcyon days of , but that doesn amprsquot mean second life has gone away . far from it this past june it celebrated its th birthday , and it is still a strong community . a million active users still log on and inhabit the world every month , and , newbies drop into the community every day to see what second life is about . i was one of them , and i found out that just because second life is no longer under the glare of the media amprsquos spotlight , it doesn amprsquot mean the culture inside the petri dish isn amprsquot still growing . packing tape and pyrotechnicspacking tape and pyrotechnicsone of second life amprsquos million strong population is fee berry , a year old mother of three children who lives in middlesex , a leafy suburb of london , england . and though her second life avatar , caliandris pendragon , is cool and calm , i amprsquove caught her at a bad time . ampldquoi amprsquom moving house , amprdquo she explains . in the background i can hear boxes being heaved back and forth , tape unspooling and being wrapped around packaged items . at one point in our conversation she has to ask her son to keep the noise down . berry became a stay at home mom after the birth of her first son and started gaming in , playing riven , a more puzzle centric sequel to myst , a popular adventure game first released in . both were developed by cyan worlds , at the time simply called cyan . a friend introduced berry to riven when she bought a second hand apple macintosh she was initially wary , telling the friend , ampldquoi don amprsquot think i like those sorts of things . amprdquo she finished the game within three weeks . she stuck with games produced by cyan for the next six years , graduating to uru , their mmo adventure game . when cyan discontinued support for uru live , the online section of the game , berry , like many others , moved on to an alternative . as with everyone entering their second life , she was dropped from the sky . her feet first hit the turf of the new virtual world on february th , . i can shrug off my role as a mother . ampldquoit amprsquos like every toy you ever had , all rolled into one , amprdquo she tells me in awed tones , recalling the power of the game to keep her playing nearly a decade on . it amprsquos also liberating , she explains , allowing her to forget about the kids , the responsibilities , and the extra few inches she amprsquod rather not have . it lets her cut free . in second life she doesn amprsquot have to be a graying year old mom she can keep the bright eyes and warm smile , but can pinch , tuck , and pluck the other bits so that she becomes year old pendragon , a vampish babe with full lips , long jet black hair , and heavy eyeliner . it s like every toy you ever had , all rolled into one . ampldquoi can shrug off my role as a mother , amprdquo she explains . ampldquoi can swear or misbehave in second life in a way i couldn amprsquot in real life . amprdquothe second ever person i meet in second life , in a drop off zone , proves that point . house chemistry amprsquos been in second life for nearly six years . the year old lives in new orleans , and may or may not look like his in universe avatar a foot inch tall man wearing all black , with thick brown dreadlocks down to his waist ampmdash he won amprsquot say . regardless , house chemistry amprsquos warm and welcoming , and seems to enjoy taking me under his wing , explaining the universe to me . when i ask him what he does in second life , i amprsquom expecting him to advise me to talk to people , make friends , and take some classes . he replies a little differently ampldquoanything i want . walk near me . i amprsquoll set this place on fire , watch . amprdquoand so he does , under a clock showing , on one of second life amprsquos introductory islands . truthfully , i amprsquom not impressed it amprsquos a pretty poor quality animation with blocky gray smoke and weirdly flesh colored balls i presume are meant to represent the actual flames . still , i politely show my admiration and ask him whether he amprsquod want to set stuff on fire in real life . ampldquono , amprdquo he says . there amprsquos a brief pause . ampldquotake your time . you amprsquoll learn how to do all kinds of cool shit . amprdquoi try and move the conversation on , asking house chemistry what he does in real life . ampldquoi build things , amprdquo he replies . i amprsquom intrigued by this person who builds things in real life , then sets polygonal representations of them on fire in second life , and say so out loud . he ignores it , moves on , shuts down the conversation . ampldquoyou got it now , amprdquo he says . ampldquoenjoy . amprdquoyou a wife or a men ? ampldquoyou a wife or a men ? amprdquothe concept of an avatar in the sense we know today first emerged in the s from the lucasarts game habitat and the cyberpunk novels of the time . philip rosedale , who created second life , describes an avatar as ampldquothe representation of your chosen embodied appearance to other people in a virtual world amprdquo ampmdash one that often blunts the harsh edges and tones fat into muscle . there are people like berry who use their second lives as a way to play a different role , a smudged mirror reflection of themselves ampmdash and that amprsquos great . but there are those who believe that identity in second life is too opaque . on my first day in universe i meet larki merlin , a something german second lifer who likes to punctuate his conversation with written word emoticons . ampldquoi am all time on big smile , amprdquo are his first words to me . his next words are to the point ampldquoyou a wife or a men ? amprdquo merlin amprsquos asking that for a good reason he stepped away from second life two years ago ampldquofor a long time ampmdash too many crazy people , only sex and lies . of the girls are in rl real life boys . amprdquothis might not be far off the truth berry tells me that at one point linden lab said six of every ten women in second life were men behind their avatars . one of the most famous women in second life , jade lily , is a male member of the us air force named keith morris . morris real life married another second lifer , coreina grace real name meghan sheehy in . despite this , merlin amprsquos back , but he admits that there are slim pickings in the universe he amprsquos met maybe two of a hundred friends in second life ampmdash and ampldquoyou waste hours to find them . amprdquo he amprsquos back , but barely . there amprsquos huge areas of second life that just look like suburbia and people will build a house and put a tv in it . every story has two sides . i asked berry about her experience in second life has it made her more comfortable , more confident ? has it changed her first life persona in any way ? there amprsquos a long pause . ampldquoerr amphellip it amprsquos made me realize other people are not as scary as they appear to be . amprdquo the first person berry ever encountered in a virtual world was in uru . ampldquoand i ran away , amprdquo she admits softly . ampldquoi don amprsquot know what i was afraid of , really . but they spoke to me and i ran away , because it was a stranger . amprdquo as a woman , berry says , the interaction was completely the opposite of what she amprsquod been taught ampldquoyou wouldn amprsquot strike up a conversation with an unknown male because there are dangers associated with that . amprdquo but when she plucked up the courage to stay and chat , ampldquoit made me realize i amprsquod been frightened of that percent instead of realizing percent are decent . amprdquowhen mainstream media outlets touched down in second life seven years ago they tended to focus on the strangeness of it all . people were having sex through a game and dressing up as foxes and kittens . the reality , says tom boellstorff , a professor of anthropology at the university of california , irvine , is more prosaic ampldquohumans already live many different kinds of life online is just one more of those kinds of lives . amprdquo ampldquoyou can do anything in second life , amprdquo boellstorff continues , his voice rising in a lilt . ampldquoyou can do crazy stuff . you can be a ball of light or you can be feet tall , or you can be a child , or a dog , or whatever . amprdquoyou can do all that . but most people ? ampldquothere amprsquos huge areas of second life that just look like suburbia and people will build a house and put a tv in it , amprdquo he says . ampldquothey amprsquoll watch tv with their friends online . amprdquo an entire world of opportunities out there and people choose to be couch potatoes . it is , eerily , just like real life . ghost towns and boom townsghost towns and boom towns ampldquowe thought of second life as complementing your first life , amprdquo hunter walk , one of the original linden lab team members working on the universe from its launch , tells me . it was conceived as a space that gave you a set of choices that were missing from reality . ampldquoin your first life you don amprsquot necessarily get to fly . here you can fly . in your first life you can amprsquot choose what you look like . here you can choose what you look like ampmdash and it amprsquos malleable . amprdquothat changeability extended right back to the developers . ampldquothe story of the internet in general is one of unintended consequences , amprdquo begins boellstorff . ampldquoit amprsquos about repurposing and doing things the original designers did not design for . amprdquo as the custodians of an internet based community , second life amprsquos developers were little different . when they began sketching out the universe early in development , linden lab deliberately left things open ended . ampldquothe early users showed us the way to where the community was , amprdquo explains walk . that community is now being overlooked , believes berry , who began working for linden lab making textures and music in june , and was fired in june after a dispute over money . ampldquoafter five years working quite closely with them , i still don amprsquot feel i really know what the culture is , amprdquo she says . ampldquothey simply never seem to understand their own product . it amprsquos ludicrous that they don amprsquot understand how people use second life , what they like it for , what they want it for . amprdquothere amprsquos no such thing as an average second lifer , but some people just don amprsquot get it , no matter how long they spend in world . berry tried , years back , to convince her mother and siblings to join the world . ampldquoi amprsquove had very little luck . if i can amprsquot get them to try it they amprsquore obviously not going to understand it . and it amprsquos really hard to explain it to anybody else . amprdquo a giant bubble floated down from on high . ampldquostep in , amprdquo she saidfor the longest time i didn amprsquot get it . i amprsquod spent several weeks pottering about , teleporting from one place to another . i stood on a dock of a bay , overlooking an azure sea and hearing the whistle of the wind . i walked through a cold , gun metal gray futuristic world full of walkways that reminded me of any number of first person shooters . i amprsquod chased a woman , inexplicably sprinting , arms flailing , through the palazzos of milan , looking at the fashion boutiques . i amprsquod visited london ampmdash in reality a tired collection of worn cliches , a cardboard cut out of the beatles crossing the street down from a roundabout with a red telephone box on one corner . it was kind of cool , but it was also corny . then berry invited me to nemesis . it amprsquos where she lives in universe , all rolling green hills and gated houses . berry ampmdash or pendragon , as she was in this world ampmdash wanted to show me just how magical second life could get . she had in her possession starax amprsquos wand . created by a user , it was at the time the most expensive item a user could buy in second life . clever coding meant that if its possessor mentioned certain words in game ampmdash ampldquomoney , amprdquo for example ampmdash the universe would change around it a briefcase full of cash would descend from the heavens and spit out greenbacks , for example . the wand has been largely outmoded by updates , but some commands still work . we were standing outside the perimeter wall of berry amprsquos house , green grass beneath our feet . her avatar hunched over and moved her hands on an invisible keyboard the animation shows when the real person is typing . in the chat box appeared a word . ampldquobubble . amprdquoa giant bubble floated down from on high . ampldquostep in , amprdquo she said . i did . and the bubble rose , and i saw a bird amprsquos eye view of nemesis . i was suspended in mid air in a giant bubble , and could roll over the shoreline high above the sea . i couldn amprsquot help but smile finally , i amprsquod found my niche . people come to the second life universe for different reasons some go there to escape their reality and to stretch the boundaries of their lives in ways forbidden by the constraints of their bodies or the norms of society . some go to meet friends and family there are some who want to create buildings , paintings , and whole new worlds . and some ampmdash big companies and small entrepreneurs ampmdash hope to make a living . there amprsquos no such thing as an average second lifer , but some people just don amprsquot get it even after the deluge dried up there amprsquos a booming economy in second life berry began taking meetings in with companies looking to extend their reach into the universe . her knowledge of the world was her selling point , helping companies avoid missteps in this strange , new place . ampldquoreportedly adidas spent a million dollars on their sim in second life , amprdquo berry says with a laugh . what it got them was a single store selling sneakers . problem was , the sneakers slowed down the universe ampldquoanybody running an event would say if you amprsquove got adidas trainers on , take them off because they were lagging the sim so bad ! amprdquo ironically , berry says , it was when the big companies descended on second life that the place felt most like a ghost town , and not a boom town they didn amprsquot get the ethos , didn amprsquot engage , and left empty offices and buildings . berry amprsquos earnings from second life have varied enormously a poor year can see her earn amppound , , for her consultancy work , as well as creating music and textures for avatars and locations in world a few years ago she specialized in providing christmas trees to those looking to get into the festive spirit . ampldquoit amprsquos not a fortune , amprdquo she explains . ampldquoi haven amprsquot earned a lot of money from it . amprdquo but it pays the bills . second life isn amprsquot a whole new world ampmdash that amprsquos something everyone , from berry , to walk , to boellstorff , has been keen to stress . for those truly committed , who have property , and cash , and a business , and money invested in the universe , it amprsquos simply an ongoing extension of their lives ampldquothat amprsquos why we chose the name , amprdquo walk says . settling a civilizationsettling a civilizationsecond life has survived its first years , but every society rises and ampmdash inevitably ampmdash falls . so what of linden lab amprsquos creation ? will people still be living second lives in ? ampldquoi wouldn amprsquot be surprised to see second life around for quite a while , amprdquo says hunter walk . it amprsquos been seven years since he left the prosaically crazy universe , but he still remains on its periphery . for a couple of years after leaving linden lab he occasionally dropped back in on the world , teleporting from place to place and checking out the sights . ampldquoit never quite got to the point where it was something i amprsquod be able to integrate into my life , amprdquo he says regretfully . instead , he now reads about it , takes pictures , and watches videos . tom boellstorff looks to history for precedent . lambdamoo was the original moo object oriented mud , a multi user dungeon game . set up so long ago that its creator , pavel curtis , can amprsquot remember whether it went online in or , it lives on today through the benevolence and hard work of a core group of volunteers that refuses to let the world die . fee berry amprsquos less sure . resident for nearly a decade , she amprsquos seen a lot of areas of second life fall victim to the decay that amprsquos part of a relentlessly forward looking world ampldquothey haven amprsquot really preserved the history of second life , as far as i can see , and don amprsquot really rate it as anything worth saving . i think that amprsquos a shame . amprdquoher second life relationship became a real life romancefired by linden lab and exasperated at the direction the universe is taking , she amprsquos spending more time in opensim , a financially free and less constrained version of the second life architecture , working on paid projects . there amprsquos one drawback it doesn amprsquot have a strong enough community or economy ampmdash yet . if it gets those , it wins hands down , she says . but that doesn amprsquot mean she amprsquos quite done with linden lab . she starts extolling the virtues of opensim , but brings it back to second life . ampldquoi hope to get a better work ampndashlife balance , and to be able to spend entertainment ampmdash leisure time ampmdash in second life , amprdquo she says . i get the sense that deep down , she amprsquos made such a strong connection that she amprsquos permanently a resident there . after all , her second life relationship with partner oclee hornet became a real life romance . ampldquohe had a bald avatar , which is quite unusual in any world , amprdquo she says . ampldquoi was interested to know why . amprdquo berry spent most of may in rotterdam , where hornet ampmdash real name eelco osseweijer ampmdash lives . the two own a two story red brick home together in second life , on which they spend a month for the freehold to the land . ampldquothere amprsquos a possibility we will live together in real life at some stage in the future , amprdquo berry explains . despite it all , i ask her , despite the changes , and the intractability , despite the disputes and the stagnancy , you amprsquore still a second life fan ? ampldquooh yeah , amprdquo she says . there amprsquos a pause and her voice grows richer , the kind of alteration in voice that only comes when speaking through a genuine , heartfelt , and involuntary smile . ampldquooh yes . yes . amprdquo lt ! var s skrollr . init smoothscrolling true gt