 putting monkeys on a diet delays the health problems of old age , new science says . but whether it makes them live longer is still open for debate . these findings in our close evolutionary relatives could help us better understand our own aging process and how to slow it down . what s more , these latest conclusions begin to resolve a scientific debate that has been unfolding amicably , the scientists say over the past three decades . well , great scott ! we have to resolve this ! the two research teams that jointly published today s study in the journal nature communications have been publishing contradictory results for nearly the last decade . calorie restriction is one of the surest ways to stave off aging related diseases and boost longevity in creatures with short lifespans , like mice , yeast , and worms . but it s harder to figure out whether the same is true in longer lived mammals like us . that s partly because humans are notoriously difficult to study . still , one clinical study of over people with healthy weights found cutting a person s calories by about percent for two years reduced their inflammation and risk factors for heart and metabolic disease by the end of the study . but they also had much lower bone density , which worried the researchers . and the clinical study couldn t answer any questions about longevity , because investigating how calorie restriction affects the human lifespan would be a very long , very expensive project . that s why , in the late s , one team of researchers at the university of wisconsin and another from the national institutes on aging turned to rhesus macaques . their lifespans are about a third the length of ours , but they develop and age very similarly . they get gray hair , their skin sags , and they get sick with the same diseases that aging humans do , like cancer , diabetes , and dementia . the studies agree that restricting calories can improve health and delay age related diseasesin , the team at the university of wisconsin published their first findings years into the multi decade study they d found that restricting the monkeys calories by percent reduced their rates of diabetes , cancer , heart disease , and death . the problem was , three years later the national institutes on aging nia scientists published the opposite results in their study , caloric restriction didn t affect survival , although it did improve the monkeys health . the wisconsin team published a rebuttal soon after , arguing that the nia s control monkeys weren t eating enough to be good comparisons for the calorie restricted monkeys . they had looked at some published data and took snippets , and by that data one would suggest that the nia control monkeys were eating less than the wisconsin control monkeys , says julie mattison , the lead author on the nia s study and on today s joint publication . but , mattison added , when she looked at years of data , it was clear that the nia s control monkeys were eating as much as they wanted . it was like , well , great scott ! we have to resolve this ! says rozalyn anderson , the senior investigator on the latest studies coming out of wisconsin and a co author on today s paper . so , years and nearly monkeys on a diet after they started , the two different research groups directly compared their data . it puts emphasis now on the idea of aging itself being a druggable target . combined , the studies agree that restricting calories can improve health and delay age related diseases . the point of contention remains whether caloric restriction can improve survival . the calorie restricted wisconsin monkeys survived about years , which is longer than the average of years , and longer than the controls . but caloric restriction didn t seem to have much of a specific effect on the nia monkeys lifespans both the dieting and the control monkeys at nia survived an extraordinarily long time more than years , in some cases . so , what accounted for the differences ? probably diet , at least , in part . the monkeys in both studies were mostly fed pellets made up of about percent carbohydrates . but the nia monkeys pellets were made from natural food sources and the carbohydrates only included about percent table sugar . at wisconsin the pellets were much more processed and artificial , and the carbs were nearly percent sugar . consequently , the wisconsin control monkeys were chubbier and less fit than the nia s control monkeys which were closer in body mass to the wisconsin calorie restricted monkeys . these studies probably answer very different questions . if you feed monkeys a more westernized diet and put them on calorie restriction , you ll see survival effects , and health benefits , nia s mattison says . if you feed the animals a healthier diet that s lower in sugar , you still see health benefits . but there s no evidence that we re going to see survival effects . i ve seen the data , and i know how cool this all looks . but i m not doing it . that s why the differences are to be expected , says steve austad , who studies the biology of aging at the university of alabama . they diverged a little bit , and they came up with some different results , he says . they did everybody a real service by putting their results right next to each other . he adds that if he could turn back time , he would have been interested to see if feeding the nia monkeys the wisconsin chow made the nia monkeys chunkier . but , moving forward , austad thinks that studying humans will teach us the most about human aging . in the meantime , there s still a lot more work to do to figure out how calorie restriction improved health for these monkeys , and how diet factored in . both teams collected decades of blood samples , tissue samples , and body measurements that have yet to be analyzed . life might seem longer , but it wouldn t necessarily be longer . despite the new consensus that caloric restriction is beneficial in primates , none of these researchers are inclined to go on a similar diet themselves . i ve seen the data , and i know how cool this all looks . but i m not doing it , anderson says . life is too short , and i love to eat . instead , she sees caloric restriction as a tool to uncover the biology of aging . this shows that we can actually modulate aging in primate species , and it puts emphasis now on the idea of aging itself being a druggable target , anderson says . if we can figure out how caloric restriction works , that would provide a whole new perspective on all these age associated diseases . austad agrees that he s not convinced it s time to start recommending caloric restriction to healthy people . i m not at all certain that people who are a healthy body weight should restrict to some emaciation level , he says . life might seem longer , but it wouldn t necessarily be longer . 