 some of the most dangerous nuclear waste in the us is currently scattered between locations all over the country , awaiting permanent storage . until february , many experts suggested that the best place to put it was a facility about miles east of carlsbad , new mexico , called the waste isolation pilot plant wipp . for years , wipp has operated as the first and only permanent , deep geologic nuclear waste storage facility in the country , holding low level radioactive materials mostly clothing and tools exposed to radiation from nuclear weapons production in steel barrels more than , feet below the earth s surface . but earlier this year two emergencies brought that suggestion and wipp s future into question . and now it seems kitty litter may be to blame . what happened ? wipp is in a salt desert , and much of the work there involves burrowing through the salt and using huge elevators to deposit the stuff at surface level . the resulting underground caverns are then filled with radioactive waste and eventually closed shut , sealed forever . investigators search for a radiation leak at the waste isolation pilot plant in carlsbad , nm . department of energy in february , according to a press release from the us department of energy which oversees operations at wipp two things happened to stall that relatively simple process . first , on february th , a salt hauling truck caught fire . that would be an inconvenience on the side of a highway , but in an enclosed salt cavern surrounded by nuclear waste , it s a potential catastrophe . workers evacuated the site . fortunately no one was hurt . but the fire was significant enough to shut down underground operations until investigators could figure out what happened and how to stop it from happening again . surface level operations continued . but not for long . nine days later , late at night on valentine s day , an alarm sounded , indicating that radioactivity was present in the air underground . no one was below ground at the time , but employees on the surface activated massive fans designed to ventilate the underground air . the next day , another monitor went off this one on the surface indicating airborne radiation . employees who worked outside on the surface were told to take shelter inside buildings completely separated from storage operations . valves allowing air to flow underground were sealed with high density expanding foam . everything came to a standstill , indefinitely . falloutthere are no indications that anyone has been injured from the radiation leak . all employees went through examinations for radiation exposure a doe press release says most workers were not affected , and those who were received less exposure than a person receives from a chest x ray . but for months , nothing has changed . the standstill remains . wipp s or so employees are mainly sitting around , waiting or performing surface facilities maintenance or assisting with procedure reviews and revisions while investigators from the us department of energy doe , the new mexico environment department and elsewhere attempt to figure out what happened . initially , there were two hypotheses . the first was that something had gone wrong with the supports inside the cavern where waste was being stored . if that were the case , it meant a piece of salt rock or a steel support had fallen into one of the sealed barrels , puncturing it and releasing radiation into the air . that was an unlikely possibility , says norbert t . rempe , phd , a retired geologist who spent decades as a principal engineer at wipp . the cavern where the radiation monitor went off had been dug only recently , so the chances that supports had eroded or collapsed were probably slim . organic kitty litter likely caused a steel barrel s seal to puncture at the waste isolation pilot plant in carlsbad , nm . the damage and the resulting radiation leak could close the facility , experts say . department of energy more likely , he said , was the second hypothesis that something had gone awry inside one of the radioactive containers that the radioactive material had become hot for some reason , expanding and puncturing a steel barrel from the inside . last month , doe investigators went into the cavern . pictures showed that the latter hypothesis was true a waste container s lid was unsealed , and dust around the lid had turned yellow from the unusual heat emanating from inside . each barrel is labeled to track where it came from . the punctured barrel originated from los alamos national labs . jim conca , phd , a geologist who worked for years at wipp who now blogs at forbes about energy issues , believes he knows what blew the lid off at least one of wipp s radioactive barrels . the culprit , he wrote , was kitty litter . when someone decides to deviate , that is a bad , bad thing . as conca explains it , inorganic cat litter has properties that make it ideal for stabilizing nitrates in radioactive material for ensuring that it doesn t dry out and become dangerously hot . so kitty litter is often mixed in barrels with the low level waste that s eventually sent to wipp . what happened at wipp , he believes , is that one of the radioactive shipments was mixed with organic instead of inorganic material . green cat litter , he writes , is made with materials like wheat or corn . these organic litters do not have the silicate properties needed to chemically stabilize nitrate the correct way . the result solutions can ignite when they dry out . in other words , the whole problem at wipp the radiation leak , the months long stall in operations , the worries over safety results from one person s mess up . yesterday , a doe press release confirmed that kitty litter may have caused a chemical reaction that lead to the leak . everything nuclear is proceduralized , he tells the verge . it s well laid out and everything everyone does is supposed to go up and down the chain of command . when you decide on a procedure for doing something like treating this waste , you don t deviate from it . ever . and when someone decides to deviate , that is a bad , bad thing . he continues in this case , it could shut down the most successful nuclear repository in history . moving forwardapart from the absurdity in a multibillion dollar project halted by the decision to use off brand kitty litter , the real lesson here may lie in the fragility of even the best nuclear storage facility . corrective action at wipp could be a massive undertaking . how many other barrels contain the dangerous organic cat litter ? are all of those barrels underground at wipp ? are they awaiting shipment at surface level in places like los alamos ? or are they located at the temporary storage site in andrews , texas , where some containers were transferred when problems arose at wipp ? expert assessment will be needed , writes per peterson , a professor and researcher at uc berkeley s department of nuclear engineering , in an email shared with the verge , to merely determine whether the safety benefits of stabilizing or repackaging the material in these drums are justified by the risk to personnel who would attempt to do this work . and if the doe decides stabilizing or repackaging the material is unjustified , that would close wipp for good . if that happened , it would be a shame and a disaster particularly for taxpayers , says the retired wipp geologist rempe . the doe estimates the total cost of the wipp plant to be . billion . even if wipp does begin operating again , we have no idea how long this will take until wipp is back to normal operations , or what the new normal operations will be , rempe says . no one knows right now . and it could be a long time before anyone knows . 