 when it comes to making money on the internet , traffic is typically king if you want to make a living , you ve got to bring in massive amounts of visitors . but there s one web comic that s figured out how to create a viable business with a relatively small number of readers . oh joy sex toy , a weekly comic devoted to sex education and reviews of sex toys and porn sites , doesn t have the mass appeal of its more innocent peers sex may sell , but sex education doesn t always garner the same rabid following as porn . yet two years into the project , creators erika moen and matthew nolan are making enough to devote themselves full time to the project in spite of the fact that ojst brings in under , visitors per month which , by nolan s estimation , is maybe a sixth of what fellow full time web comic girls with slingshots brings in and a minute fraction of the traffic seen by penny arcade . it doesn t have the mass appeal of its more innocent peers . as nolan outlined in a blog post earlier this year , the financial stability of ojst isn t the product of one single magic bullet , but rather a combination of income streams some traditional , some more innovative that join together to create a viable business . some of these revenue sources are common in the world of web comics . patreon the popular platform that allows patrons to pledge a monthly amount to support a creator comprises a large chunk of the site s income moen and nolan have also made repeated use of kickstarter to raise the capital to publish print collections of their comics , and banner ads and sales of ojst books bring in income as well . but paired with these revenue streams is another highly lucrative form of income that s much more novel , at least in the world of web comics affiliate links , a commission system that provides users with a percentage of every sale that results from traffic they drive to a retailer . we make anywhere from , , in sex toy affiliation sales a month , says nolan . it swings wildly each month depending on what we review and the time of the year . sometimes it actually makes more than patreon . three greatest sfw fetishes by trudy cooper amp ryan north creating a series of sex education comics has long been a dream for the portland , or , based couple . when i met matt in i had recently done this short comic called girlfuck , a page basic intro for how cisgender lesbian sex works . it was proto ojst factual information paired with silly humor and graphic depictions of sex . i think basically from our first meeting he was telling me , hey , that comic you did , that was really good . you need to do more sex education comics like that ! no exaggeration , he kept repeating that to me for the next eight years , and for eight years i was like , yeah , yeah , i ll do it someday . during those eight years , moen kept busy working as a freelance artist , honing her comics skills with bucko , a murder mystery comic co created with jeff parker , and diary comic dar while nolan was employed as a game artist , consultant , and ux designer . but once bucko wrapped , moen finally felt ready to get started on a sex education project only to find that the heavily researched , highly educational graphic novel she d envisioned was much more taxing than she d ever dreamed . i worked on it every day until i completely burned myself out and that was just at the script stage . . . it felt too big , too important , and i didn t feel qualified to be doing it . i never studied sex or even sociology in college . . . who was i to write a book on this subject ? i worked on it every day until i completely burned myself out . but fate intervened an appearance on reality show stripsearch led to a conversation with penny arcade business manager robert khoo , who inspired moen to go back to her web comic roots and start writing a weekly series . to pad out the site s content and stave off burnout , she started running sex toy reviews . but once moen and nolan realized how much money those reviews could bring in , they moved from being a secondary form of content to part of the site s primary strategy . ojst now partners with a number of different affiliate programs , including amazon which offers the lowest commission , at percent , sex toy shops like babeland and good vibrations which tend to offer a percent commission , and a variety of porn sites which , with a percent commission , offer the highest split for the site . according to nolan , affiliate sales was a happy coincidence for us . we didn t set out to make a sex toy selling machine . . . people wanted to buy what we were talking about . so we gave them more places to buy them , and now affiliation and toy reviews are serious things we think and plan for . though nolan acknowledges that the review based nature of ojst makes affiliate links a more natural fit for the site than it might be for more narrative based projects , he thinks the biggest barrier to entry is simply a lack of awareness . comic folk just don t know you can make a percentage on sales you send people . it s a hard idea to wrap your head around when you re just used to selling your books . the history of the vibrator by emi gennis these days , the comic which updates on a weekly basis is roughly percent reviews and percent education , with occasional guest strips thrown in to mix things up and give moen a bit of time off . recent reviews have included examinations of the tenga original vaccuum cup and gay porn site cockyboys with educational comics including a primer on utis which moen enlivens with an embarrassing tale of pants wetting and an interview with sexologist emily nagoski , author of the recently released come as you are . no matter the topic , each comic is introduced and hosted by an illustrated version of moen or nolan or , on occasion , both with a diverse group of masturbateers on hand to help illustrate the finer points of sex toy usage and erotic anatomy . ojst wasn t originally intended to be a full time gig for both moen and nolan , but as the site s revenue increased , that started to seem like a real possibility . when nolan got laid off from his previous gig , he originally planned to look for a new day job . but a few months into his search , the couple realized they were making enough to cover expenses , allowing him to stop looking for work and focus his energies on building their business . according to nolan , it s not as much money as we could be bringing in if i had my old job , but at the same time we re much happier , and i m not over worked . it wasn t intended to be a full time gig for both moen and nolan , but that started to seem like a real possibilityeven with two people on board , the project is still a great deal of work scripting , drawing , and inking the comic takes the bulk of moen s time leaving nolan to handle most of the business . though they ve been able to expand beyond the web comic a kickstarter to fund volume two of the ojst book went live earlier this month for now , nolan and moen aren t planning on launching any new sites or trying their hand at any penny arcade style empires . and they do their best to remember that their success might not last forever . i don t want it to sound like we re rolling in the cash , says nolan . as with any business , the majority of our income goes back into the comic are we making enough for the two of us to be working on this full time ? we re still trying to figure that out how many sex toys can we really sell to our fans ? only time will tell but if ojst continues to accrue more fans , it may turn out to be a surprisingly high number . 