 amazon is in the hits business . the company never reveals specific sales numbers for its kindle and kindle fire products except in words like best selling , but amazon sells tablets and ebook readers in the millions . starting today , it probably has a third hit on its hands ampnbspthe fire tv , its new media streamer . and that amprsquos no accident . at , amazon amprsquos new set top box will compete with devices like apple tv , roku , and google amprsquos chromecast to be the gadget consumers use while cuddled up on the couch in front of their big flat screen . on one hand it amprsquos an obvious move amazon has thrust huge resources behind its streaming video service , which is of course the primary method of consumption on the fire tv , and the company has always said that it makes money not when you buy a device , but when you use it to buy things from amazon . of course , lots of tech companies want to be the one selling you movies , songs , and tv shows . but amazon has a huge advantage . even as it presented the new device inside a faux living room in new york city , amazon made clear why it amprsquos building the fire tv it amprsquos seen that everyone wants to buy a set top box , it knows not everyone is happy with the one they bought , and it has plentiful data on exactly why . there lies opportunity . amazon knows both what people buy and how they feel about itamazon doesn amprsquot innovate by crafting new product categories , like apple does . it also doesn amprsquot make much money selling its hardware . instead , it takes all the data it gathers as the world amprsquos biggest online retailer , breaks down exactly what amprsquos available and what consumers want , then produces a piece of hardware that it can sell cheaply in order to bring consumers into its ecosystem . ampnbspjust as netflix created house of cards to satisfy ampnbspthe particular tastes of its viewers , amazon made the fire tv because millions of buyers are already looking for it . ampnbspto understand the fire tv is to take one glance at amazon amprsquos best selling electronics list two roku models , google amprsquos chromecast , and the apple tv are the only non amazon devices in the top . the world amprsquos largest online retailer just took on all three . if the device gets to scale it amprsquos already no . on the best seller list , amazon will make money by using the fire tv to sell everything else . that amprsquos how it amprsquos always done things . we have a philosophy that we try to price our devices as close to break even as we possibly can , says kindle vp dave limp . if they put it in a drawer , we amprsquove not benefited at all . once the consumer has a fire tv in their living room , he says , somebody might buy ampagrave la carte content , movies , tv shows . somebody might sign up for prime . . . we want to be really aligned with the customer that we only make money when they use our products , not when they buy them . all three of amazon amprsquos hardware product categories follow this strategy , particularly its tablets . amazon enters a growing but immature market , sells good devices essentially at cost , markets them aggressively across its site especially on the all powerful homepage , and reaps the benefit when customers use them to buy other things from amazon . with the fire tv , which puts the prime video experience front and center as no kindle device ever has , it s potentially a more lucrative idea than ever . this sort of inside out production isn amprsquot without precedent . years ago , before samsung was a household name in consumer electronics , it was a key manufacturer of the internals for smartphones and tablets . the korean titan learned the business from the inside out , and mastered the supply chain in an effort to make phones cheaper and more efficiently . amazon amprsquos experience is equally useful it studies people amprsquos shopping and usage habits , and gives buyers both space and incentive to report what they like and dislike . its focus group is the entire industry , and it collects data before ever building a prototype . amazon amprsquos customer reviews said the roku was slow ampnbspthe fire tv is fast . customers complained about searching with a remote the fire tv amprsquos flagship feature is the ability to find things to watch using your voice . amazon doesn amprsquot have to guess what people want , it just has to wait for others to get it wrong . amazon doesn amprsquot have to guess what people want , it just has to wait for others to get it wronglimp says that amazon amprsquos been watching the set top box market for a while , and that the company amprsquos involvement started by identifying the problem . we talked about the playing field , and one of the filters we use internally is amplsquodo we want to use the boxes that are there ? amprsquo and then we went out and talked to customers as well , and they were frustrated . putting the pieces together from there was easy . we had the product in the labs for a long time , but as we started ampmdash as those dominoes started falling , as we started solving each one of those problems , i amprsquod say about months ago or so , we started feeling like we had a product . when you put it in your own house ampmdash and at this time they were still early versions of this ampmdash we just went amplsquogosh , i want that . amprsquo there was a checklist for success , and amazon followed it to the letter . and if the fire tv isn amprsquot what you want ? well , amazon will happily keep selling you a chromecast or roku . or a playstation or xbox , for that matter . we think the fire tv is the best one out there , limp says . but that doesn amprsquot mean people won amprsquot buy other ones . there are other ones at different price points , there amprsquos lots of selection , and we amprsquoll see . and the best thing about being amazon is that no matter how it shakes out , no matter which one you buy , amazon wins . ben popper contributed to this report . 