 eventually they just made a watch . motorola design chief jim wicks and his team had spent a year and a half designing the device that would ultimately become the beautiful moto smartwatch , but every initial result was lacking . every time you do one , he tells me , no matter how awesome you might think it is , if it amprsquos square , everyone amprsquos just kind of like amplsquoehhh . . . amprsquo and you sit there and you think about making it a little bit thinner , or a little bit bigger , a little bit heavier ampmdash you work for all those things and you still get that kind of feeling . and then finally we realized we amprsquore not going to break through that ceiling , even with our peers , if we can amprsquot get out of the amplsquoeh amprsquo zone . after two rounds of designs , prototypes , and tepid internal reactions , motorola went back to the basics . rather than reinvent wristwear or build a blocky rectangle like the galaxy gear or the pebble steel , motorola decided to mimic what it hoped to replace the elegant watches we amprsquove had on our wrists for decades . we came to the realization that if we amprsquore going to do this , we need to really embrace what this space is all about , he says . so motorola turned the moto into a beautiful , circular stainless steel wearable that looks more like a timex than a moto x . wicks says it got the same reaction from all the industry experts he showed it to yep , that amprsquos a watch . smartwatches are complicated enough without messing with the lookthere are still more questions than answers about the moto . wicks was tight lipped about battery life , the particulars of the software and user interaction , and even the diameter of the watch face . it amprsquos not large , but it amprsquos not small , either was as specific as he amprsquod get . one thing he amprsquos not shy about is motorola amprsquos ambition the isn amprsquot for nerds or early adopters . it amprsquos for everyone . and since it amprsquos already going to ask people to learn to talk to and swipe on their wrists , motorola kept the form factor as simple as possible . it goes into a familiar space , wicks says , and it does it in a way that allows you to replace something you have now or something you gave up before with this new device , which is both emotionally and culturally familiar . motorola amprsquos android wear smartwatch is made to gently ease us into the future by keeping one foot firmly rooted in the past . in a way , wicks says , even the interaction won amprsquot feel totally new . this device is made to function as a watch on your wrist the way a watch would . to not just look that way , but to work that way for people . it starts with simply showing the time our goal , i amprsquoll tell you , is that when i amprsquom sitting here and i lift up my watch to look at it , i amprsquoll see the time . he pauses . unless there amprsquos something else that amprsquos more important for me to see . with ampnbspandroid wear , there amprsquos plenty more to see , which is where wicks hopes the will become much more than just a clock . if you talk to people in the watch industry , they say people use watches as jewelry and fashion . they don amprsquot use it to tell time ampmdash they use it to know what amprsquos next or how much time they have left . i think what you saw in android wear was really communicating some of those things . planning ahead , letting you know what amprsquos going to happen so you don amprsquot have to . sometimes you want the time ampmdash sometimes you need something elsemost of the onus for that is on google , of course . the google now like platform is all about cards and gestures , quick glances and interactions with your phone . but just as wicks loved the touchless control in the moto x , he amprsquos most excited about the moto amprsquos voice interactions . he says it amprsquos a natural use , because we amprsquove actually always talked to our watches in some way . the words you said to a watch in the past were just amplsquooh shit i amprsquom late , amprsquo or amplsquoi have minutes to get to my train . amprsquo it amprsquos nice that the whole vocabulary towards your watch now can change , from amplsquooh shit i amprsquom late amprsquo to amplsquonavigate home , amprsquo or amplsquowhat amprsquos next ? amprsquo motorola amprsquos goal , he says , was to make hardware that gets out of the way of that . we really focused on the watch face let amprsquos make that dial , so to speak , the hero . and we tried to reduce everything else to its purest form , so it amprsquos the most iconic that it can be , but not to the point where it turns into a brown , dieter rams like super simplified kind of thing . he still takes care to point out the watch amprsquos details , though the brushed or polished finishes , the parting lines . it makes it very iconic in nature , he says , but also has kind of an approachability and a softness with the body . the moto is in some ways a compilation of motorola s other projectsmany of the amprsquos key components are cribbed from other motorola projects wicks says his team learned about power management from the ill fated motoactv fitness tracker , and the moto x amprsquos voice activated touchless control system that allows you powerful two way conversation with your device . in fact , motorola was working on the moto before it even knew about android wear . it was perfect timing , wicks says . the cool thing was the area we were looking at and the approach we were taking actually resonated really well with what android wear was doing . so we were really quite surprised , when the time came that they started to communicate with all the potential vendors , that there was an opportunity there . having shown little more than renders and videos , motorola has a lot left to say before the moto comes out this summer . when i asked why motorola didn amprsquot include a camera or some of the other features from the galaxy gear , he replied only , well , i think there amprsquos going to be a lot more that you see ampmdash we haven amprsquot laid out everything that we amprsquore doing yet . wicks did allude to easily replaceable watch bands for the device , as well as a moto maker style customization option . but making a beautiful smartwatch is not the same as making a good smartwatch . the execution is the hard part , and as great as motorola amprsquos promises seem , they amprsquore still just promises . wicks doesn amprsquot seem worried ampmdash he says motorola took the hard road and wound up better for it . the normal thing to do is take the technology that exists , he says , and create something based on what you technically can do . we took a different approach , and said , amplsquookay what do we think this should be ? amprsquo then we figured out how we could achieve it . the idea is right , as good as even any smartwatch concept yet ampmdash but getting it on to our wrists is another story . and the clock is ticking . 