 the skies were gray and drizzly over paris today , as the city continued to mourn the lives that were lost in a series of horrific terrorist attacks friday night . around people were gathered outside le petit cambodge and le carillon , where diners and revelers were gunned down just before pm friday . flowers , candles , and hand scrawled messages of support were strewn across the sidewalk in front of the restaurant and bar , which sit directly across from one another at a normally vibrant intersection in the city s th arrondissement . some wept softly in the arms of loved ones , others stared at the ground in silence . fr d rique , a year old illustrator who used to live in the neighborhood , was sitting by herself on the corner of a bench just in front of le carillon , wearing a long black coat and staring through teary eyes at the mass of bouquets and photos that had been dampened by an overnight rain . her gaze was broken when a friend passed by on a bicycle , and she got up to greet him . they hadn t seen each other in a while , and they both conducted a brief check in . are your friends okay ? they re fine , we were lucky . but i have friends of friends . . . they kissed again , he sped off , and she returned to her bench . fr d rique had been reluctant to visit any of the memorials that had been set up in front of the six sites that were targeted in friday s attack . the authorities told us not to be outside in large groups , she explained to me . and they have enough to worry about right now . but she figured the scene would be quieter just before noon on a tuesday , and decided to finally pay her respects at a corner she used to frequent with her friends . i m not going to dance tonight . maybe next week , but not tonight . it s like when you lose a friend , she said . you have to go to the funeral to complete the mourning . to try to have some closure . the bar and restaurant are both shuttered now , and paris is slowly lurching back to life . but closure seems a far way off . the bloodiest attack on french soil since world war ii has jolted the city to its core . scattered among the mountain of flowers today were messages of hope and perseverance . for you , we will live , read a white balloon tied to a sidewalk pole . a handwritten note read we are going to drink , we are going to laugh , we are going to make love . but fr d rique says it will be a long time before her life returns to normal . we are going to continue to live , i m sure , she said . tonight , i m going to have raclette and drink wine with my friends the wine seller in my neighborhood invited everyone to his store for dinner . but i m not going to dance tonight . maybe next week , but not tonight . as the city tries to put itself back together , french authorities are looking for answers . the suspected mastermind of the plot , abdelhamid abaaoud , is still at large , and on tuesday , prime minister manuel valls said that the exact number of assassins involved in the attacks is still unknown . in a rare address to the national assembly and senate yesterday , french president francois hollande called for constitutional changes that he says would allow the government to combat terrorism both in france and abroad . among the amendments he supports is a measure that would allow the government to raid suspected terrorist enclaves without a warrant , and one that would allow the state to strip convicted terrorists of their french nationality if they hold two passports . he added that the country s current state of emergency would be extended to three months . we re now aware of what the rest of the world goes through . hollande said he would also consider expanding france s surveillance powers . following the attacks on charlie hebdo and a jewish supermarket earlier this year , france passed sweeping legislation that some have likened to a french patriot act . the law , which went into effect in july , allows the state to monitor the communications of suspected terrorists without a warrant , and obliges internet service providers to grant unfettered access to their networks . french prime minister manuel valls has touted the law as critical to preventing future attacks , though the country s surveillance machine apparently failed to pick up on last week s assault . in an interview with french radio on monday , valls acknowledged that france was aware that an attack was being planned prior to friday s violence , and said that other operations were likely in the works . fr d rique acknowledged that parisians will probably have a little less freedom following the attacks , and she thinks that s unfortunate . but she hopes the tragedy may spur her friends a collection of artists , designers , and writers to be more politically engaged in their work . we re now aware of what the rest of the world goes through , she said . countries at war , all the violence we see it elsewhere but now it s arrived here . others are worried that france s increasingly powerful far right politicians may use the attacks to build support for its anti immigrant agenda . marine le pen , leader of the front national political party , has already called for france to immediately stop accepting refugees fleeing syria and afghanistan , while valls said this week that the country needs to expel all these radicalized imams . some in france s muslim community , europe s largest , say they fear retaliation from those who may wrongly blame them for the violence . in front of le petit cambodge , a few meters away from where fr d rique was sitting , a veiled woman named kahina stood with her baby boy in her arms . she said she came there today to express solidarity with her fellow parisians , and to show that these acts do not represent islam . but she fears that some may unfairly target her or her husband because of their religion , and worries about the world that their children will grow up in . there will be some french people who think of us a certain way because we wear a veil , or because my husband has a beard , said kahina , . but for us , this has nothing to do with islam . it s a religion of peace , of love . leaving the memorial site , i stopped for a coffee at a small , trendy cafe down the street all wood , white brick , and right angles . bob dylan s like a rolling stone was playing softly in the background and a small table was covered with newspapers that all carried variations on the same headline france at war . i rummaged through my pockets looking for change , but didn t have quite enough for an espresso . the cafe owner , a tall , bearded man with a shaved head and warm eyes , smiled back from behind the counter and told me not to worry . i thanked him , and said i would come back to pay off my debt . it s okay , don t come back for that , he said . come back when the neighborhood comes back to life . when the music returns . 