 the building where the department of homeland security tracks every cyber attack against the us is surprisingly bland . with its neutral exterior and circular drive , i wasn t even sure we were at the right place until i saw our press liaison standing in the lobby . there are no signs to distinguish it from the generic office park that surrounds it , and the doorman wouldn t even confirm if dhs had an office inside . the national cybersecurity and communications integration center , better known by the abbreviated nccic , opened in to serve as a place where dhs could monitor cyber threats across government agencies and critical infrastructure , such as power grids and dams . if an attacker ends up on the department of agriculture s network or a government employee surfs to a malicious website , for example , the nccic is supposed to detect it . until recently , the government has relied on its own information gathering , as well as partnerships with outside companies , to monitor its network and stay ahead of digital threats . but now , dhs is restructuring its work because of a law passed this past december as part of a huge omnibus bill the cyber information sharing act , or cisa . the legislation focuses the agency on an effort to build out a more comprehensive cyber threat detection system , one that s fed by information shared with the government by various companies . after the lobby and a short elevator ride , a bare , fluorescently lit hall led to an office door with a sign advertising weekly office doughnuts . phyllis schneck , the deputy under secretary for cybersecurity and communications at dhs , greeted us and took us through to the main nccic floor . the nccic looks similar to what you see depicted in movies as nasa mission control long tables with computers and screens . employees include ex military personnel and it professionals . they speak to each other as they work , just like normal coworkers , except they re coordinating the nation s cybersecurity defenses . the workstations face four massive screens that have mini displays within them . they show different measurements , like the number of unsecured critical infrastructure hubs that are being launched and the network status of every agency . if suspicious traffic shows up on one of the four big screens , a person responds and loops in others , schneck explained . the alert is noted through a change in the screen s color green signaling that everything is all clear and red meaning things aren t looking so good . when we arrived , the entire center was powered down into declassified mode , so we didn t observe any real time cyber threats . in addition to government agencies , dhs also assists in investigations abroad . following the hacking of a power grid in ukraine , for example , dhs sent employees to the country to investigate . the agency later issued a report on the incident . dhs doesn t just watch for human threats . it also monitors natural phenomena , like sunspots , fires , floods , and typhoons . the agency tracks the sun , because as schneck explained , a catastrophic situation could affect satellite communications , given that computers are just big magnets that respond to radiation . as cisa gets going , the agency will start integrating private companies cyber experiences into its malware prevention system . though dhs says this will better protect the us government and its entities from attacks , not everyone agrees . privacy advocates worry about companies sharing personal data with the government , while others have concerns about disrupting corporate workflows . consumers also might not feel comfortable with the idea that their data could be given to dhs without their permission . schneck says information sharing could greatly increase america s cybersecurity defenses if done correctly . for instance , if a company realizes its employees are being spammed with malicious phishing emails , it could send information about the sender and the email s contents to dhs , which will alert cybersecurity bureaus around the world to the threat s existence , and , hopefully , thwart the attackers . jeh johnson , the secretary of homeland security , ampnbsphas equated information sharing to the see something , say something of cybersecurity . the government pointed to its biggest cybersecurity failure as the primary evidence of cisa s merits the data breaches at the office of personnel management . investigators discovered that the same group who hacked into anthem healthcare last year and stole information on millions of americans also compromised opm . if anthem had shared information about the attacks ampnbspwith the government , like ip addresses and the attackers malicious links , opm officials could have monitored their own network for those same things , potentially protecting opm from attacks , or at least detecting them sooner . attackers were in opm s network for months . essentially , this is where cisa would have been put into action , government officials said . in the weeks and months following the opm disaster , lawmakers began strongly pushing for cyber information sharing . dhs heralded cisa as the legislative solution the country needed . the bill encouraged companies to voluntarily share information about malicious cyber encounters by offering them immunity from related lawsuits , so they they could share users data without worrying about getting sued for privacy infringements . but while this might entice companies to participate , privacy advocates say it leaves consumers in the dark . only a small amount of data is needed to thwart an attack , mark jaycox , civil liberties legislative lead for the electronic frontier foundation , said in an interview with the verge . oversharing could easily happen and remain undisclosed to the public . beyond that , the list of companies sharing information is secret , too . we don t know what companies have joined or asked to join the information sharing , jaycox said . we re now approaching another side of this bill and why it was terrible the transparency aspects . no consumers would feel comfortable using a service if they know their information , including personal details , ampnbspis going directly into dhs threat intelligence arsenal , katie moussouris , former chief policy officer at hackerone , said in an interview . just look at what happened to trust in technology companies after edward snowden s leaks . a pew research center study from found that percent of us adults thought they had lost control of their personal data to companies . despite privacy concerns , the bill passed and is now law . only six companies have signed up to fully participate , the associated press reported in march . following our tour of the nccic , schneck took us to her office . she insists privacy was and continues to be a major consideration , and that the agency asks for only the essential technical details when incident information is shared . we brief privacy folks all the time , she said . look , it s not worth protecting something if we re giving up our rights as americans . so what information goes into the nccic ? the agency published guidelines in february to clarify . companies should share anything that helps investigate an incident or vulnerability . information isn t directly related to a cyberthreat if it is not necessary to assist others to detect , prevent , or mitigate the threat . so , for example , with a phishing email , a company should send dhs the sender of the email , the malicious url , any malicious files attached , the contents of the email , and any additional information that could help thwart future attacks . the name and email address of the email s targets should not be shared , the agency says . whether companies will follow these guidelines remains to be seen , though the system s guaranteed secrecy makes it difficult for the public to check . sharing this information will go a long way to keeping us entities and interests secure , schneck said . she thinks of malware and threats in terms of virtual viruses , and just like a flu vaccine helps the body protect against the influenza virus , putting indicators of compromise into dhs cyber center will act as a vaccine of sorts the nccic will be able to more quickly detect malware and other cyber threats across the country s networks . but while that might be the case , companies aren t liable if they overshare users data , and consumers won t readily know if that s even happening . some companies also say they ve already created a system around warrant requests and will share user information if legally obliged . they don t really need voluntary information sharing , moussouris said . schneck remains idealistic , however . she hopes that greater information sharing will eventually allow the agency to detect and thwart an attack without a human ever getting involved , especially when it comes to state sponsored attacks , she said . her vision is probably even more ambitious than it sounds . dhs needs to get more companies to share data , to improve its technology to be better able to detect changing threats , and humans may still be needed to determine when data is sensitive . the future of a fully autonomous threat detection system remains a long way off . maybe that s a good thing , though , as we grapple with the current system and the questions it introduces . photography amelia holowaty krales the verge 