 last week , former secretary of state hillary clinton called isis the most effective recruiter in the world , and pushed tech companies to help curtail the group s ability to woo recruits through online videos and social media . while studies like one last week by researchers from george washington university show that twitter is still isis s most significant online recruitment tool , the group also uses more intimate platforms , like instagram . compared to twitter , isis s presence on instagram is more informal . users often post pro isis images and memes , as opposed to the screenshots and video clips disseminated by the group s official channels . for users in syria , instagram allows them to project a semblance of normal life under isis home cooked meals and views out their window , for instance , with hashtags and symbols declaring support for the group . instagram allows them to project a semblance of normal life under isisoverall , these accounts normalize radical ideas , says sarah gilkes , a research associate at gwu s program on extremism who worked on the study . of the americans charged with crimes relating to isis , the study found that almost all spent time in isis s insular online communities . after seeing hundreds of memes with islamic state ideology superimposed , the ideas suddenly don t seem so extreme . plus , many radicalized people often come from troubled backgrounds or unstable family situations . these platforms can give them a sense of community . we worked with gilkes to examine isis supporters instagram accounts . many accounts denounce western intervention in syria and allude to more extremist views , but only certain ones use the specific hashtags and imagery that indicate isis support . we include some examples below , along with gilkes explanation of what we re seeing . all photos were publicly available . it s important to keep in mind that while an account might clearly communicate support for the group , it doesn t mean an individual will resort to violence . the vast majority of pro isis people will never commit a crime , gilkes says . that often only occurs after a variety of triggers , depending on the person . this account appears to be run by a young woman in england , going off her geotags and several selfies . in this image , gilkes explains , the user includes the hashtag taqwa , which means piety . her image and caption tap into themes of nationality versus unity under a religion . a primary isis narrative is unity of the true muslim community and loyalty to that community versus to the state , gilkes says . color doesn t make a difference , it s all about the concept of unity , she says , which this post directly states . also of note is the use of an emoji pointing toward the sky . gilkes says this is often used among radical supporters . the flag , also a clear indicator of support , translates to there is no god but god on the top portion . in the circle , it states allah , messenger , muhammad , which relates to the second part of the testimony of faith , or the shahada . this is a common jihadi theme . the isis flag also comes up in the below profile picture . the woman s account description says she doesn t like coconuts , which , in isis s online world , is derogatory slang for people the group deems to be not true believers . this includes both sunnis and shiites who speak out against the group or deny their muslim identity . the woman also uses the word ukhtis , which means sisters , so she s encouraging other interested women to message her privately . just like any other online community , its participants have created their own style and imagery to demonstrate membership . the group frequently references green birds and will often combine a green heart or green circle emoji with a bird emoji to convey the green bird imagery . the green bird is said to be the state martyrs reach when they get to heaven . lion imagery is commonly used , as well , because the animal represents bravery in islam . users also commonly note when their accounts are new and reference previous usernames . gilkes and her fellow researchers noted in their paper that , as much as these accounts can be taken down , they almost always come back . these takedowns are often bragged about and posted as a badge of honor , gilkes says . we can see lion imagery in the background of an isis flag in one user s post . instagram also allows for easy sharing of isis mantras in digestible images . the below is an example . this image is a bit bizarre , gilkes notes , because the arabic on the sign doesn t have its letters connecting they stand alone and some are backwards . looking past that , though , the picture is fairly self explanatory . this user is saying there s no way to idly sit by and still be sincere in your desire to become a martyr , gilkes says . a person has to act upon that desire to truly make good on that belief . this user posted the below later in the week although this image by itself isn t necessarily radical , his use of the word khilafa , or caliphate , indicates at least an interest in the group . when combined with his prior post , one can conclude he supports isis s radical ideology . this image plays to instagram s strengths . people can easily curate an image of their lives and idealize it for followers . below are two photos , one of which the researchers used in their paper , that represent dispatches from syria . you hear a lot about the violent content that isis puts out , but you don t hear a lot about the images of shopping in mosul or ramadan festivals and celebrations , gilkes says . isis curated this image of themselves as brutal and violent , but they also have this aspect where the state comes in . while sifting through accounts , there were occasional photos of what appear to be dead fighters , but there are also pictures of everyday life , which has been one of the platform s pulls . in this photo , used by the researchers in their paper , a commenter chimes in with anti isis rhetoric . many people attempt to engage with supporters on twitter , too . even hacktivist collective anonymous tried to take down the group s accounts . however , on twitter particularly , gilkes says this calling out of isis members doesn t accomplish much . more often than not , the dissenting user will end up on one of isis s curated block lists , and the group s online community will continue to interact with only its own world view . while clinton and other politicians have pointed to technology companies as the solution , it s still unclear how social media platform operators could discourage such accounts , especially when their content doesn t breach current terms of service . most images are benign and show support through slang like coconuts or emoji . for its part , an instagram spokesperson said in a comment to the verge that there is no place for terrorists on its platform . we work aggressively to ensure that we do not have terrorists or terror groups using the site , and we also remove any content that praises or supports terrorism , the spokesperson said . we have also developed simple , powerful reporting tools that allow the community to flag content to our reviewers . the global review team responds to reports from the community around the clock and we prioritize safety related reports for immediate review . the solution to isis s social media campaigns might be actual people rather than reporting toolssuspensions get rid of one voice temporarily , gilkes says , but she compares it to whac a mole . she says the solution to isis s social media campaigns might be actual people rather than reporting tools . i think really the power is in people with credible voices , whether on the community level , in the religious sphere , or in the government , she says . these credible voices need to be coming in and turning the isis propaganda on its head , and sort of reveal what life under isis rule looks like . that being said , different messages resonate with different people , so finding one that works will likely prove to be the most difficult struggle . 