 when leap motion was announced in , it seemed like a solution looking for a problem . a little black box that plugged into a computer , it could recognize hand gestures and translate them into interface commands to let you do things on your computer just like you do them in real life . but the company was trying to sell people on something they d never asked for , for use with a machine they d already been interacting with for years . then came virtual reality . when people first started using headsets like the oculus rift , the mouse and keyboard suddenly became inadequate they were tough to find while effectively blindfolded , and they didn t take advantage of vr s unique feeling of d space . suddenly , tools like leap motion started to make a lot more sense . the company has shifted more and more toward vr in recent years . but today , it s making the move official with a project called orion a revamped tracking system tailored for vr motion , and a small sensor that can be built straight into virtual reality headsets . if things go according to plan , the sensor could start showing up in products as early as this fall . and while this hardware is meant for manufacturers only , the software is available today in beta for its current leap motion controllers . leap motion s creators say that as they spent more time in vr , they started feeling hemmed in by their original focus on desktop computers . there s a lot of things you want to do in virtual reality that you don t do on a pc , says co founder david holz . on a laptop , for example , users generally wouldn t move their hands more than a few inches . in a virtual landscape , they might stretch them all the way out to reach an object , something the leap motion wasn t prepared to handle . the new software attempts to broaden its scope while adding overall improvements , like identifying fingers more accurately and tracking them more quickly . holz and his co founder michael buckwald won t reveal exactly how many of the . leap motion controllers they ve shipped since launch in their site currently lists , developers and hosts free and paid apps . it s also supposed to be appearing in a special faceplate for the osvr headset , but that has yet to see release . we ve sold a lot , says buckwald . input is an almost existential threat to these companies . whatever the number , leap motion remains a relatively niche product even within the world of vr . so far , that s true of practically all input devices . the high end htc vive and oculus rift will eventually use sophisticated motion controllers , but those are still months away from release . smartphones will usually pair with a bluetooth gaming controller , but few users want to carry one around . so mobile headset makers often end up using the single button model of google cardboard , or no control system at all . input is an almost existential threat to these companies , says buckwald , and hand tracking is the solution . in the second half of , particularly during the holiday season , leap motion expects several vr companies to release headsets that incorporate its orion sensor . it s unclear which ones , but apparently not all of them are us companies , and some moved into vr after seeing facebook acquire oculus for billion . the biggest names in vr right now have already put significant work into motion tracking . google , which is expected to release at least one non cardboard headset this year , has already devoted years to its project tango augmented reality platform . oculus has bought multiple tracking tech companies , including the leap motion like nimble vr . but leap motion could be talking to indie headset makers like fove , or to chinese internet juggernaut tencent , which is supposed to launch a vr headset later this year . the bigger question is whether orion can deliver a reliable and natural input system . my past experience with leap motion has been a combination of excitement and frustration it s a great system when it works , but it fails just often enough to undercut its value as an interface , like a mouse button that misses every th click or a touchscreen that can t always find my finger . to its credit , the system has gotten consistently better over time , and i ve never used it long enough to really settle in . but the promise of a natural user interface is that it s supposed to adapt to your motion , not the other way around . the demo leap motion is showing off now is called blocks , a featureless landscape where you can conjure cubes as well as rectangular boxes and dodecahedrons out of thin air by pinching and pulling . the motion makes total sense , like stretching invisible putty . the tracker mimics your hand almost perfectly across a wide field of view i accidentally reached outside it only rarely . once the shapes are down , you can grab , throw , and push them , or turn off gravity altogether and bat them around . objects don t collide with your hands perfectly , but i could recognize and adapt to the quirks more quickly than in my earlier demos and the problem is potentially more in the blocks app itself than the underlying tracking system . it s still disorienting to grab at something you can t feelas we found out nearly three years ago , though , leap motion has a huge inherent weakness the lack of tactile feedback . no matter how good the tracker is , it s a little disorienting to grab something and get only a visual confirmation that you re actually holding it . the same is true of their first steps toward a minority report style floating interface . right now , turning your hand palm up in blocks brings up a three button shape selection menu . the idea is clever and well executed , but it s hard to get used to not feeling anything whether it s a computer key or a touchscreen to confirm that i ve interacted with a machine . controllers like oculus touch also let you grab , draw , and push things in mid air , but they add a layer of both abstraction and feedback . you don t expect a remote to literally act like your hand , and you get the reassuring feel of hitting real buttons , even if they represent a totally different action in vr . leap motion is in the uncanny valley of motion control it offers interaction that is sometimes strikingly realistic , but distinctly not real . despite its flaws , if leap motion makes it into mobile headsets , it will still be the best mobile vr interface i ve seen , from a simple bluetooth controller to microsoft s hololens air tap . whether that translates into real success depends largely on how well the headsets using it sell and what secret interface projects vr s biggest players , like oculus and sony , might have in the works . 