 on thursday , followers of channel awesome , subscribers on youtube got a strange new message . the channel usually specializes in pop culture riffs , but this was a more straightforward video , with host douglas walker laying out a three week odyssey triggered by a single dmca copyright claim against a clip he d used from my neighbor totoro . according to walker , the totoro clip was in fair use , but appealing the complaint had sprawled into nearly a month of notices and counter notices . we re coming up on three weeks of getting no monetization , no money for any of the videos we ve put up , past and present , he said to the camera , growing more and more frantic . nobody has given us a straight answer . nothing has been consistent . nobody knows what s going on . walker isn t alone . the first weeks of saw a spate of similar videos from channels like eli the computer guy , subscribers , alternate history hub , subscribers , and i hate everything , subscribers . the specific infractions are different in each case , but the broad strokes are the same a random violation , a sudden restriction of advertising or upload features , and a very frustrated youtuber ready to leave the channel entirely . walker s claim was resolved four hours after his video posted , but not every channel has been so lucky , and the ordeal has raised larger questions of creators place on the web s largest video platform . nobody has given us a straight answer . nothing has been consistent . nobody knows what s going on . the latest crop of angry users doesn t seem to have resulted from a policy or enforcement change on youtube s part , and there s no evidence that complaints or appeals are rising overall . rather , the complaints seem to be the result of an appeal system that s been strained since the beginning and is now reaching a breaking point . youtube users who appeal a complaint can easily get trapped in a confusing automated system and while the system has never been perfect , the stakes have grown higher and higher . what s changed from my perspective is that this is the third year in a row i ve earned over , from the platform and i m getting tired of worrying about whether all my work is going to vanish , eli etherton told the verge . it s , not . we aim to allow as much content as possible on youtube and still ensure that our terms of service , including our community guidelines and copyright policies , are followed , a youtube spokesperson said when reached for comment . we take feedback on our policy enforcement seriously , and we encourage people to flag any issues through the youtube appeals and counter notifications processes . it s , not . still , those policies can be complex and overlapping , leaving many youtubers confused as to where they stand . in addition to the community and copyright policies , youtube channels can also run afoul of the adsense policies that determine what videos are appropriate to run ads against . community and copyright violations are governed by a three strike policy , but the decision to revoke monetization is often independent of that policy . as a result , it can be hard to say why ads were pulled on a specific channel like eli the computer guy . the real need for change is rules written in stone , eli says . malicious sounds easy to define until you get onto a platform with global reach . youtube relies on user generated flags to enforce its policies , which can make violations maddeningly inconsistent . that model was established by the dmca s copyright complaint system , but it s become the norm on youtube , twitter , and facebook alike , enforcing everything from user guidelines to advertising rules . but the scattershot nature of user complaints means video creators have little chance to get a feel for what kind of videos might trigger a violation in practice . an offending clip might sit on the network for years without being flagged , only causing problems when a channel builds up enough subscribers to attract attention . once the complaint is lodged , the venues for litigating it can be maddeningly opaque . anyone has the power to falsely flag videos , and there is no punishment for doing so , so ultimately the content creators are penalized , said alex , who runs the popular i hate everything channel and declined to give his last name . at this point a complete overhaul is necessary . at this point a complete overhaul is necessary . most of the recent complaints stem less from youtube s violation reporting system than from its appeals process , which for most youtubers is still largely automated . for google , that s a feature rather than a bug the company prides itself on scalable solutions that work as well for follower accounts as they do for heavy hitters like eli . but as youtube s personalities become more important and more powerful , they re coming to expect the kind of personalized treatment they would get from a television network . in eli s case , that s what he got he was contacted by a youtube customer service representative the day after we spoke , and now says he s likely to stay on the platform . youtube is still by far the largest source of video on the web , with hundreds of millions of hours watched each day , but the latest complaints come as the platform is facing more competition than ever . in november , facebook announced its native videos were generating billion views each day , and the social network rolled out live video features to all users just last week . for creators willing to do product placement , snapchat is also an increasingly tempting way to make money from online video . but despite the growing number of alternatives , most online video personalities still see youtube as the only game in town . for eli , leaving youtube would have meant leaving web video entirely . before youtube s representative found him , he was planning on making the leap to podcasting , which would make him less reliant on a single platform . with his following , he s also well placed to partner with a sponsored channel on youtube or elsewhere . i had actually turned down very lucrative offers to be a personality for other people s content in the past simply because i was happy with youtube , eli says . not everyone is as optimistic . tech tricks can play on any platform , but for web culture vlogging like i hate everything , the possibilities are narrower . i would happily move to another viable platform that treats their users better , except there isn t one , alex says . youtube is a monopoly so they can do whatever they want . they know we ll keep using their website no matter what . verge video youtube s plan for the future of video