 three clinical trial volunteers sit next to kirsten lyke , a tropical disease researcher , as she discusses her work on the phone . all had come to the university of maryland , in baltimore , to receive a dose of an experimental ebola vaccine . we re finishing up our last set of vaccinations today , she says . and right around the new year , we will have the new data . we re finishing up our last set of vaccinations today . monday was the last day of the university s early stage ebola vaccine trial involving healthy participants . it s aimed at determining whether the vaccine is safe , tolerable , and effective at provoking an immune response . the vaccine , called cad eboz , is one of two ebola vaccine candidates currently under human investigation in north america . the other vaccine , one that was developed by researchers at the public health agency of canada s national microbiology laboratory , begins human trials in halifax , nova scotia this week . these two vaccines are the farthest along that are in clinical trials , says scott halperin , a microbiologist at dalhousie university and one of the researchers investigating the vaccine in halifax . but right now , it s hard to tell if either vaccine will make it to market . until you actually test vaccines in humans , you really don t know which one will work . vaccines are at the forefront of research efforts to curb the ebola outbreak in west africa that has already claimed the lives of over , people . they re the type of intervention that could help those who are most at risk healthcare workers and citizens in guinea , liberia , and sierra leone protect themselves against infection . yet both lyke and halperin are quick to caution against putting all our eggs in the preventative basket . to stop the spread of ebola , the world also needs to stick to the basics of infectious disease interventions . and researchers need to explore treatments for those already infected as well , like convalescent whole blood a treatment that essentially means injecting people with the blood of ebola survivors . survivor blood and drugsthe world health organization recently told scientists that they should the use the blood of ebola survivors to treat others . the announcement was surprising to some because researchers have yet to conduct a large scale clinical trial to look into its effectiveness . based on what we know about science , it should work , lyke says . using antibodies contained in the blood of recovered patients is a well established technique used for several infectious diseases . and several ebola survivors , including physician kent brantly , have already donated their blood to help treat ebola patients . transfusions from ebola survivors should work . without a clinical trial , however , it s hard to determine how useful the transfusions have been , so the institute of tropical medicine in belgium is planning a trial . what we need now is a well designed study according to high ethic and scientific standards to confirm it works , says roeland scholtalbers , head of communications at the institute of tropical medicine in belgium . in mid december , the institute will hold a trial in which patients will receive blood or blood plasma from ebola survivors . the trial will last about one year , but researchers hope to see results as early as march , which could inform a decision about possibly scaling up this intervention or stopping the practice altogether . if using the blood of survivors proves ineffective , there are a number of drug based ebola treatments that might yield some positive results . the anti ebola drug zmapp has already been given to a number of ebola patients , and thomas duncan , the first person diagnosed with ebola in the us , was famously given the anti viral brincidofovir before his death . yet despite a favorable safety record , brincidofovir had only been tested against ebola in petri dishes prior to being given to ebola patients . and zmapp a drug that contains artificial antibodies still hasn t undergone clinical testing , which means that we still don t know if it s effective , or even safe . moreover , zmapp is in extremely short supply , so many researchers have moved past it . we can t really give it to people anyways , lyke says , until the company that makes it produces more . recipe for an ebola vaccinewithout an effective drug candidate or treatment , prevention becomes more important . informing the public about how to avoid becoming infected is essential , but a vaccine could help thousands of people avoid the disease without having to think too much about it . the two candidates that are being tested on humans are based on the same principles as all vaccines are . both make use of an virus that normally infects non human animals . to make an ebola vaccine , scientists first manipulated a virus and deleted one of its genes . then , they inserted a gene from the ebola virus into the animal virus , so the animal virus manufactures ebola proteins that are harmless to humans . so when the virus is given to people , and their bodies detect the ebola protein on its surface , they make antibodies against that protein , halperin says . a vaccinated individual would therefore already have the means to fight the virus off if they encountered ebola in the environment . healthy individuals have been more than willing to try the vaccineeach vaccine uses a different host virus the canadian vaccine makes use of a virus that normally infects cows , whereas the vaccine that s being tested in maryland is based on a chimpanzee virus . that may lead to some differences between the way the two work . for instance , the canadian vaccine has been shown to offer some protection to animals that have already been exposed to ebola . about percent of the non human primates survived when they were given a dose of the vaccine after being given a lethal challenge of ebola virus , halperin says . if the canadian vaccine is approved , it s possible that it might one day be used as a post exposure treatment . the maryland vaccine , on the other hand , shows a lot of promise , halperin says , because the type of virus it uses tends to provoke immune responses quite easily in humans . credit niaid it s too early to tell if either of the vaccines will ever make it to market , given that neither has been used on humans with ebola . but according to lyke and halpering , healthy individuals have been more than willing to try it out . there s a been huge response , lyke says , people just want to participate . halperin says that he received calls over the weekend from people who wanted to participate in the trial , which was announced last friday . when we announced that we were doing the study , we got about phone calls within minutes , he says . it s been remarkably easy to recruit volunteers . halperin s trial will only involve participants , so many keeners will have to be turned away once they ve been screened . still , it s nice to see that degree of enthusiasm , halperin says . both research groups expect to have an idea of how safe their vaccines are , and which doses are optimal , after the new year . back to basicsthere s still an incredible amount of uncertainty surrounding the various ebola drugs treatments and vaccines in development right now . the scientific principles behind them are sound , lyke says , but there s nothing like ebola . it s unique in terms of viruses . that makes it harder to treat strategies that worked for other viruses could easily fail when confronted with this particular pathogen . as a result , halperin and lyke are both adamant that the best interventions remain those that we already know about . prior to this outbreak , m decins sans fronti res have always been able to contain ebola using their tracking methods , lyke says . so although this particular outbreak has been unusual , we already know how to stop ebola . first and foremost , it s about having good sterile supplies along with iv fluids and the regular supplies that medical professionals need , lyke says . screening people for ebola is also crucial . down the line , she says , a vaccine might prove useful to stop the spread of ebola , but it s important to keep focusing on providing healthcare workers with basic medical supplies and training . ebola is a virus like many others . and then there s the matter of public perception . there was a lot of panic following the news of an ebola patient in dallas and later an ebola patient in new york city , halperin says , but ebola isn t something that people in north america should be worrying about for themselves . in many ways , imagining a large ebola threat in north america is hindering efforts to help people who are truly at risk . people here should be thinking about how to support what s going on in africa , because this is a problem there , and our responsibility here is to do everything we can to assist . scholtalbers held similar opinions . i think it is important citizens worldwide are able to distinguish fact from fable , he says . there is an epidemic of irrational fear , while in the end , ebola is a virus like many others . 