 it s still early in , but oxenfree is already one of the most striking games of the year . while it looks like a traditional point and click adventure game , with its d world and painterly visuals , it s actually an inventive twist on interactive storytelling that puts dialog at the forefront . as you explore the story , a twisted yet charming tale of teens trapped on a haunted island , you re able to engage in deep conversations with other characters , and the action never stops while you chat . it s an integral part of the experience , and it gives the game a distinct feel . oxenfree is the first game from new studio night school , formed by veterans of disney and telltale games , and it could one day become a movie or television show with a little help from the creator of the walking dead . when you think of skybound , you probably think of comic books . the entertainment company was founded in by walking dead creator robert kirkman as a way to help creators bring their comics to a larger audience . it has since expanded in multiple directions , dabbling in television and film , and even helping pewdiepie launch a new show on youtube . the company has a knack for taking a property most notably the walking dead and successfully translating it to multiple mediums . now , it s turning its attention to video games by partnering with small studios like night school . we re looking for something that feels very authentic , and also very new and fresh and innovative in a very specific way , says dan murray , president of skybound s interactive division . murray joined the company in early with the goal of expanding further into games . by that point skybound had already seen quite a bit of success with telltale games adaptation of the walking dead , one of the rare video games adapted from another medium to be both a critical and commercial success . the series is still ongoing a spin off game starring series fan favorite michonne just launched and it helped turn telltale into one of the preeminent names in interactive storytelling . but for skybound , the company also wanted to do in video games what it had already done in comics help other creators bring their visions to life . one of the things that most people notice about skybound is that it s a company built around creators , murray says . one of the big things we ve been focused on the last couple of years is finding some new voices from the gaming space and bringing those into the fold . the fruits of that work have only recently started to show . this year skybound has partnered with two different game studios , taking an almost publisher like role in the process . those games include both oxenfree and labyrinth , a collectible card game rpg hybrid that just hit steam this week as an early access title . we weren t in a spot where we needed a traditional publisher . though the partnership between skybound and oxenfree developer night school studio was only formally announced in january , it s been in the works for some time . murray and night school co founder sean krankel had known each other dating back several years , and were looking into ways to work together . we just had a similar outlook on how games could be transferred into various other media , says krankel . when the first trailer for oxenfree was released last year at the game developers conference in san francisco , it piqued the interest of none other than robert kirkman , who reached out to murray about potentially working with the game s developers . the game was fully funded , we weren t in a spot where we needed a traditional publisher , says krankel . but skybound was able to offer something else a chance to expand oxenfree beyond just gaming . they have shown that they know how to take an intellectual property and put it into various other media and do it in a way that isn t overly opportunistic , but a way that s really true to the original vision , explains krankel . we re in the very early process of developing oxenfree as something that can make its way into film or tv , and we work so closely with the tv and film guys at skybound who have no interest in taking it and co opting it and chopping it up . they re very vested in making an actual extension of what makes the game special . skybound also helps with promotion , using its clout to show off the game at events like comic con and placing print ads in the walking dead magazine . but for krankel , it s the potential expansion of the franchise that s really attractive , and it s something no one else really offers . to be honest , if the skybound thing hadn t come around , none of this other stuff would be happening , because the other potential film partnerships just didn t feel all that right and we , being so tiny , don t have the bandwidth to focus heavily on that , he says . for other game studios , the partnership is a bit different . in the case of labyrinth developer free range games , skybound is serving more of an advisory role . it s not a traditional publisher developer relationship , says free range president chris scholz . there are a lot of things that skybound can do . honestly , one of the most useful things has just been advice and mentoring . all of those guys have such huge experience creating original ip , that just having weekly meetings with them has been very insightful . skybound is helping refine the branding around the game , while also handling community focused promotions on services like twitch . they ve got the muscle of a big company . many game developers including both krankel and scholz go the independent route in an attempt to get away from the often stifling world of big studios . so the idea of working with a large publisher isn t particularly appealing . that s the reason why small , boutique publishers like devolver digital have popped up , operating more like a punk rock music label than a traditional game publisher . they re able to give game developers more of a personal connection , and skybound has a similar appeal but with the added bonus of its experience and connections in various worlds of media . they ve got the muscle of a big company , but none of the layers of management that make actually getting anything done difficult , says scholz . the gaming initiative is still a very new thing , and both projects so far happened relatively organically , with murray reaching out to developers he already knew . whether or not that s something that can scale as skybound expands its work in gaming is unclear , and will likely depend on the success of these early partnerships . but even at this formative stage , the company is already setting itself apart from the stereotypical monolithic image many have of a game publisher . they just get it , says krankel . 