 when you re looking to make a lasting impression , it s best to take the time to get it right . while the click hungry musicians of the moment are constantly dropping new tracks and teasers , my favorite artist , the ethereal erykah badu , can up and drop a mixtape after a five year hiatus and still shake things up . in an era of a cultural saturation , there s something to be said for restraint . this advice carries over to cars , too . take volvo , known as a master of restraint hello , they literally invented the three point restraint seat belt in the late s . after an era of financial tumult brought about by its divorce from former corporate parent ford and a lagging product line , volvo has finally re merged on the scene with the introduction of the xc , an suv that s entirely new for the first time since the model s introduction in . and it s good . thanks to an billion investment by its current owner china s geely the swedish born automaker is having a drop the mic moment brought about by , of all things , a big truck . volvo has always projected itself as a luxury brand that mixes cool , quirky , and safe , but with the xc , it s doing so on a much grander scale . so far , the praise has been effusive motor trend named it suv of the year , it s yahoo s ampnbspride of the year , and consumer reports gave it considerable praise in its recent review . the praise has been effusivelast fall , i first spent an afternoon tooling around in the xc and realized it deserved a deeper look of my own . for thanksgiving , i drove it from new york city to washington , dc to see how it fared on a classic american holiday road trip . while volvo knows that americans spend minutes on their daily commute research that is feeding into the company s growing self driving initiative it also understands that americans are open road types , and as such , they like a smooth , powerful ride . we are a nation of crossovers and suvs , after all . i m all american in that regard , but when it comes to good design , my tastes lean european . from mile one , the xc was stopping traffic . i was still in brooklyn when i got my first thumbs up , windows down inquiry about it . from the outside , it looks expensive and it is . the msrp is , , but my test vehicle ballooned with high dollar options to , . and while the onyx black paint and graceful proportions were turning heads , the real design game is actually happening on the interior . volvo the inside of the xc looks like it belongs in an ikea in a good way . it has that fresh form language that we see in countless starter apartments clean lines , balanced proportions . the sunlight pours in through the moonroof and the natural walnut trim is inviting without being high gloss tacky . that s where the ikea comparisons end , though . while i ve found that ikea couches have short lived ergonomic appeal , the same can t be said for the xc three grueling hours into the drive on i south , the leather seats were still comfortable and supportive . the backseat driver a seven year old passenger could change the rear climate independently to his liking . all three passengers had plenty of legroom and the seven year old had the option of hopping into the built in booster seat . road noise was minimal , all the better to blare lykke li and miike snow on the bowers ampamp wilkins sound system , which is excellent . the inside of the xc looks like it belongs in an ikea in a good way at launch , the xc shipped with a single engine option a . liter direct injection mill that produces horsepower and runs on a modest four cylinders . it s equipped with an speed transmission and has start stop capabilities . for my purposes , the engine had plenty of power to make quick passes on the highway , and while it wasn t range rover boss like , it didn t feel sluggish . it averaged about miles per gallon which is not great , considering the small displacement , transmission , and start stop system , all of which are designed to improve economy . however , there s a plug in hybrid model due out soon in the us that ll do better for a much steeper base price of , , followed by the coupe , crossover , and station wagon concepts shown at recent auto shows based on the xc s form language . on a longer excursion , the xc has features that make you want to fiddle with its new telematics system , which just debuted in this model and will filter into more models in the future . i entered in my destination the washington , dc suburb of alexandria , virginia on the ipad like center console with the same quick , painless satisfaction of signing my name on a square tablet at a cafe . it s one of the least frustrating in car navigations systems i ve used . the ui is large , readable , and more responsive than similar ones offered by other automakers , such as cadillac s cue . it wasn t cold enough to wear mittens this thanksgiving , but i ve read that i could still use gloved fingers to play with the touchpad perhaps a testament to volvo s cold , swedish roots . i did have some electronic quibbles that could be attributed to my well abused press car , like a usb port that failed to charge . volvo playing it safe is a longtime volvo concept . the first volvos were developed to withstand the harsh conditions of the scandinavian winters that chewed up foreign vehicles in the late s . it s held on to that safety first philosophy over the decades . though it s changed hands , volvo still espouses safety in virtually every ad and piece of marketing material , things like adaptive cruise control and pedestrian detection . its backup and side view cameras have clear graphics that closely represent the actual proportions of the car to road sometimes , you get a distracting fisheye effect , but not here . the xc also has a self parking feature , but i didn t have the patience to wait for my car to park itself autonomous driving hasn t yet caught up to the speed of me , it seems . the real test for the volvo xc , as with any vehicle on a road trip , came when it was time to get out . the seven year old in the back seat didn t want to i can t say i did , either . this car makes you want to be on the inside , which is really where it counts . verge video volvo s concept , a vision of an autonomous future