 when donald trump revealed his energy plan in north dakota last week , he framed it as a jobs issue . environmental regulations put in place during the obama administration led to job loss among hard working americans , he said and a clinton presidency would only make things worse . she wants to shut down the coal mines . and if crooked hillary can shut down the mines , she can shutdown your business too , trump said . his own energy plan , on other hand , will create trillions in new wealth . but in the days since the speech , many experts have pointed out that the us is actually producing more oil domestically than it has in the last years . in addition , it s incorrect to blame environmental regulations for a decline in coal demand because the real driving force is the low cost of natural gas . and so , for energy policy experts , trump s speech was a demonstration of the candidate s fundamental misunderstanding of what drives demand for various energy sources . but the biggest problem surrounding trump s energy plan isn t that it makes no sense it s that it doesn t actually exist at least not out in the open . trump says his plan will create trillions in new wealth . with the november elections just five months away , the trump campaign hasn t released a policy paper showing that trumps plan can , in fact , reform the current energy policies in the us to create trillions in new wealth . in contrast , clinton and sanders have both published climate and energy plans . because of this , practically every expert i spoke with had to first tell me that evaluating trump s plan is nearly impossible . it s not a plan it s a speech , says david victor , director of the laboratory on international law and regulation at the university of california at san diego . it s not just that the trump campaign is vague on details . it s that we have actually no clue where this came from and how they did the basic analysis . still , there s some meat in trump s speech to dissect . so , here s a list of the many , many things trump got wrong trump thinks making the us energy independent would be good for the economybecause trump gave too few details in his speech , it s hard to tell exactly what he means by energy independent . for most people , this would mean relying solely on domestic production to power the us . but given that trump also called for a renewal of the keystone xl pipeline project a project that would bring canadian oil into the us he clearly doesn t actually want to cut out all foreign oil sources . so , let s just operate under the assumption that trump wants to stop importing oil from countries outside north america . first , the us is the largest oil producer in the world . that means that even though trump is trying to paint the us as a country that s trapped under the weight of foreign oil markets , americans are actually doing pretty well for themselves . it is this diversity of supply that reduces risk furthermore , relying on a single source of energy the us s own supply is risky . if something were to happen , like a devastating hurricane in the gulf of mexico , then the us wouldn t have other , reliable sources to turn to . you ve got all kinds of economic shocks that can occur in the united states and globally , says brian murray , interim director of the duke university energy initiative . the more sources of supply that you have , the less likely you are to be affected by supply and demand shocks throughout the world . ampnbsprobert stavins , director of the environmental economics program at harvard university , agrees it is this diversity of supply that reduces risk and that provides security , not reliance on a single source . trump thinks wind farms kill more than million birds each yearin his speech , trump blamed government misconduct for fast tracking wind projects that kill more than million birds a year . it s not clear where that number comes from , but either way , it s completely inaccurate . in , researchers estimated that , birds are killed each year when they collide with wind turbines a little over one third of trump s estimate . the fish and wildlife service , on the other hand , says that wind turbines kill somewhere between , and , birds each year . trump s argument is a classic and dubious line of attack on wind energy . by some estimates , coal mining kills close to million birds each year . and oil and gas kill between , and million . so claiming that wind turbines are killing american birds is ridiculous in comparison . but the argument is especially disingenuous coming from trump , who recently mocked endangered animal protections in california . trump thinks environmental regulations are killing the coal industryenvironmental regulations , like restrictions on federal land use , have had an effect on the coal industry , but regulatory impacts are nothing compared to the effect that the natural gas industry coal s main competitor has had on energy production in the us . the truth is the natural gas is a lot cheaper right now , so coal is being left behind . we all know the coal industry has been largely devastated because of natural gas , says charles ebinger , senior fellow in the energy security and climate initiative at the brookings institute , a nonprofit organization . because of this , any attempt at bringing back coal would probably have an adverse affect on natural gas production , he says . supporting fracking would lose more jobs for coal workersbut that s not even the weirdest part of trump s position on coal . in his speech , trump referred to using untapped reserves of natural gas on federal lands . this is clearly a reference to fracking . but if he removes the regulations that prevent fracking on these lands , that would probably lower the cost of natural gas even further effectively stabbing the us coal industry in the back . trump s promised support of greater natural gas fracking would actually have the effect of lowering demand for coal , causing more mines to close , jobs to be lost , etc . , of the us coal industry , stavins says . trump thinks the paris climate agreement gives foreign bureaucrats control over how much the energy the us consumes so he wants to cancel it the paris climate agreement definitely doesn t give foreign bureaucrats control over how much energy the us uses . the agreement clearly states that countries can determine their own plans for cutting emissions . i don t know if he is ignorant of the facts or intentionally lying , but either is terrible for a presidential candidate , stavins says . as for canceling the agreement , the us doesn t have the power to make that happen . so far , more than countries have approved the agreement . but trump might be able to pull the us out of the agreement before it s ratified . this would be a very bad move from a foreign diplomacy standpoint , however . with the paris agreement , nearly two decades of us climate diplomacy has finally won the day . and now the us would protest and drop out ? just one more way in which a trump presidency would be an embarrassment , and a terrible threat to the welfare of the united states and the world , stavins says . trump thinks the oil and gas industry support million high paying americans jobs the oil and gas industry isn t a big player when it comes to jobs in the us . in january , , workers were directly employed in oil and gas extraction , while the coal industry employed another , in , according to the bureau of labor statistics . trump didn t mention climate change but his denial shines througheven though trump talked about getting rid of the paris climate agreement and environmental regulations , he failed to mention climate change during his energy address . in fact , the closest he came was to say that , as president , he would deal with real environmental challenges , not the phony ones we ve been hearing about , presumably a nod to climate change , which he s said is a lie . trump is a well documented climate change denialist and conspiracy theorist , claiming it s a hoax orchestrated by the chinese . failing to mention climate change might actually be a strategic move for him . diving into that subject would have turned an already terrible energy speech into a farce . the concept of global warming was created by and for the chinese in order to make u . s . manufacturing non competitive . donald j . trump realdonaldtrump november , based on this speech alone , trump comes off as both ignorant and intentionally deceptive . but he didn t stop there . in california last week , he told an audience that the state s devastating drought is a fabrication . they re taking the water and shoving it out to sea , he said , before adding that he knew how to solve the problem . all it would take would be to redirect water to central valley farmers , while ignoring concerns about endangered fish . trump s denial of a very real problem is scary . but as the grist point out , his position didn t come out of nowhere republicans have been blaming the drought on bad environmental policies for some time now . he ll try to make himself in favor of everything . because trump has yet to publish an energy policy paper , debunking his plans is a mostly futile practice . holding back means that he can tailor his speeches to his audience without having to worry about making sure that what he says aligns with his proposed policies . trump has this way of taking credit for all sides of an issue , jeremiah bohr , a sociologist at the university of wisconsin oshkosh told me . he ll try to make himself in favor of everything . so what does presidential candidate trump stand for ? in the last month , we learned that trump wants to kill california s smelt , but save birds from wind turbines . he s also fine with denying climate change publicly while citing it as a reason to ampnbspsave his irish golf course . and when he s dealing with fossil fuels , it s totally fine to expand fracking while somehow reviving the coal industry . the contradictions are so abundant that it s hard to keep track . of course , each of these positions could be entirely different tomorrow . 