 microsoft is on the verge of massive change . ceo steve ballmer has announced his retirement , and the software giant doesn amprsquot have an immediate replacement waiting in the wings . after years with just two ceos , the company is searching for its perfect match ampmdash someone to move software out of traditional boxes and into service efforts , an individual who can steer towards new a hardware push . that amprsquos a tall order . after months of searching , the company revealed last week that it amprsquos not planning to name steve ballmer amprsquos successor until . while many had expected a new ceo by now , the search will continue over the holiday period and into the new year . microsoft identified over candidates and spoke with several dozen before focusing in on a group of individuals . this group has now narrowed , and the current speculation is now centered on four key names ford ceo alan mulally , former nokia ceo stephen elop , microsoft cloud and enterprise boss satya nadella , and former skype president tony bates . bill gates says the microsoft ceo role is a ampldquocomplex role to fill , amprdquo and it amprsquos clear there amprsquos no immediate or obvious answer . while microsoft amprsquos board is assessing internal candidates , it amprsquos a big decision to name a leader who will need to tackle a nokia devices acquisition and a huge reorganization in the coming months . as the challenge of replacing steve ballmer continues into , microsoft employees , investors , and customers are left wondering who will lead the company into the next big trends in technology . alan mulallyspeculation has centered on ford ceo alan mulally as the man microsoft wants . mulally is credited with turning ford around through the mid to late s as other american car companies were struggling to stay afloat . he took ford from losing billions to sustained annual profits and allowed the company to avoid bankruptcy and a federal bailout . while he has no background in technology , he amprsquos no stranger to microsoft amprsquos business . mulally and outgoing ceo steve ballmer are longtime friends , and ballmer actually called on mulally for advice when planning the massive microsoft reorganization announced over the summer . the two reportedly met at a starbucks , where mulally laid out the tenets of his success at ford a simplified brand and good teamwork . that close relationship led to a microsoft reorganization focused on that teamwork . ballmer has streamlined divisions and removed policies that pitted co workers against each other . ballmer even borrowed the concept of one microsoft from mulally amprsquos one ford approach . though mulally is past retirement age , a short stint could allow microsoft to infuse some outside experience into the company as it attempts to reach its devices and services goal . before ford , mulally had extensive experience in the airplane industry , where he worked at boeing for years in roles from engineer to executive . he might not have the technical knowledge that microsoft usually requires for executive positions , but he amprsquos certainly proved he can adapt and manage big businesses . mulally amprsquos experience turning ford around could be a valuable asset for microsoft as it brings on nokia amprsquos device business in the face of struggling mobile marketshare . microsoft is attempting to balance its strong enterprise offerings with a focus on consumer devices and services that spread across work and home . mulally is clearly a strong candidate for managing the sprawling businesses that microsoft runs , but his age , importance to ford , and lack of technology experience could all count against him in the race for ceo . satya nadellasatya nadella is a microsoft veteran , having joined the company over years ago . born in india in , nadella studied electrical engineering at mangalore university before moving to the us to study computer science at the university of wisconsin . he originally worked at microsoft rival sun microsystems before heading to redmond to work on research for microsoft amprsquos online services division . he has held a number of roles , working in the company amprsquos business division on office , and to some degree on the bing search engine . most importantly , nadella has been instrumental in transforming microsoft amprsquos cloud businesses . his work leading microsoft amprsquos server and tools division helped boost its profitability and move the company from traditional client server computing to cloud infrastructure like windows azure . recently , nadella has been focused on microsoft amprsquos cloud services , pushing the company amprsquos underlying infrastructure into products like bing , skydrive , xbox live , and skype . while nadella has little experience running consumer facing businesses like xbox or skype , he has a deep understanding and knowledge of the computing and engineering required to develop and build services and applications that are used by millions . given microsoft amprsquos devices and services push , he amprsquos clearly well positioned to help steer the company in one particular direction . while nadella has made a name for himself inside microsoft as an intelligent and charismatic leader over the years , he amprsquos not a household name to consumers and even most businesses . he has surged through the ranks with technical expertise and a focus on enterprise , but has had little involvement in microsoft amprsquos mobile future . microsoft amprsquos core strength currently relies on enterprises and businesses purchasing licenses or using software and services that the company develops . while windows is struggling thanks to a decline in pc shipments , microsoft amprsquos enterprise and office software and services are continuing to bring in impressive revenues for the company . nadella compliments this strength perfectly , but he would need to prove he can complete microsoft amprsquos vision for devices and its continued mobile push if he amprsquos to succeed steve ballmer . tony batestony bates is relatively new to microsoft , having joined the company in late after the software maker acquired skype . born in britain , bates has a strong technology background thanks largely to his work at cisco . after dropping out of a mechanical engineering course at london amprsquos south bank university , bates opted for a career as a network operator at the university of london for about six years . he taught himself programming , learning unix and c during his commute to work . his skills allowed him to help run some of the early internet network gateways between the us and uk . he clearly has strong technical skills and experience , and his years at cisco saw him manage around , employees responsibilities included strategy and development . bates amprsquo cisco experience exposed him to enterprise , commercial , and small business areas , where he largely focused on the infrastructure sides of those various departments . however , he also shifted his work from the business side to consumer products as cisco gradually transitioned to focus on electronics , dvrs , and routers for the home . he also served on the youtube board ahead of google amprsquos acquisition , increasing his involvement in consumer related technology . bates amprsquo mix of consumer and enterprise experience is a natural fitbates amprsquo consumer experience eventually led him to skype in when he was hired as ceo , completing one of his many personal goals to lead a company as ceo before he turned . bates revealed in an interview that he made a list of three companies he amprsquod like to lead as ceo one was skype and the other two were on the consumer and internet sides of the market , but bates refused to reveal the company names . for microsoft , bates amprsquo mix of consumer and enterprise experience is a natural fit and beneficial to the company amprsquos goals , but his lack of ceo experience at a publicly traded company may count against him . bates has also remained active in silicon valley social circles , a key technology group that has often been hostile to microsoft in recent years , and a collective that microsoft is always keen to woo . stephen elopstephen elop is one of the more unusual ceo candidates that microsoft is considering . born in canada and celebrating his th birthday at the end of the month , elop will return to microsoft early next year even if he amprsquos not named ceo . the former nokia ceo left microsoft in late to run the finnish smartphone maker , and his return will see him run an expanded devices team unless he amprsquos made microsoft ceo . elop oversaw nokia amprsquos turbulent transition from symbian to windows phone , kicking things off with an honest and surprising burning platform internal memo . in it , elop compared nokia to an oil platform that was on fire , noting that apple changed the game with the iphone and google amprsquos gravitational force with android had managed to attack nokia amprsquos low end phone dominance . it came just days before elop helped form a partnership with microsoft , his former employer , to create smartphones running windows phone . since then , nokia has transitioned fully to windows phone , and is the single dominant seller of phones running microsoft amprsquos software . elop amprsquos previous experience at microsoft , where he was the head of the business division , and his work running nokia make him an obvious ceo candidate , but he also has years of experience elsewhere . for six years he helped run boston chicken now boston market as its cio , before the firm filed for bankruptcy in . he then joined macromedia as web businesses started to boom , spending seven years in various senior positions . he was named macromedia ceo just a few months before adobe acquired the company in april . elop eventually resigned from adobe after just over a year and joined juniper networks as coo for a year before moving to microsoft . while he spent less than two years at microsoft , elop was responsible for microsoft office and oversaw the release of office . a mix of experience and skills is essential for a modern microsoft ceo , but understanding the company amprsquos culture and new focus on mobile and devices is equally important if the firm is serious about transitioning from its pc roots . elop amprsquos experience at nokia was mixed . while nokia amprsquos profits dropped percent during his time as ceo , the finnish firm was already struggling to adapt and elop managed to trim and even turn a modest profit just ahead of microsoft amprsquos acquisition . however , elop has an unfortunate history of leaving companies just as they amprsquore struggling , a position microsoft finds itself in for key consumer and mobile markets . recent reports have suggested elop may consider a strategy shift at microsoft if he were made ceo , including rumored plans to sell its xbox business and kill off the bing search engine . the plans seem unlikely given microsoft amprsquos new collaborative focus , but any potential ceo will want to change and shape the company their own way . wrap upthe rumors around microsoft amprsquos ceo choice have consistently focused on these four men , but a delay into may leave the decision wide open . nadella has revealed he amprsquoll stay at microsoft regardless , and mulally amprsquos representatives have been issuing non denial denials . elop and bates have both remained silent during the search , leaving their fate largely unknown . the four main contenders may no longer fit the requirements of the board , leading to the possibility of a dark horse candidate taking the role by surprise . microsoft could even opt for a dual ceo strategy , with enterprise and consumer focused leaders . it amprsquos not clear exactly what microsoft will do , and the board will likely be busy working over the holiday period to find the ideal solution . a delay until leaves the possibility of a dark horse winning the racemicrosoft amprsquos choice of ceo will speak volumes for the direction of the company . the complex nokia deal requires a leader to balance the company amprsquos push for hardware with its continued focus on consumer and enterprise software and services . if a future ceo isn amprsquot able to make the nokia deal work , it will spell major trouble for microsoft amprsquos hardware ambitions ampmdash and no one in redmond wants another zune or kin . an indecisive process or the appointment of an interim ceo will also reveal microsoft isn amprsquot ready to fully decide or commit to a particular strategy , despite its devices and services plan there s a lot of uncertainty over microsoft amprsquos future direction , and ballmer has already put together a plan for his successor that they may be forced to follow with the pressure of co founder bill gates as chairman . microsoft amprsquos next ceo will carry the weight of over , employees on their shoulders , all in the middle of a massive transition to one microsoft . that amprsquos no easy job . jacob kastrenakes contributed to this report . 