 the way we move around cities is changing . ride hailing and sharing apps are helping lower our dependency on cars , and we re also seeing more ways to move around that don t involve cars at all . we can mostly thank the rise of rideables for that products like electric skateboards and those two wheeled hoverboards that are going to be underneath every tree this holiday season . but for people who have longer commutes , or want a safer ride , more sensible electric scooters are beginning to materialize . green ride a company based in israel , where scooters are nearly a way of life wants to firmly plant its inu scooter at the top end of that emerging market , next to other newcomers like gogoro and gas powered incumbents like vespa . i recently got to ride a prototype of the inu , and the experience left me hungry for this impending electric scooter battle . like the gogoro , the inu is attractive , futuristic , and full of high tech features . it has a smartphone dock that s compatible with ios and android devices . it has a colorful display that fills the handlebar , lights that trim the wheels , and a built in alarm . the inu also folds up , like some other scooters do , but it can do this on its own with internal motors there s no pulling on straps or handles . unlike the gogoro , the inu doesn t require you to swap batteries or rely on a network of charging stations . it has a kilometer mile range , and can be fully charged from a standard wall outlet in three hours . it has hydraulic disc brakes in the front wheel and regenerative braking in the back to help maintain that impressive range . it promises comfort , too , in the form of shock absorbers and a leather seat . the inu might not be as fast as something like a gogoro or a vespa , but that s on purpose the scooter is speed limited to km h so that riders don t need a motorcycle license . green ride says that speed will change in each country according to local regulations . but the most strikingly unique thing about the inu is its design . it s flashy and bold without being obnoxious . the curved , aluminum frame and spare use of color make it look as much like a fashion statement as it does a means of personal transport . the inu is flashy and boldthis is mostly thanks to ori yemini , the lead designer of the inu . at , yemini is relatively young , but has held a number of jobs in industrial and automotive design the latter including a stint at pininfarina , the company behind a number of famous ferrari designs . the philosophy was to make it peaceful , because most cities architecture and scenographies are hard lines , yemini says . everything is hard and pointy . in order to make it unique , i thought to make it round as much as i can . yemini went on to describe a rather unique approach taken by the team at green ride while developing the inu . they used facebook to study , on a larger scale , the habits of people who work in city centers . we tried to understand their way of life , what they hear , the atmosphere that they live in , he says . the next step was to see where they lived , and better understand what surrounded them . we did virtual travel around the world with google maps , yemini says almost sheepishly , and we lived for a few hours in some major cities , trying to understand the lights of the cities , the way people dress . from there , yemini set out on designing the inu . i had inspiration for almost every part for the frame , for the wings , for the wheels , for the seat , he says . after i lived the life of those people , we made a market in front of our eyes and we had almost , although they were virtual , we had them in front of our eyes the whole time we designed the product . the most difficult part of creating the inu , yemini says , was striking that balance between high performance and high design . the process was a tug of war with engineers who always wanted parts to be bigger and thicker , he says . but whatever balance was struck between the opposing sides during development , it worked . it s nearly impossible to spot any of the electronics on the scooter itself . they re all hidden in the seat , in the aluminum piping , and especially in the wheels . there is no space for a hair there , yemini says . even to fill the air for the tire , we almost don t have space for that . he says the same goes for the motor . if you give us another month , we d have no space to keep going in development there . every little space that we had we ve already used . every little part of the scooter is packed with techthe inu was first shown off at ces last january , but a finished model won t be available until the middle of next year when the company officially launches it in europe and in new york city . green ride recently offered me a ride on a prototype which you can see above , and we took it around the block at the north end of times square . there s a heavy emphasis on prototype here , though the scooter was literally disassembled in israel and reassembled in green ride s hotel room . that meant that the model they brought did not fold up , and it had some electrical issues that kept it from going very far or very fast . it was more plasticky than the final version will be , and it kept losing one of its front hubcaps . despite these issues , the inu was still a massive head turner . a dozen people stopped in the street , on their bikes , or causing traffic in their cars to ask what it was , what it does , and when and where they could get it . sure , they were disappointed when i told them about the near , price tag and the availability , but that didn t stop them from taking a picture so they could show it to a friend or post about it online . the inu is ambitious the design and the price won t be for everyone . the prototype falls short of the promise , but that s okay . i m still buying into the future that green ride and its competitors are selling , even if i have to squint a little to see it . 