 it s midnight in hobart , indiana , and the auditorium of the cozy , single screen art theatre is echoing with the sounds of cartoon characters in the throes of passion . one orgasm follows another first marge simpson then bugs bunny as first time attendees to the art s weekly screening of the rocky horror picture show go through a variation on a ritual that s taken place for nearly years the hazing of the virgins . virgins under get off the hook this particular night , due to the risqu nature of the initiation . it s not a packed house , but it s lively as about attendees , many of them regulars , file in and wait for the show to start , both on the screen and off . nighthawks at the cinemahow misfits lost the midnight movieby keith phipps illustrations by david aguado it s midnight in hobart , indiana , and the auditorium of the cozy , single screen art theatre is echoing with the sounds of cartoon characters in the throes of passion . one orgasm follows another first marge simpson then bugs bunny as first time attendees to the art s weekly screening of the rocky horror picture show go through a variation on a ritual that s taken place for nearly years the hazing of the virgins . virgins under get off the hook this particular night , due to the risqu nature of the initiation . it s not a packed house , but it s lively as about attendees , many of them regulars , file in and wait for the show to start , both on the screen and off . the art , built in , is a lovely art deco venue with a mural covered auditorium , but like many small town theaters it has struggled in recent years . in , it benefitted from a campaign designed to keep independent theaters alive by helping them to convert to digital projection . since then , it s stayed afloat with second run offerings that focus on family friendly fare . i m told that posters advertising magic mike xxl when i visit don t represent the usual sort of film that plays there . but each saturday , the art offers an added attraction help me mommy , which bills itself as northwest indiana s rocky horror picture show floorshow cast , performs for an enthusiastic crowd as the rocky horror picture show plays behind them . first released in september of , rocky horror has never left theaters , and the film is more famous now than ever . but fame has also changed it , turning it from a fringe item to an institution famous enough to provide fodder for an episode of glee and a possible tv remake for fox . and as it s grown in fame , the cult has appeared to lose some of its outsider fervor over the years , with weekly gatherings like this one becoming increasingly less common across the country . you wouldn t know that sitting in the art theatre in hobart , though . each week the cast and crowd goes through a ritual familiar to anyone who s seen rocky horror at a midnight show a pre show featuring clips involving the rocky horror cast and other bits of weirdness . a virgin auction in which first time attendees are subjected to good natured , if obscene , initiation rituals . and then the show itself , in which the venerable movie plays out behind a live action reenactment known in rocky fandom as a shadow cast as its dialogue gets interrupted by a mix of crude , witty retorts from the audience , some nearly as old as the film itself . yeah , we re all a bunch of weirdos . that also makes them older than most of the attendees who skew toward teens and somethings . i was always very socially awkward . never felt like i fit in anywhere , a man who asks to be identified only as t . r . tells me in the art theatre lobby a few hours before the show . these are odd sentiments to hear from a handsome year old union plumber wearing a captain america t shirt , with a physique and unerring gaze to match , but there s not a hint of insincerity to them . i did sports , i did theater , i did a bunch of stuff and never fit in . t . r . first saw the rocky horror picture show in and soon joined the pink invaders , the northwest indiana rocky cast that would eventually evolve into help me mommy . rocky horror was the first place i ever came to where it was just like , yeah , we re all a bunch of weirdos and we re all accepting of each other . you can come hang with us and we re not going to make fun of you for it . if the ampnbspranks of rocky horror fandom are thinner than at their height in the s and s , they still remain a self replenishing resource , and rocky horror continues as an important rite of passage for misfits of all stripes , in hobart and elsewhere . but the larger midnight movie tradition from which it emerged is changing , and facing an uncertain future . prior to the s , midnight shows were the realm of the occasional horror release and exploitation distributors who used the slot to attract night owls to seedy fare . but the midnight movie as we know it as a friday and saturday night staple featuring cult films came into its own as the s turned into the s . getz was the johnny appleseed of the midnight moviethe s saw a flurry of activity in underground film as jack smith , kenneth anger , andy warhol , and others made movies way outside the hollywood system , films that took avant garde forms and featured content too extreme for the mainstream . that didn t mean there wasn t an audience for them , though . warhol s film chelsea girls played new york for months , for instance , and in the latter part of that year , mike getz of los angeles cinema theatre after having success in los angeles playing experimental films at midnight hit upon the notion of sending a package of films on the road under the name psychedelic film trips . they played at midnight across the country in theaters owned by getz s uncle louis sher , and they did well , making getz something like the johnny appleseed of the midnight movie . as jonathan rosenbaum and j . hoberman put it in their invaluable book midnight movies in thus popularizing the underground , getz provided the spadework for the midnight movie explosion of the s . t he underground invented a grass roots alternative to straight movies , television , and theater . the underground demonstrated that , in america anyway , anyone could make some sort of movie and get it shown somewhere . accordingly , all manner of long repressed sexual content burst scandalously upon the screen . there was even money to be made doing it . the moment had arrived , in other words , for the underground to go overground , and a few key titles pushed it there . george romero s groundbreaking zombie film night of the living dead found a second life , appropriately enough , at midnight . alejandro jodorowsky s violent western fantasia el topo played for appreciative , often stoned crowds . so did early john waters outrages like pink flamingos and female trouble . tod browning s film freaks found new life in midnight revival screenings , and s the harder they come helped popularize reggae outside jamaica . in some respects , the films had little in common . the blackly comic sensibility at the heart of waters films shares little with the outr stylishness of el topo . yet an anti authoritarian streak runs through all of them , one that resonated with counterculture audiences as one decade gave way to the next . not everyone saw this as an entirely healthy development . in a november new yorker piece titled el poto head comics , pauline kael likened the crowds turning out for el topo and head films like it to a black mass , criticized its extreme violence , and called it out for pretension and incoherence . jodorowsky employs anything that can give the audience a charge even if the charges are drawn from different systems of thought that are as thought incompatible . head movies don t have to be works of art , she concludes , they just have to be sensational . yet even if the charges stuck , the popularity of el topo and other midnight fixtures confirmed that there were viewers hungry for images and ideas they d never see in respectable hours and the communities that formed around them . in the heady buzz of a packed midnight house , these films reassured their audiences that because they were outsiders didn t mean they were alone . the midnight landscape started to shift in the s with the rise of home video , and as with every movie related technological advance , something was lost as something else was gained . it s no coincidence that the golden age of midnight movies started to fade as vhs ascended , but it also allowed their weirdness to spread . growing up in a tiny ohio suburb , i doubt i would have had access to most of those films if not for a well stocked video store , and i m sure i m not alone . feel the need to see the proposal at on friday ? now you canand as the films that once occupied it began to disperse , the midnight slot started to go mainstream . warner bros . capitalized on the anticipation around tim burton s version of batman by playing it at midnight on june rd , its opening day . the following year , disney went even further , devising an elaborate , troubled promotion by which moviegoers could buy i was there first ampnbspdick tracy t shirts that would double as admission to midnight screenings . over the next two decades , midnight screenings of mainstream films became commonplace , particularly in the years after the debut of star wars episode i the phantom menace , which attracted considerable press for the long lines of fans waiting to see the earliest possible screening . midnight premieres of films in the lord of the rings , harry potter , and twilight franchises followed franchises with rabid , passionate fan bases and subcultures . but so did midnight screenings of virtually every movie released feel the need to see the proposal the very minute the clock strikes on friday ? now you can . now midnight has become just another spot on the schedule in many theaters , with even the see it first element dropping out as more and more films started hitting theaters on the thursday evening before their official release . does a slot once reserved for the weird and the unexpected have the same meaning when you can see the proposal or the remake of the karate kid at the same time ? as technology has changed , theaters have met even more challenges in attracting midnight audiences . at chicago s music box theatre , assistant general manager buck le pard points to increased competition from netflix as a particular problem . you want to do something , you re hanging out with your friends , le pard says , like let s go see a movie , and then it just became let s see what s on netflix . music box has experimented with eventizing midnight screenings , partnering with the website consequence of sound and finding success with a midnight showing of blue velvet preceded by a celebration of all things david lynch , complete with actors dressed as famous lynch characters . the theater s midnight selection also leans heavily on nostalgic offerings from the s and s , though sometimes it s hard to figure out what films fall into the sweet spot . a recent run dedicated to s blockbusters got off to a good start with jurassic park then faltered with independence day , mission impossible , and speed . there s a notable shortage of new cult classics the distribution wing of austin based alamo drafthouse cinema , drafthouse films , has the rare distinction of surfacing new , or at least newly discovered midnight movies gems like the gloriously amateurish s action film miami connection set and filmed in orlando and roar , a bizarre nature adventure film produced by and starring tippi hedren . yet as fun as those movies are , there s a notable shortage of new cult classics finding their audience at midnight . the midnight tradition has always had a corner dedicated to films that fall under the so bad they re good heading . it was midnight screenings , after all , that gave reefer madness its second life . but these days , if a new film has any hope of joining the ranks of midnight regulars , it most likely falls under this heading . films like birdemic shock and terror and the room have attracted cults dedicated to their incompetence , which is compelling for reasons their creators could never have imagined . irony has always been one mode for midnight appreciation it s now threatening to become the dominant one . the rare exceptions are those films that get a second chance thanks to midnight audiences . a combination of home video and midnight screenings made the big lebowksi into the cult object it is today . donnie darko and wet hot american summer both did meager to embarrassing business on their first release only to be rediscovered by appreciative , after dark crowds . considered a commercial disappointment on its release , edgar wright s scott pilgrim vs . the world has since become a midnight staple . i didn t expect it , wright told me in an email exchange about the film . . . but i had somewhat designed the movie to be the type of film that would have blown my head off as a teenager . so when it quickly started building up a passionate following even on its initial release , that connection back to the films that inspired me came full circle . i like movies that reward repeat viewings and it s a very dense movie so people come back again and also drag their newbie friends too . ampnbspwhen the movie underperformed on its opening weekend , the head of marketing at universal , michael moses , sent me an email that simply said years , not days . i think he too knew that it could be a sleeper . give it another years , wright concludes , and we might be in the black . if that second life offers cold comfort to studio bookkeepers , it at least assures filmmakers like wright and donnie darko s richard kelly , and wet hot american summer s david wain that their work is finding the audience that missed it the first time around , however belatedly and in the late night hours . the fall and rise of ampnbspscott pilgrim illustrates how difficult it is to predict the success , immediate or eventual , of any film in prime time or midnight . a few titles , like the self consciously cult y musical repo the genetic opera have made deliberate attempts to stake their claim in the midnight market , with varying degrees of success . which brings us back to the rocky horror picture show , and back to hobart , indiana . while other key films from the golden age of midnight movies still get brought out for the occasional showing , most are solely home video fixtures . rocky horror remains a theatrical draw even after appearing on vhs , dvd , and blu ray , being broadcast on cable networks from vh to logo , and glee . if a proposed tv remake ever happens , it will almost certainly survive that , too . why ? the harder i ve looked for a simple answer , the more that answer has eluded me . alexander degman , a member of the help me mommy cast , even confessed to me he didn t like the movie . i like everything else . degman says of the film itself , whether it s good or bad or indifferent , it s people putting dedication into something . it s people having a passion for something and just getting people to do something else other than sitting in front of the computer playing video games all night long . the midnight slot has become a different sort of space the rocky horror picture show is , in some ways , the safest form of rebellion , in hobart or elsewhere . we have a big audience of teenagers , cast member sarah denton who shares a last name with the hometown of rocky horror s heroes tells me , and i like to think that we re more of a safe place than anything . because it s a saturday night , it s a bunch of teenagers they could be going to parties , out drinking , out doing drugs , but we re not doing that here . instead , they re watching and interacting with a movie , one formed from glam rock , bondage gear , and the cheap , lasting stuff of b movie fantasies and dirty rock and roll . it s a movie that takes a buttoned up couple from denton , ohio and drops them into a fantastic , dangerous , arousing world they didn t even know was within their reach . and if two kids from denton can find it , then maybe anyone can . yet if rocky horror seems in little danger of fading away , it s unlikely we ll ever see its likes again . the midnight slot has become a different sort of space in the years since its s heyday , and watching movies a different sort of experience . for better or worse , some of the conditions that helped draw in midnight crowds namely a passive tolerance of drugs , alcohol , and rowdiness are hard to find these days . and midnights aren t the only route by which films now find their cults . leos carax s holy motors a film very much in the tradition of golden age midnight movies , may have only played in a handful of theaters for a few weeks , but now i can rent it in a click and watch it on my laptop , at starbucks in the middle of the day . i can even link out to its amazing entracte , on youtube , a rousing musical showstopper that shifts the film into another gear as it moves toward its second act . you can watch it alone , if you like . but it will never quite be the same as its natural setting in the dark , away from the rest of the world , after midnight . edited by emily yoshida , michael zelenko 