 from siri to alexa , voice interfaces are becoming increasingly common , but for all their recent advances , they often struggle with one of the most basic characteristics of human speech accents . the problem is so prevalent that computer scientists have identified the ampnbspexistence of a machine voice , a ampnbspstandardized way of speaking that individuals with accents adopt in the hope of being understood . ampnbspresearchers even warn about the existence of a ampnbsp speech divide that ostracizes individuals whose accents differ from those the machines have been trained on . as is often the case with technology built on large data sets , the problem begins with the input . if you only train your interface using a narrow selection of voices , then it won t know how to respond to accents that fall outside of its frame of reference . according to marsal gavalda , the head of machine intelligence at yik yak and an expert on speech recognition , academics have been studying the problem since the s . speech recognition s lack of diversity is rooted in data sets collected decades ago historically , speech recognition systems have been trained from data collected mostly in universities , and mostly from the student population , gavalda tells the verge . the diversity of voices reflect the student population years ago . for example , a project in the early s known as ampnbspcall home gave students credits to make free , long distance phone calls . their calls would be recorded , transcribed , and annotated , then sold as data sets to research teams and computer scientists . it was the easiest place to collect these samples , says gavalda . he adds that researchers also collected audio from news broadcasters but again , this meant selecting only the most neutral accents . there s an easy way to fix this , though collect more data . companies like google have been doing exactly that as their voice interfaces become more integral to their software and hardware , and the internet has made this collection pretty straightforward . as was first ampnbspspotted by quartz , the search giant has been using a third party company , appen , to corral a diverse array of accented audio samples from the website s users . recruiting at r beermoneycontractors for appen have been posting on a number of subredddits , including those dedicated to part time work r slavelabour , r workonline , r beermoney , etc as well as individual cities . r edinburgh was where the request for samples was originally spotted , presumably to iron out understanding of the ampnbspunderserved scottish accent . i m currently recruiting to collect speech data for google , reads one ampnbsptypical request . it requires you to use an android to complete the task . the task is recording voice prompts like indy now , google what s the time . each phrase takes around seconds . adults are paid to record , phrases , while under s can record phrases and earn . neither appen nor google would confirm that they were involved in the project , but a well placed source told the verge that the search giant regularly collects voice data to improve its services it s just usually not so visible . we talked to a number of redditors who completed the task , and asked them about their experiences with voice interface tech . there were regional accents from the uk and america , as well as indian and chinese accented english , with most users saying they d had difficulty with tech like siri and alexa in the past . all said they went through the same process of being directed to a mobile webpage where there was a record button to tap , and a number of phrases to read out . these voice samples were mostly addressed to google beginning ok google , hey , google , etc . , but some just asked for the names of popular tv shows , toys , and video game including a number of youtube channels , like ampnbspsky does minecraft . others spanned a range of typical google searches , including hunting for recipes how to make a birthday cake , understanding idioms hey google , get cold feet , beating pub quizzes presidents in order , and looking for that perfect karaoke number you ll be in my heart just music . i need to annunciate a ton and use simple phrases . one respondent told the verge by email i m originally from china , but i ve lived in the us for about a decade , so i speak pretty much understandable english . ampnbspthe closest description of my accent would be us northeast with a hint of singaporean newscaster . however , i do need to ampnbspenunciate ampnbspa ton and use simple phrases for applications like siri and google now to work . i can t really converse with my phone . after audio samples are collected by appen they re annotated by the company s in house linguists , with longer sentences broken down grammatically , and contextual information added was the sample recorded on a phone ? inside ? outdoors ? . mark brayan , the company s ceo , wouldn t comment on the company s work with google , but told the verge that the firm collects and annotates a process it refers to as decoration audio samples from around the world , with employees able to translate some languages . brayan says demand for the company s services has increased massively in recent years , especially as voice interfaces become more common and users expect more out of them . to go from understanding percent of words to percent , the recognizer has to digest infrequently used words , of which there are millions , says brayan . companies often request audio samples for specific vocabulariessometimes the company has to produce samples of specific vocabularies , related to , for example , a sport or a hobby . one of the big challenges is what we call named entity recognition , says brayan . that s brand names , product names , individual names , and so on . companies can ask for specific accents , or they can just say where they re hoping to launch a product and appen will produce the relevant voices . so if you re launching in canada , for example , you need not only the french language but also french accented canadian english . incorporating unrepresented english speaking accents will be a big step forward for voice interfaces , says gavalda . you could argue that the majority of english speakers are not even native speakers . he compares the situation to clinical trials for pharmaceutical companies that only recruited white men . it wasn t until an ampnbspact of congress in that it became illegal to exclude women and minorities from such vital research . if you think about it you re developing a of medicine , he says , so it stand to reason you would make it work equally well with all different types of people . being able to ask siri or alexa questions obviously isn t as important as having access to effective medicine , but it is exclusion all the same . thankfully , as google s trawling for accents on reddit shows , it s relatively easy to remedy . just collect the audio samples , and let the machine learning systems process them . after all , a computer doesn t really hear accents there are just sounds it recognizes and those it doesn t . it just needs the data . correction a previous version of this story stated that appen employees had posted to reddit . it was third party contractors appen had hired who did to . we regret the error . 