 when the supreme court decided alice v . cls bank in , it marked a new era in software patent law . by ruling that abstract ideas could not be patented simply because they were executed on a computer , the alice decision significantly narrowed down the possible universe of software patents . since then , more and more software patents have been invalidated by the courts particularly in the federal circuit , the appeals court for patent cases , which is still grappling with how exactly to apply alice . intellectual ventures v . symantec is the most recent attempt at applying alice . this last week , symantec and trend micro got handed a big win in the federal circuit , with the appeals court invalidating three patents on antivirus technology owned by intellectual ventures , the biggest patent troll in the world . the lower court already invalidated two of three patents , but in that first phase of the case , symantec lost out on the third patent , resulting in an million judgment against the antivirus company . the third patent didn t affect trend micro . with the new appellate decision , which invalidates all three , symantec is now off the hook . a concurring decision gives patent reform advocates a lot to be excited aboutsymantec is likely very pleased with intellectual ventures v . symantec , but a concurring decision also gives patent reform advocates a lot to be excited about , potentially making patent trolling a first amendment issue . in a post alice world , it s tempting to think that the time of absurd software patents like the patent on internet shopping carts is ending . but just because more are being invalidated , it doesn t mean software patents are over . alice marked a big change , but the federal circuit is still trying to decide how to apply this new supreme court precedent to a vast range of cases . the oversimplistic , but very useful way of thinking about alice is that you can no longer patent thing that already exists but with a computer . for example , you can no longer patent computer bingo , no more than you can patent regular paper bingo . just because a computer gets involved doesn t suddenly make an existing invention patentable . you can no longer patent computer bingoit seems like a sensible approach , but patents very rudely don t do you the favor of naming themselves in understandable ways . it s not like the famous internet shopping cart patent was called shopping carts , but with a computer . the federal circuit is having a hard time figuring out how to apply alice , because , well , it s hard . in intellectual ventures v . symantec , intellectual ventures asserted patents on technology that looks for , identifies , and filters out computer viruses . the court found that the first patent was really just the same as sorting through your own physical mail but with a computer . here , it was long prevalent practice for people receiving paper mail to look at an envelope and discard certain letters , without opening them , from sources from which they did not wish to receive mail based on characteristics of the mail , judge dyk wrote in an opinion for a panel of three judges . doing it with a computer wasn t anything new . the second patent was no better it was a corporate mailroom but with a computer , where the computer , rather than mailroom clerks , would follow rules to release , delete , return , or forward messages . it was a corporate mailroom but with a computerthe important part of the decision comes with the third patent , which isn t just a but with a computer patent . the patent covered a method of antivirus protection in which communications inside a telephone network e . g . , in this era , the internet are routed , viruses are detected , and communications are partially inhibited to prevent the spread of the viruses . but the court ruled that this idea was patent ineligible , because abstract ideas can t be patented . after all , performing virus screening was a long prevalent practice in the field of computers , and , as the patent admits , performed by many computer users . . . by itself , virus screening is well known and constitutes an abstract idea . the reasoning here , however , is just one way of interpreting alice . different panels of different judges have gone different ways , said vera ranieri , a staff attorney at the electronic frontier foundation . ranieri pointed out that cases like bascom and enfish , decided earlier this year , went in completely different directions . it is unclear to me how they can be read to form a consistent body of law , she said . the test applied in intellectual ventures is a technical effect test , said charles duan , director of the patent reform project at public knowledge . in the technical effect test also described here by patent attorney john roglitz a software invention is not patent eligible unless it has a technical effect on the computer system making it faster , more efficient , etc . as opposed to just using the computer system to achieve some other end . it doesn t mean that software patents are overthis test is stricter on software patents . but if this way of interpreting alice wins out , it doesn t mean that software patents are over just that there s fewer of them . we know this , says duan , because the technical effect test is basically what s used in europe and software patents still exist over there . but in a concurring decision , circuit judge mayer made a much more drastic argument , saying that patents that constrain essential channels of online communication are antithetical to free speech . the implication is that for constitutional reasons , patents on common email antivirus software should be invalidated . it s a radical position , one that was advanced by the american civil liberties union in an amicus brief in alice when that case went up to the supreme court . it s only a concurring opinion so far , but ever since alice came down , the federal circuit has been in flux about what the law around software patents actually is . and now the aclu s stance on software patents has entered the fray . mayer s approach potentially tosses out an entire category of software patentsmayer s approach potentially tosses out an entire category of software patents because of their effect on the internet . a less extreme way of interpreting mayer s opinion is he only meant to make a policy argument , pointing out the importance of judging patents harshly . if courts aren t strict with software patents related to the internet , free speech is imperiled . the upshot is that intellectual ventures v . symantec settles very little , but it does show that there s a wide range of possible futures for software patent law futures in which software patents continue to flourish , and futures in which patents get tossed out just for their effect on the internet . which way we end up going , only time will tell . 