 car companies want to sell as many cars as possible . this is an indisputable fact . but lately they ve been trying to speak the language of a post ownership future . they see uber and lyft and the trend of more people moving to cities and abandoning their cars , and they re anxious . they know there is a problem with too many cars on the road and too much traffic and pollution . so they decided to lean into the mobility trend and see where it takes them . ford spun off its own llc . general motors launched a car sharing company . nearly everyone started overusing terms like transportation as a service and smart cities without really explaining what they meant or how this is a sustainable business . at both ces in las vegas and the north american international auto show in detroit this year , this trend was on full display . in detroit , ford eschewed the traditional new car reveal in favor of a ted style talk about smart cities and the future of transportation . walter isaacson of the steve jobs biography fame moderated a totally scripted panel discussion with ford chairman bill ford and ceo mark fields , in which they discussed the company s new business ethos of reducing commuting times and producing zero waste . how do i know it was scripted ? i was sitting right by the teleprompter . these were totally bizarre topics to hear at a car showit s strange watching car companies try to rebrand their mission . during the presentation , ford showed off just three vehicles , the revamped f pickup truck still built ford tough , and announced the return of the bronco and ranger . but the two vehicles that received the most attention were not the kind you d see on a showroom floor a transit van for the ride sharing service chariot which was recently acquired by the automaker , and a hybrid yellow taxi . ford also screened a utopian vision of what it sees as the city of tomorrow , in which pedestrians and smart cars straight out of science fiction mingled in harmony in an urban environment that was more hanging gardens of babylon than blade runner . it s not just ford that s out there making big claims about mobility . cadillac recently started a subscription service . bmw is expanding its car sharing program to new cities . honda unveiled a new concept car designed specifically for ride and car sharing . with americans putting more miles on the road than ever before , and traffic fatalities showing no signs of reversing their upward trend , the . trillion auto industry is suddenly interested in solving the problem it helped create too many cars on the road . from the auto industry s perspective , this is a pretty obvious move . car sales are continuing to grow , but at a much slower pace than in years past . analysts say this drop in sales can be attributed to the rise of mobility services like car sharing and ride hailing . investments in companies like uber and lyft topped billion in , according to mckinsey . that s a lot of money , and the car companies want a slice of the pie . total mobility services could theoretically be as large as our core automotive business . but how serious are these companies about embracing mobility ? according to raj nair , ford s chief technology officer and executive vice president of product development , quite serious . the total mobility services could theoretically be as large as our core automotive business , he told me in detroit . so it s not an insignificant opportunity for us . nair ticked off the per mile costs of various forms of transportation to back up his claim taxis cost on average per mile , while mass transit falls between . . per mile , depending on the city . ride hail services cost around . per mile , depending on surge pricing . and personal ownership tends to cost around . per mile , nair said . photo by ethan miller getty images raj nair and with the advent of self driving cars , the economics underpinning mobility services become even more attractive , with the cost slashed to around per mile . now you have a solution that s actually cheaper than personal ownership , that s actually extremely convenient as well , he said . it s not you have to go to the bus station or the subway station . it s on your schedule , maybe it s shared , but it could be a personal ride as well . and it s cheaper than owning a car . of course nair s vision for a high yielding autonomous mobility service depends entirely on a future where robot cars roam the streets , endlessly picking up and dropping passengers , never parking , never taking bathroom breaks . it s a future that depends heavily on both the advancement of self driving technology and our ability as a society to accept this technology both of which may take decades , or in fact never converge . it s an age of experimentation . of course , mobility service startups are still struggling to squeeze out a profit . both uber and lyft are losing hundreds of millions of dollars a year in their effort to undercut each other and the traditional taxi industry . lyft generated million in revenue last year but lost about million , according to leaked financial documents . uber appears on track to lose around billion in , mostly thanks to its costly price war in china , which it eventually was forced to concede . if automakers are serious about mobility , they will need to shift focus from vehicle production to fleet management , which is not guaranteed to be a smooth transition . somebody has to own these robot cars that we re using and sharing , but who ? back in the day , the car companies dabbled in fleet management with the emergence of the rental car business , but eventually most were spun off into their own ventures . the auto companies expanding into service are lured by the potential of a higher margin business in service that also could insulate them from potential changes in ownership models of vehicles , said mike ramsey , a research director at gartner . it s an age of experimentation but long term the companies will have to decide whether operating fleets and all of the energy and cost associated with that , really is fulfilling its stated purpose . gm maven but confidence that mobility services will eventually bolster a car company s the bottom line is something you hear from a lot of auto execs these days . while in detroit , julia steyn , ceo of gm s car sharing service maven , told me this new venture is of tremendous value to gm s core business . and she defended gm s ability to maintain a large fleet of vehicles as part of the company s core competency . you end up not selling a vehicle , you end up owning a vehicle , steyn said . she argued that gm s after market division , its network of dealerships , and experience with the insurance industry all build upon these things that we have done well for years . most car companies probably see this trend as a temporary blipthese mobility services are better viewed as a hedge against the trend of more young people moving to cities and ditching car ownership . gm wouldn t be letting millennials share its cars if it didn t think that by doing so it stood a better chance to sell them a chevy volt or better yet an escalade when they start having kids and moving to the suburbs . and its safe to assume that most car companies probably see this trend as a temporary blip a momentary pit stop on the road of life , and not detrimental to their core mission of selling cars . the tech startups doing the disrupting appear unconcerned about the auto industry s incursions into the mobility space especially those startups with a vested interest in the industry s success . over a year ago , gm invested million in lyft with the stated goal of collaborating with the san francisco based ride hailing service on a fleet of self driving taxis . in the meantime , lyft drivers can get special deals on gm car rentals . lyft ceo logan green told me recently that automakers commitment to mobility is sincere . i think we should take them seriously , green said . it s a very genuine move . if these mobility offerings don t make money , they can be discounted as an experiment . we won t get a good idea of how successful all these mobility services are until they are large enough where their profitability or lack thereof can be scrutinized . until then , they can grow and contract as the market demands and often with little impact on car companies or their bottom line . if these mobility offerings don t make money , they can be discounted as an experiment when they are small , ramsey said . when they grow and their operations have a noticeable cost , they have to show a path toward profits at least , particularly if the auto market slows . but even with its gm partnership , lyft in on the record that the age of personal car ownership for people who live in cities will end in . that can t be something that gm or any of its competitors will be happy to hear . how long these alliances will last , or what carmakers would do in a world of radically decreased ownership , is a road we have yet to travel . 