 the verge in celebration of our th anniversary , this month we re publishing a series of interviews with innovative leaders about what the next five years hold . to read more about this series , read our editor nilay patel s introduction here . whether or not you play video games today , you will in the future . andrew wilson , ceo of electronic arts , believes games in will be more diverse , more accessible , and simply more inescapable . your smartphone and your game console will help you play with friends and strangers across the globe , but so might your virtual reality headset , your augmented reality glasses , or just the screen on your smart fridge . wilson has a knack for forecasting the future of the industry . in its years , the creative process at ea has expanded from a handful of coders producing games in a couple of months , to hundreds of designers , artists , writers , and actors collaborating for years on global facing blockbusters . but the past few years have been something of a unique inflection point . wilson took the executive role at ea in , the year the video game publisher won the consumerist s ignominious title of worst company in america for the second time in a row . under his leadership the company has shifted focus to what it calls player first , creating an internal committee to learn what fans said and continue to say across the internet , and to grow from that criticism . saw a return to form of ea s established sports franchises , a pair of critically acclaimed first person shooters , a suite of successful smartphone games , and a high profile flirtation with vr . all of which is to say , in the world of big budget game development , andrew wilson seems to understand what works now . but wilson is looking forward his ambitions involve a bigger , broader , and more inclusive future . that s why we chose to chat with him about the video games and interactive media of tomorrow . the interviewwhat is a day in the life of someone who enjoys video games in ? the biggest shift i think we ll see is games moving from being a discrete experience to an indiscrete experience . when i was years old i m kind of in my s now if i wanted to listen to music , i had a couple of choices . i could sit up all night and hope they d play what i liked on the radio , or i could go down to the record store . i could buy a cassette tape of bon jovi or poison or guns and roses or whatever it was i was listening to , go home , put it in my boom box , and sit down and listen . i really had to make a conscious decision . even that was an evolution from where we d been years before , where if i wanted to listen to music , i actually had to go and listen to an orchestra . i d get dressed up in my tuxedo , and i d go down and listen to music . today , by virtue of the fact that almost every device i own plays me music , and services like spotify curate and cultivate and personalize that music for me , music permeates almost every aspect of my life . it s moved from being something i have to make a conscious decision to engage with , to something that really surrounds every aspect of my life from the minute i get up in the morning to the minute i go to bed at night . subscribe to our newsletter so you don t miss the rest of the verge interviews . terms apply . subscribewhen we think about games today already we ve got more people playing more games on more platforms in more geographies around the world than ever before . it s not just a console business , or a pc business , or even a mobile business . we ve now got virtual reality and augmented reality and streaming , too . now fast forward that to the future , and you think about what the world looks like with a g network streaming latency free gaming to every device you own . it s really easy to imagine that games would permeate our lives much the way digital music does today . from the minute i get up in the morning , everything i do has an impact on my gaming life , both discrete and indiscrete . the amount of eggs i have in my internet enabled fridge might mean my sims are better off in my game . that length of distance i drive in my tesla on the way to work might mean that i get more juice in need for speed . if i go to soccer practice in the afternoon , by virtue of internet enabled soccer boots , that might give me juice or new cards in my fifa product . this world where games and life start to blend i think really comes into play in the not too distant future , and almost certainly by . in , what will i see on the shelf when i go into a store or on the front page of a digital storefront ? i think we re going to start to see games take on a really different proposition . one of the core reasons why we engage with games is for social interaction . maslow s hierarchy of needs once you get past air , food , water , shelter , you get to sense of belonging , which is really about socially interacting . you get to self esteem , which is really about overcoming challenges , and you get to self actualization , which is really about creating in a living world . games are going to give you all of those things . i think what we start to see is less about what the game is is it a shooter , is it a sports game , is it open world or closed world , is it a linear story or a forked story , is it multiplayer and more about this one , existing world where we all play a part . one of the core reasons why we engage with games is for social interaction . i think that entertainment will continue to be a really important part of our lives . we ll have moved from paintings on a cave wall and throwing bones into a circle to a global community interacting through games in a way that s truly positive and fulfills social connection and competition and creation and self esteem and overcoming challenges . i think it s going to be a really , really positive part of our lives . what you re describing sounds humongous , both as a virtual space and as a creative undertaking . how big are these virtual worlds ? and how many people will it take to create them ? what s really interesting is when i started making games , which was in , a big game team was about people . when i took on fifa in , , we had about people . now , i hear stories elsewhere in the industry of game teams that have a thousand people . the size of the worlds that are created are really directly proportionate to the amount of people on a team , and the amount of time they have to build . it s really architecture . it s building like any build is in the real world . think about a world where we aren t limited by the core team . think about a world where we as game developers build kind of a foundational tool set and unleash billion people on the planet to create whatever they think is amazing and what they believe will engage their friends , more than anything we could ever do . the world that we will create will be infinitely bigger than the earth that we live on , and likely bigger than the solar system that we live in . are you referring to something like minecraft that will allow players to create from within a game , or are you speaking about billions of people actually coding video games ? when i was a kid , i learned german at school . my school was really progressive , so we ultimately taught kids mandarin . i grew up in australia , so we re part of asia . china was a big trade partner with australia . progression got us to mandarin . now i have a four and a half year old daughter . my hope is that she learns computer code , because i truly believe that will be the universal language . fast forward years into a world where . . . we all speak the universal language of code . fast forward years into a world where we might speak french or german or chinese or japanese , but we all speak the universal language of code . think about what that means in the context of creating entertainment inside of a virtual world . it s profound . this concept of a game following you through your day to day life is fascinating , but there are so many hurdles . will we truly see the same game on each platform , or will the experience be unique depending on the hardware ? as you think about us putting the entire experience into the cloud , what then happens is the nature of the experience isn t governed by the platform that you choose to play on . the nature of the experience is governed purely by the screen size that you have access to , and the connected controller , and the amount of time you have to play . when you re playing on a playstation or or whatever is available at that point , it s going to look one way on your big screen tv . when you re looking at it through a mobile device , it s going to look a different way . when you re playing it on your internet enabled fridge screen while you re getting the eggs out in the morning , because you re just doing a few quick trades for madden ultimate team , it s going to take a different format . the most important thing is that none of that time is wasted . it s not throwaway time . everything accumulates to the value of who you are in that virtual world . that s really our vision to get to a point where we don t discern for you where you should play or how you should play , only that every minute of play that you invest in the experiences that we create adds value to who you are in that virtual world . you re not throwing things away from one device to another or one experience to another . that goes from device to device . it also goes from game to game , because again , we as human beings are the sum total of our experience . that s what makes us who we are . that s what gives us our character . we want to replicate that in the virtual space . but how do you produce those games across all of those platforms ? what we re trying to do is prepare the company for a world where truly there are more devices capable of playing games , and players are refreshing them more often and likely refreshing them asynchronously . you might refresh your mobile device at a different time than i do . you might buy the k , i might stick with a k . you might go down the oculus vr route , i might go down the psvr route . what i ve got to do as a creator is try and keep you together with your friends inside experiences that you love , and the only way we can do that is at a core engine level . what i ve got to do as a creator is try and keep you together with your friends inside experiences that you love . we talk a lot about our single engine in frostbite . it will scale up graphics on a bigger device and scale them down on a smaller device , so that we can build once and publish to many devices . it s a world where we re no longer having to make a decision like , do we build for the xbox or the playstation or both ? there s literally or or different devices , and we have to be able to build for all devices that are meaningful for players . we ve been investing heavily on that front for the last four or five years . and we think now , by virtue of that transition , we get more games on the ps and xbox one than any other publisher . you see us now starting to really grow our mobile install base . you see us get to the psvr and google vr in the same time frame . that s the only path forward for us . in a world in which we have to build incrementally for every device , forget the cost implications of that , we literally just couldn t do it from a person power point of view . representation is an ongoing issue with video games . for decades , we ve had this generic protagonist the joyless , bald , muscular white guy . it feels as if indie creators rapidly expanded beyond that hero , and aaa is gradually following suit . what is being done to improve representation in big budget games going forward ? representation is really important . again , when i started playing games , we could squint and see million players . many of those players were year old boys playing in their mother s basements . that was really what gamers were . there was this negative connotation about what being a gamer meant . today the average age of a gamer , i think , is about . nearly percent of them are female , and certainly gaming transcends all forms of culture and gender and background , both socioeconomic and ethnic background . as we think about representation inside games , what is the most important thing for us , like it is in movies and books and tv and all other forms of entertainment , is to really capture the true nature of the community that s engaging in that content . when you look at some of our games today , you see that we have strong female leads , we have strong black leads , we have strong latino leads , we have young leads to older leads . it s really important as we design games , and that wasn t really any mandate that we made as a company , and it won t be any mandate that we make going forward . it s really just the creators inside of our organization saying , hey , i m looking at who s playing our games . we know that they want to look into the games that we make and see people like them so that they can better relate to those games . we want to capture that . the diversity that we live in today is amazing . it s what is driving us as humanity forward is this real true understanding of who we are as a global community . we actually have probably more than any other community the ability to do that at the most profound level . we really want to capture that in our games . let s talk about e sports and competitive games . are you concerned about the gap expanding between pro and amateur players that newcomers will be too intimidated ? i think e sports looks like just about every other sport . again , i spent the last , years of my life working in sport . there s always the pinnacle of the sport . that s a really important part , and that s aspirational for us . we watch a bunch of basketball , baseball , football , and soccer . do we think the elite leagues are really important ? absolutely . but the thing for me as a dad that is the single most important game that i m ever going to watch will be my daughter s soccer game , because that s the thing i m most involved in . i love what s happening in the premier league , but that game that my daughter plays in is as important . that s our vision for what competitive gaming is . in all honesty , that s how we think about the world . do we think the elite leagues are really important ? absolutely . are we investing there ? yes . but the thing that we think is going to have the most powerful impact on the world of competitive gaming is making everybody feel like they re a star . at some point we realize that we re never going to play in the big leagues . that doesn t mean we can t play . we want to make sure that as the infancy of e sports kind of grows and cultivates over time , that we don t lose all those other players , that players don t wake up one day and say , well , i m not going to be able to play in the big leagues in a big stadium , so i m going to stop playing . that would be really bad because then millions and millions and millions of people would lose out on the opportunity to compete , would lose out on the greatness , the thrill of victory , would lose out on what it s like to overcome the agony of defeat . we think that s as much about what sport is as playing in the elite leagues . we re investing as heavily there at a grassroots level as we are at the elite level . you mentioned virtual reality earlier . i sense a reluctance from aaa publishers to appear bullish about vr . what is your best case scenario for the future of virtual reality ? think about the laserdisc and the dvd . you can see kind of a strand of dna that went through those things , but it required a couple of turns of the innovation cycle to get to a point where we had truly amassed consumer ready media . i think the same is going to be true for vr . for any consumer entertainment product to take off , it really needs three things . it needs to be innovative technology . vr has that . you just can t take fifa from the playstation straight into vr without making some fairly fundamental shifts . what you then need is a profound user experience . you need the best games . you need the best experience with those games . we re not there yet . the three biggest categories in games are action adventure , shooters , and sports . all require you to run around in a virtual space . that , for many people inside vr , creates all kinds of nauseating symptoms . we , as designers and the hardware manufacturers , have to solve for that . refresh rate and frame rate have to increase , the way we design games is going to have to change . you just can t take fifa from the playstation straight into vr without making some fairly fundamental shifts at a design level . we ve got some work to do on the profound user experience . the last thing you need is low barrier to entry . for many people that means cost . right now , all of the frontline vr opportunities , notwithstanding the google option , which has a different challenge , but all the frontline things , they re pretty expensive . when you think about what has happened in our space when one platform , whether it s sony or microsoft , launches at a more expensive price than the other , and you look at history , you see the cheaper one that was almost as good or equally as good usually won . gamers are very price sensitive . i think we ve got some turns of the cycle to happen to get a price point to a place where it becomes a no brainer for people . we ve got the innovative technology . now we have work to do on the user proposition , and we ve got to bring the price down . i think all of those things are very doable , so i m bullish on it . i really am . earlier , you mentioned this group of millions of young white men playing games in their basement in the past . a lot of those people have grown up to become game developers , and created an industry largely of white men . are there steps or opportunities in place now to improve diversity among the ranks of game makers not just at the entry level for the games of the future ? there has to be . diversity is such an important part of this . again , if you re going to make games for a community , you have to have a true representation of that community . for the longest time our industry , like every other industry , was very white male dominated . we re seeing real change to that now . some of our greatest creative leaders are women . i think two out of the three biggest games we launched last year were led by really strong , creative women . we re seeing lots of people come out of very different backgrounds and very different communities . part of the reason our fifa product is so great and captures the essence of what football means or soccer means to people around the globe . we had different nationalities on that team , all of whom loved soccer , but soccer meant something different to them if they come from argentina versus brazil , or if they come from the uk versus germany , or france versus the us . things mean different things to people from different places . that doesn t mean they love them any less . it just means they look at it through a different lens . we believe it s really important to capture that . i can tell you right now there is a very big push from us , whether it s to engage with girls who code to make sure we re getting year old girls into engineering . they love games , but have been scared off by this concept of engineering or computer engineering , which has been a white male dominated world . we re investing there . we re investing in schools in different ethnic communities . we re trying to recruit from around the globe , because again , what we have the opportunity to do is capture the true essence of a global community , of a global tribe inside of a virtual space . the only way we do that properly is to truly be representative of that community . this interview has been edited and condensed