 in a few hours on december th , jeff lost nearly , . it was . bitcoins held in the wallet service coinbase , the most well funded and widely implemented service on the market . jeff , who asked that we not use his last name , got the news of the transaction as soon as it happened , and after going back and forth with a customer service representative , he had his money refunded . exactly one month later , it happened again . coinbase told him he d been hackedthis time , the news came while he was at the hospital for the birth of his daughter . he hurried to unlink his checking account , only to see a new purchase for , worth of bitcoins had just cleared . he quickly moved the new money out of coinbase , dropping it in ampnbspa secure offline wallet where the hackers couldn t reach it . he d saved the , from being stolen , but his original . bitcoins were now gone for good . coinbase told him he d been hacked , and didn t qualify for a second refund . it s part of a string of bitcoin thefts that have hit the service in recent weeks . the verge has confirmed two other coinbase users with stories similar to jeff s , one taken for , and another for , . in the first case , the victim was using two factor authentication and received a refund in the second , two factor hadn amprsquot been enabled and the refund was denied , on grounds that the user hadn amprsquot properly set up the account amprsquos security measures . several ampnbspother as yet unverified reports have also been posted on ampnbspthe coinbase subreddit . the verge has confirmed two other coinbase users with similar storiesresearchers from ampnbspthe security firm fireeye say the relatively small scope of the breaches makes it unlikely that coinbase had a service wide vulnerability . instead , the researchers suggested that jeff and others had been individually compromised , but that coinbase s unusually powerful api key made them more vulnerable after the attack had taken place . used to let third party apps access coinbase accounts , the right api key will let any program move bitcoins in and out of a given accounts . once the key is compromised , attackers can even access linked bank accounts to purchase more bitcoins . users are advised not to authorize the api key if they don t need it , but if an account has been compromised , hackers may decide to authorize it themselves , as jeff suspects happened to him . the small scope of the breaches makes a service wide vulnerability unlikelyreached for comment , coinbase ceo brian armstrong confirmed that some users had experienced attacks , but emphasized the individual nature of the breaches , saying , phishing is something that s ongoing . it happens on every major site on the internet . armstrong also pointed out coinbase s use of two factor authentication , a feature that s still missing from many major banking sites . the fireeye researchers agreed none of these attacks seem to be targeting coinbase amprsquos own infrastructure . every indication suggests they are individual exploits targeting individual accounts , and coinbase amprsquos own user agreement clearly states that users are responsible for maintaining adequate security and control of any and all ids , passwords , personal identification numbers , or any other codes that you use to access coinbase services . for one reason or another , jeff and the other customers failed to do that . still , amid real financial losses , it amprsquos easy to see why they feel betrayed . any program with the proper api key is able to make its own transactionsin jeff amprsquos case , the api key was almost certainly at fault . he says he reset the key and disabled it after the first hack , only to find it reenabled by hackers the next time he logged on . a day after jeff s second hack , coinbase enabled two factor authentication via email for anyone attempting to turn on the api key , a change that might have prevented jeff s losses ampmdash but by then it was too late . even now , any program with the proper key is able to make its own transactions without further authentication . the attacks come at a critical time for coinbase , an the andreessen horowitz backed company that has become the bitcoin market amprsquos largest and most reputable broker in recent months . in january , the company partnered with overstock . com to handle bitcoin transactions for the site , the largest retail implementation the currency has ever seen . smaller sites like bloomnation , malwarebytes , and ampnbsppayment tracker mint signed on with coinbase shortly after . at the same time , the company has often been the target of phishing schemes , particularly after public user transaction records were discovered ampnbspthis past april . in response to the verge s report , coinbase ampnbsppublished a blog post this morning that specifically warns against phishing schemes , instructing users to avoid clicking on suspicious or unknown urls . it was just too easy for someone with the key to take all the funds out of the account . much of the blame also lies with the basic structural properties of bitcoin , which make it impossible to reverse transactions and easy to launder money once it s been stolen . if the same hackers tried to transfer funds from a traditional bank account , the account owner could have a small but crucial window in which to stop the payment , and preemptive antifraud measures could halt the transaction before it took place . because of the network s open and pseudonymous nature , those protections are extremely difficult to implement in the bitcoin marketplace . for his part , jeff blames the api key and the promises of bank level security made on the company s website , a promise armstrong says he stands by . it was too easy for someone with the key to take all the funds out of the account , jeff says of the api key . he wishes the option to enable had been less accessible , more hidden . i wish it had just never been there . it s particularly galling to him because the key is a developer level feature that most consumers have no use for . for jeff , that extra bit of third party access came with a hefty price tag . as he put it , i m just a dude that wants to buy some shit from overstock . 