 one of the past year s greatest political victories is that net neutrality a slightly wonky name for a set of rules governing which companies can send which traffic at which speed from which carrier has become a hot enough political topic to draw millions of messages to the fcc , congress , and the white house . so maybe it shouldn t be surprising that there s now a video game about fighting an evil isp intent on throttling your traffic . what s more surprising is that it s actually fun . sight is created by retro yeti , a team of students from the university of utah s entertainment arts and engineering program . it s a running game set in a surreal pastel manifestation of cyberspace , where bandwidth is life and fast lanes are hidden green strips that boost your health and accelerate your pace . your service provider is intent on taking your bandwidth with angry throttling drones , which you ll have to evade if you want to stay online . but you have a secret weapon a ping that helps you find the fast lanes and , eventually , save the internet . we were trying to kind of steer away from the tron look . sight , which is being released today for free on steam , follows in the footsteps of mirror s edge , a parkour game about a courier in a dystopian future city . it owes a little to simple endless running games like temple run , although there s a lot more control and it s divided into set levels . where mirror s edge tried to make a city full of linear paths , levels in the preview build of sight are empty and stylized , a series of flat blocks and platforms that players need to run across and jump between . the ping system is a high tech version of mirror s edge s runner vision , which highlighted paths and hazards . what s interesting about sight is the elegant way it changes this from an incidental hint tool to a central mechanic . pinging your environment lets you see fast lanes , but it also opens you up to damage from the drones slow lanes . throttling doesn t just slow you down , it drains your bandwidth and eventually kicks you offline . it also self consciously avoids the black and neon palette of a stereotypical cyberpunk game . we were trying to kind of steer away from the tron look , that s kind of been overdone , says artist rachel leiker . so we decided to go with a kind of brighter , more electric sort of feel . sight didn t start as a game about net neutrality , and it remains heavily abstract . the team came up with the basic idea a d running game with a tool for finding hidden paths first , testing it as a superhero themed game called super fail in mid . soon , though , they started questioning their premise . superheroes were swell , but it wasn t quite as boundary pushing as we d like , community manager tina kalinger wrote in a blog post . the team thought about issues they found interesting and relevant , coming up with two ideas surveillance , which would eventually give them the drones in sight , and net neutrality . it wasn t something that was slapped on , says lead designer kyle chittenden . it was something that we all wanted to kind of voice our opinion on . at the time of that post , net neutrality wasn t a real , enforceable rule . it had been struck down by a court in early , and the fcc was getting ready to end the public comment period on a new proposal . everyone was still trying to fight for the idea of net neutrality , leiker says . today , the tables have turned . net neutrality laws officially took effect earlier this week , and sight is coming out a few days after ctia , at ampt , and the national cable and telecommunications association have all filed challenges to them . it s similar as far as the theme goes , but how we participate in that conversation has changed a little bit , says leiker . the fight is still there , and we re still going to be making a statement about that fight with the game , and hopefully informing people how important this is . the team sees net neutrality as a personal issue . one of our designers was one of the first people to really use twitch , says leiker , and he ran into issues like comcast coming down on him and saying , you re using too much bandwidth . it s no coincidence that , according to the team , one of the game s goals spoiler ahead is blowing up your isp to get friends back online . we re students , and we basically live and breathe the internet , says kalinger . it s just kind of a nightmare to deal with the isps that are available for us . it s really about connecting to people and losing that . the political lessons in all this can be a little fuzzy . in cases like twitch , for example , it s hard to clear up whether fast and slow lanes exist at all , let alone where they are . comcast , time warner cable , and verizon have all been accused of degrading service to the streaming video platform . time warner cable , for example , flatly denied throttling video , but it admitted that service could be sub par and met with twitch to try and solve the problem . the peering disputes between netflix and internet service providers are considered a prime example of cable companies demanding pay for play , but they raise complicated questions about who s responsible for upgrading an overcrowded internet . killing comcast won t get you better bandwidth it will get you no bandwidth , unless the sequel to sight involves building your own isp . when sight works , though , it s a worthy little addition to the genre of high concept sci fi action games . a deceptively simple landscape full of hidden tricks and pitfalls , with the threat of total disaster always on the horizon , is a perfect symbol for a network that almost everyone uses but few people really understand . and retro yeti wants to convey that losing bandwidth isn t just about having trouble loading netflix it s about degrading the quality of what has become , to many of us , a second home . a lot of people these days , some of their best friends , they ve never met in person . so it s really important to understand what net neutrality means on that level , says leiker . it s really about connecting to people and losing that , and how dangerous that is . 