 so , here s a crazy thing this time last year , no one even knew that gm was working on an affordable , high range electric car . in automotive terms , going from concept to production to test drives in months time is an exceptionally tight schedule . there are regulatory hurdles and crash testing . there s the fact that engineering a good , roadworthy vehicle is fundamentally difficult and expensive . in reality , of course , development on the bolt started long before the introduction of the concept car at naias in detroit last year , and it shows . i think this car might be ready for the real world . but let s back up for a second and talk numbers . gm isn t going into any new details here , but the bolt is expected to deliver plus mile range for a net price of around , after tax breaks . that can be misleading if your income is too low to take advantage of the full tax credit , but the car will be well under , regardless . the company tells me that time will fall under seconds , which should match or best vehicles of similar size and shape like ford s c max . my test drive of the bolt ahead of its introduction today took place on a closed , walled off course just a few hundred feet from the stage where gm chairman and ceo mary barra will unveil it . the course wasn t nearly as big as i would ve liked ampnbspi need to stretch the bolt s legs before i issue a fleshed out opinion on it but i had enough laps to get the sense that this is a very unremarkable car on the road . and i mean that in the best possible way gm is trying to make a car that real people want to buy . this isn t a parlor trick , it s not for speed freaks , it s not for tech nerds well , maybe it is ampnbspmore on that in a bit . the bolt just needs to feel like a good , usable , everyday car that happens to be fully electric . unlike a , tesla model s , unremarkable is high praise for a car in this category . you ll hear me say it s for anybody who wants to save time , money , and the environment , barra told me in a conversation before she took the stage today . we wanted it to be a great car , and to really separate it . . . i think it s going to have wide appeal . what exactly do i mean by unremarkable ? decent , usable acceleration which , in typical ev fashion , is eerily smooth in the bolt handling that prioritizes comfort over performance and , for the young families that could become a core target demo for cars like this , space . space ! i actually commented to the gm staff on hand that the bolt has an optical illusory flair to it , because it s got a freakish amount of rear passenger legroom considering the compact dimensions . as near as i can tell , some of that legroom comes from thin front seats they seemed comfortable enough to me , though you never know until you ve road tripped in them . weirdly , the most interesting thing about the bolt might not be the drivetrain but the infotainment system , an lg sourced unit that is unique to this car and is crazy good . to be fair , when i say crazy good , i mean by car standards ampnbsprarely are factory infotainment systems much more than maddening garbage fires that make your seemingly trivial task of changing the radio station a chore . the bolt s system is anchored by a . inch touch display that might be the most responsive i ve ever used in a car ampnbspthere were no appreciable delays between taps and responses , which was a baseline expectation for phones and tablets years ago that hasn t really taken hold in the auto industry yet . unremarkable is not an insult with this carall of this is probably thanks to lg having a heavy hand in the bolt s development . i think i even see some lg influence in the ui , which is flat , two dimensional , and modern looking ampnbspthere s no skeuomorphism , no drop shadows or reflections that look like they were pulled from a five year old smartphone . the home screen is comprised of customizable widgets for different functions ampnbspmusic , battery status , and clock , for instance ampnbspthat can be rearranged to the driver s content , and any widget can be made full screen by tapping an icon in the corner . carplay and android auto are both supported . it s worlds better than the infotainment system on the first generation volt , and it s even substantially better than chevy s relatively new system that s used across the portfolio . if gm is smart , it ll adopt the bolt s hardware in more vehicles . and there s one more tech trick in the interior the rear view mirror is replaced with an lcd display linked to a wide angle camera behind the car . the value , or so the story goes , is that this kind of setup eliminates obstructions like pillars and rear passengers so you get a better view of what s going on . shockingly , it s good . i thought i d hate it , but i immediately adapted to it and treated it like i would a standard mirror . and if you don t like it , you can flip a lever beneath the display and it magically turns into a regular mirror . none of this matters if gm can t make the bolt in volume , customers can t be bothered to look at it in a world of cheap gasoline , or the upcoming tesla model is a lot better . any of those scenarios is possible . but regardless , i can t help feel like the company has just made history it has produced a practical ev without the traditional ev downsides that many , many people can afford . and while i can t yet declare that it s great , i m comfortable saying that it s not bad . of course , the bolt is the first of its kind , but it certainly won t be the last . the auto industry is changing at an unprecedented pace right now , and if ces has taught me anything over the years , it s that the first mover advantage doesn t mean much . gm is going to have to haul ass just to keep up but so will everyone else . for owners , car sharers , and riders alike , that s pretty awesome news . see all of our ces news right here ! h . ces promo a background fa b a border radius px padding px px px font family ff din web condensed , helvetica , sans serif text transform uppercase font weight normal font size px text align center display inline block margin px auto color fff h . ces promo a hover background bf a d color fff text decoration none 