 can you trick your brain into not feeling pain without medication ? we ve used electricity to do that for centuries , but this method is newly popular again . transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation , or tens , has become far more accessible since it was approved as an over the counter treatment by the us food and drug administration about two years ago . now , with the country in the midst of an opioid epidemic , doctors and patients and medical device manufacturers are paying more attention to this form of natural pain management . think of the machines as using electricity to rub away pain , says mark johnson , a professor of analgesia at leeds beckett university in the united kingdom . tens devices are portable machines with electrodes . you put the electrodes wherever you have muscle pain , turn on the device , and feel a tingling sensation . the machine sends electrical pulses through your skin and nerves . the electrical pulses do two things first , it distracts the brain to prevent the pain signals from reaching the brain . second , it encourages your body to produce more of its own natural painkillers . some see tens as a possible alternative to opioidsthe verge s natt garun tried several tens devices made by accurelief at this year s consumer electronics show , as did i , separately . i used mine on my forearm and found the tingling feeling rather uncomfortable . natt s device , placed on her shoulders , went to at the setting , she was bouncing around and finding it difficult to type properly . that said , neither of us have severe muscle pain , so it s difficult for us to evaluate the effectiveness . also , the highest setting is usually reserved for people with serious chronic pain . higher settings are also important because tolerance for the electrical signals does build . using electricity to manage pain has a long history , says kathleen sluka , a professor of physical therapy at the university of iowa . ancient egyptians used electric eels for this very purpose and , in the s , doctors helped their patients by using a device with a crank that created electrical output . physical therapist have used tens devices for years in clinical settings for both chronic pain and acute pain , and they can also be helpful for routine soreness from exercise . tens is easy and safe and it s been around for a long time , says sluka . most of what you re seeing now is people finally bringing it to the community . despite the long history , the basic technology hasn t changed much in the past few decades , says johnson . researchers have long tried to find the magic bullet a particular pulse or pattern of electricity that will make it suddenly much more effective but there haven t been many breakthroughs . but , since fda approval , there are plenty of inexpensive tens devices available at drugstores like walgreens and rite aid . these new devices come in a lot of different shapes and sizes and many are wireless , which is convenient for patients who wear them anywhere from minutes a day to all day . accurelief , for example , recently debuted a few new tens models that can be controlled using an app instead of with a traditional remote . one of these , called theramed , is a device for athletes that will launch later this year . people with anxiety and depression might not find tens as effectivethe market for tens is small , but growing very quickly , says jeff swains , vice president of marketing for accurelief parent company compass health brands . doctors and pharmacists are starting to get pressure from government bodies around cutting back opioid prescriptions , he says . we have customers that are healthcare organizations and they recognize the cost associated with opioids , so they re invested in actually trying to give away devices to the people on their plans because it s less expensive than opioids and there s no chance of being addicted . it s unlikely that a device from the drugstore is just as effective as a powerful opioid , and there has been some debate on the effectiveness of the devices . one cochrane review concludes that the effectiveness is mixed , but because the device is so cheap and safe , there s no real harm in trying . johnson , from leeds beckett university , disagrees with reviews that say tens is not effective because there isn t enough good quality evidence . a lot of the current studies are done on small sample sizes , he says . plus , the studies cite the average result , even when the feedback skew on extreme ends of the spectrum . dana dailey , a professor of physical therapy at the university of iowa , is currently running a study looking at both the long term use of tens , since previous studies look at it for only a few days . sluka agrees that tens isn t for everyone . some people absolutely love them and some people can t stay in the study because they can t handle it , says sluka . is it as effective as opioids ? maybe not , she says . but it s usually at least as effective as ibuprofen , if not more . the devices can be useful when part of a broader treatment program , are alternative to ingesting drugs , and don t have dangerous side effects . more recently , some similar devices are using electrical signals to try to fix mental stress , too . right now , we don t know a lot about who will benefit most from the devices . we know more about who shouldn t use it , notably people with implanted pacemakers . other research has suggested that people who have more anxiety and depression tend to not do as well , according to dailey . it tends to be more physically uncomfortable to them , and they re more likely to find it painful , she says . in terms of effectiveness , people who sweat a lot or have a lot of oil in their skin might have more trouble getting the electrodes to stick . if you re interested in testing tens , there are a few things to keep in mind . you need to turn up the intensity as high as you can take it , according to sluka . it s not enough to just get a little tingling sensation like i did . that s not very effective . and though tolerance build up is a risk , having the device on too low a setting defeats the purpose to begin with . when choosing a device , take a close look at the size and length of the electrodes . the biggest expense for this unit will be replacing those electrodes , which could happen as often as every few weeks . make sure the electrodes aren t too expensive to replace , and also that they will fit on whatever part of your body you will be using the device on . the neck , for instance , is probably one of the hardest places to put a tens unit on since there s less surface area and people do use their necks a lot . for those itching to try this for themselves , they re easily available and usually range from about to . unless you re very sensitive to sensation , it basically can t hurt to try . 