 you don t see an all star comics every day . published in , it s a milestone in what s known as the golden age of comic books the debut of the first bonafide superhero team , the justice society of america . there s hardly a plot , only a meeting of some of dc s biggest stars flash , green lantern , hawkman taking turns sharing tales as if they were telling ghost stories at a campfire . spectre recounts a battle with a monster from the moon hawkman remembers a crisis on the island of krakatoa . the masked vigilantes on the cover are a friendly lot , decades removed from the gritty realism that would come to dominate the industry later . the flash wears a slightly over sized long sleeve shirt , emblazoned with a yellow lightning bolt . his face is as pleasant and plain as a dumpling , and on his head sits a helmet that brings to mind an overturned colander . comic conmana true crime tale of comic books , corruption , and a million vanishing actby russell brandom amp colin lecher illustrations by jun cen you don t see an all star comics every day . published in , it s a milestone in what s known as the golden age of comic books the debut of the first bonafide superhero team , the justice society of america . there s hardly a plot , only a meeting of some of dc s biggest stars flash , green lantern , hawkman taking turns sharing tales as if they were telling ghost stories at a campfire . spectre recounts a battle with a monster from the moon hawkman remembers a crisis on the island of krakatoa . the masked vigilantes on the cover are a friendly lot , decades removed from the gritty realism that would come to dominate the industry later . the flash wears a slightly over sized long sleeve shirt , emblazoned with a yellow lightning bolt . his face is as pleasant and plain as a dumpling , and on his head sits a helmet that brings to mind an overturned colander . so when an all star comics surfaced at heritage auctions first big sale of , collectors took notice . the copy was off white , its condition ranked at . out of by the certified guaranty company . cgc knew of only two higher ranked all star s in the world , one of which a . had sold for , back in . the overstreet comic book price guide the bible on such matters estimated an . copy to be worth somewhere between , and , . but someone bidding at the heritage auction was willing to pay significantly more . the comic had been low balled at first , going for , . during the auction itself . but after the official bidding closed , private offers flooded in , , then , . in the end , it sold for , , putting it in the same class as a record breaking debut spider man that had sold a few years earlier . all star wasn t the only mid tier comic suddenly going for outrageous prices at the sale . a sub mariner in which the aquatic hero namor twists apart a panzer tank at normandy sold for , , more than three times its estimated worth . in the very next lot , someone shelled out , . for an off white . sub mariner in which namor struggles with the japanese fleet even though overstreet pegs an . copy of the same book at just , . absolutely insane ! podboy wrote the day after the sale in the collector s society forums , a common online hangout for comics buyers . i paid for my subby in . . what s up with some of these buyers anyway ? agent asked . makes you wonder if it s simply a case of bidding fever . whoever was after the sub mariners and all star comics at the heritage auction wasn t a collector . their bids were too erratic , they didn t know the market , and chances were , they weren t terribly smart . it was also clear that they had a lot of money on their hands too much money , maybe and they were eager to spend it . through months of interviews and hundreds of pages of public documents , the verge reconstructed what they were seeing a multi million dollar embezzlement scheme that would ensnare a crooked lawyer , a multinational corporation , and some of the most sought out comics in the world . whack job in , anthony chiofalo had nearly years of corporate law behind him and a political career in his future . married with two sons , chiofalo was squat , clean cut , and brusque . he d spent his formative years in the bronx , and when an assembly district seat opened up in the area , he decided to make a run . he was pretty determined , says joe thompson , a bronx community activist who also ran in the election . but running as a republican in the heavily democratic bronx was hopeless , and chiofalo lost badly , pulling a little more than percent of the vote . thompson can t remember seeing chiofalo around the community much after that . chiofalo had trends of grandiosity and episodic impulsivity and poor judgment . the failed campaign marked a turning point in chiofalo s life a defeat that precipitated a gradual unraveling . according to state records , his wife served him with divorce papers in august of , followed by an order of protection . chiofalo broke the order within a few months , and by the next year he was writing notes that would later be described as hostile , obscene , and derogatory , sending them to his wife , to the children s guardian even to a clerk for the judge presiding over the divorce case . chiofalo eventually sued his wife and about others involved in the divorce proceedings , alleging that they had infringed on his civil rights . the argument was thrown out in court . by , the state court s disciplinary committee decided to take action against chiofalo , on the basis that his letters and frivolous lawsuits proved him unfit to be a lawyer . a letter from a psychiatrist quoted during chiofalo s disbarment proceeding said he experienced trends of grandiosity and episodic impulsivity and poor judgment that he would regress at times of stress and duress , particularly around financial , legal , and family issues . when he did , his narcissistic defenses come to fore , often to his detriment . one of the dozens of individuals involved in chiofalo s civil rights lawsuit put it even more simply he s a whack job . bad news . if there was one bright spot in his life during that time , it was susan , a university health professor living in texas . susan requested her maiden name not be used in this piece . the two had been high school sweethearts and reconnected during chiofalo s divorce . in , susan invited chiofalo to join her in texas . eventually , they moved into a cozy rental at oakmoss trail , in spring , texas a small , green piece of the houston metropolitan area , with wide open spaces and a population of about , . by , the two were married . chiofalo seemed to have left his problems behind he found a new job as in house counsel for a japanese construction company called tadano , a gig that came with a , salary and new responsibility . disciplinary committee records show he lobbied to keep his new york law license , saying that he was seeking psychiatric help , but in october , he was suspended from practicing law in the state for two years . tadano seemed to be involved in more and more litigationit was around this time that chiofalo s job at tadano hit a snag . tadano was the world leader in rough terrain cranes , selling huge tank treaded trucks capable of lifting tons to construction companies from london to dubai . that globe spanning business came with a river of legal work , and chiofalo s job was to coordinate local firms hired by tadano , drawing up contracts , reviewing service agreements , and approving payments . but in the months after chiofalo came on board , tadano seemed to be involved in more and more litigation . in march of , the company ordered an investigation into the spike in legal costs . our approach initially was trying to ask exactly what went on , and then immediately trace the money flow , says philip hilder , a lawyer for tadano . an employee eventually came across an expenditure that looked off . the bill was from seidner amp virdone , llp a business supposedly located at oakmoss trail . according to a tadano lawsuit later filed against chiofalo s wife , the company only existed in new york it was the firm chiofalo retained to work on his divorce proceedings . another company chiofalo submitted invoices from wasn t real at all . tadano alleged it was requesting payments be sent to the address on oakmoss trail the firm s manager and registered agent was anthony chiofalo . chiofalo had created a byzantine structure of revolving transfers to conceal his tracks , laundering money through bank accounts , third party payments , and the purchase of collectibles . tadano alleged that in one particularly daring trick , he sent a retainer letter to the company requesting , for an attorney . the attorney was chiofalo s landlord . tadano had cut a check that paid six months of rent . the attorney was chiofalo s landlord . tadano had cut a check that paid six months of renttadano assessed the damage , adding up all the suspicious checks that had flown from the company s accounts to each of chiofalo s fronts . nearly million had vanished . two months after the start of the investigation , a higher up at tadano approached chiofalo , asking him to explain himself . chiofalo produced records spreadsheets , with billable hours but the law firms listed would turn out to be fakes . chiofalo told people he had enlisted the services of michael maio whom he touted as a super lawyer , licensed with seven state bars . but maio never existed he was no more than a resume , cobbled together from an east coast lawyer s accomplishments and a photograph of a west coast lawyer . maio was chiofalo s mother s maiden name . but the company never had a chance to ask about all of the inconsistencies . the day after he was confronted , chiofalo didn t show up to work and stopped answering his phone . as soon as he knew he d been caught , the lawyer disappeared . the museumwhere do you stash million if you don t want anyone to find it ? tadano hired a private investigator named bryan vaclavik to follow the money . a year veteran of the harris county district attorney s office , vaclavik specialized in fraud cases . he discovered wire transfers from chiofalo to a heritage auctions , and when investigators at tadano checked the records for chiofalo s work phone , they found that he had been making regular contact with a local storage facility . what the police uncovered was astonishingon june th , the police arrived with a warrant to search seven climate controlled units in spring , texas four seasons self storage facility . the compound sits on a flat , sunny stretch of concrete just a few miles west of interstate . what they uncovered there was astonishing the first unit was packed with sports memorabilia , signed helmets , and baseball cards . the second unit had a makeshift study space , full of furniture and books . the third unit had six framed texas flags and a shadowbox arrangement of photographs of mussolini , among the flood of other memorabilia . the fourth had more figurines , sports photographs , and paintings depicting scenes from the bible and world war two . the fifth unit was mostly baseball cards , along with photographs of robert de niro , phil jackson , and mussolini . the sixth unit had statuettes of batman , iron man , conan the barbarian , and , again , mussolini . young allies , published in then , in the seventh unit , there were the comics nearly boxes of them , drawn from every era and genre with seemingly no logic to the collection . the monkees and star wars comic books ampnbsp worth a few dollars , if that sat next to nine different early detective comics issues , a batman , a young allies , and a specialty comic from the world s fair . a later search turned up a copy of action comics , where superman makes his first appearance one of the most coveted and expensive comic books of all time . tadano s money had been transformed , taken from legal bills and embezzled into merchandise . the haul was worth millions . investigators weren t convinced chiofalo had spent all of that cash on his own . tadano alleged that chiofalo s wife had been in on the scheme . harris county da investigator dustin deutsch called susan a few weeks after chiofalo disappeared . she said she didn t know where her husband was and hadn t seen him in a month . through what deutsch described as an anonymous tip , he discovered she had a one way plane ticket to new york leaving the following day . was she flying back to meet her husband in the bronx ? he rushed to get a warrant and searched the chiofalo home the same day . the home resembled an extension of the storage unit it was overrun with stacks and piles of boxes and packages , addressed to one of chiofalo s fictitious companies , a civil complaint from tadano would allege . the interior of their rental home was so crowded that it resembled a museum more than a residence . investigators said they found checks and other financial documents made out to chiofalo , susan , and the fictitious lawyer maio , while forged invoices were found in clear view . together , tadano would allege , the chiofalos used the embezzled funds to buy a , lexus , a , toyota pickup , and a , square foot home for , that they would remodel . one chiofalo linked cashier s check for , had gone straight to a furniture store . the police moved to arrest susan , with chiofalo still on the run . susan filed for divorce the following month . chiofalo was charged in absentia with felony theft , with bail preemptively set at million . under the criminal complaint against him , the arrest date section said simply , to be . plastic coffinslike a famous painting , a rare comic is hard to fence . only a handful of buyers in the us handle big ticket sales , and most shops keep scans of every comic for simple safety reasons . even the most pristine comics are unique , marked with subtle wrinkles , stains , and clouds of mold known as foxing . those marks make it easy to follow a single comic as it moves from sale to sale . it s almost like fingerprints , says buddy saunders , who operates lone star comics in dallas . if it shows up on ebay and it was stolen from us , we know . big auction sites do the same , in part because of return fraud , in which a scammer will purchase a valuable comic and try to return a forgery . if the wrinkles don t match the scan , the buyer is in serious trouble . in recent years , a business called the certified guaranty company or cgc has made fraud even harder . if you bought a comic book from an auction house within the last decade , it probably came in one of cgc s distinctive plastic shells , complete with a two digit condition rating , a serial number , and a hologram for authentication . the shells make it impossible to read the comic critics call them plastic coffins , but they offer strong protections against damage and theft . barcodes make for easy tracking , and de slabbing a comic will make almost any buyer suspicious . if that buyer wants to look the comic up , it s easy to find recent sales in an auction site s database . deutsch s specialty was evidence he taught forensics classes at a nearby community collegeif officials were going to use comics to catch and prosecute chiofalo , investigators needed to know which comics he had taken with him , and which he had left behind a task that fell to da investigator dustin deutsch . deutsch s specialty was evidence he taught forensics classes at a nearby community college , and his cases made him a regular on the local tv news . his team spent a full week at the sprawling storage complex , cataloging more than , separate items . some of the haul entered into evidence as whole boxes , as if the investigators had simply given up on counting it all . locked away in one of the storage units deutsch was searching was an all star the one that had cost chiofalo , . somehow , that comic never made it onto the evidence list . no one noticed the omission . by the time the investigators closed the doors on the storage units at the end of the week , the comic wasn t there . it was missing , along with an all winners and a box of other titles that had mysteriously dropped off the list . all winnerson august th , three months after chiofalo vanished a man named lonnie blevins walked into wizard world s chicago comic convention looking to unload a box of comics . he worked with deutsch as a da investigator in harris county , sporting the same tight cropped haircut and square build as his colleague . he was part of the team sorting through chiofalo s storage units , although it would be another two weeks before they turned in their official report . but today , he was at the con on personal business . every year , chicago comic con takes over the the donald e . stephens convention center , a stadium sized concrete box sandwiched between airport hotels on the northwest outskirts of chicago . this was the third day . william shatner and stan lee made appearances , along with the world s largest playable pac man machine . but for comics , the real action was in the booths , where buyers came from across the country to check out any interesting books that might be for sale . blevins brought with him a full box of loose comics , none of them in cgc slabs . some of his comics were real gems , like an all star and an all winners , but the box was all over the map in terms of condition and quality . without slabs , buyers were suspicious , but he reassured them . he was a cop back in texas he showed them his badge , and let them scan it in case they needed to find him later . all winners , published in besides , how often do you see an all star , let alone an unslabbed one ? the flash ! the green lantern ! johnny thunder ! dr . fate ! it was a rare book and an expensive one , too after all , just a few months earlier , an all star had sold for , in a private heritage sale . there was some light foxing a cloud of mold toward the bottom of the front cover but otherwise it was in good condition an . or even an . by the look of it . in retrospect , maybe buying such a big title without a cgc box was asking for trouble . it was very strange , one of the buyers remembered later . nobody would crack that book out and sell it raw . but the book was going cheap . maybe blevins just didn t know what he had . sometimes you just get lucky . blevins left the con with , in cash and another , split between nine checks . the investigator said he was going through a nasty divorce , and was worried his ex wife might raise trouble over any checks for more than , . but what about that foxing ? when the buyers took their comics home , they noticed something strange the all star that had sold in february had the same imperfections . in fact , it was the same book . but that book was slabbed it had a barcode and provenance , sold to a private buyer who wouldn t have deslabbed it without a reason . had they bought stolen property ? it was worse . they had bought stolen evidence . the book had come direct from chiofalo s storage unit , smuggled out under the nose of the harris county da and according to prosecutors , blevins and deutsch worked together to smuggle them out . more than , in comics had disappeared from the storage unit , and blevins had spent the summer selling them at comics conventions across the country . the books were deslabbed to throw investigators off the trail , but even without the barcode , the cover gave it away . collectors search for flawless comics , but it s the imperfections that give them an identity , and this imperfection placed blevins at the scene of a crime . a suitcasemeanwhile , chiofalo spent the summer on the run . months went by , and leads dried up . he had taken hundreds of thousands of dollars with him with that much money , maybe he never needed to come back . and then , one day in december , just after pm , a man in a black sweatshirt walked into the police headquarters of newport , rhode island , carrying a large black suitcase . he told an officer at the counter that there was a warrant out for his arrest . police ran a search chiofalo wanted for aggravated larceny in the state of texas . he had been on the run for seven months . he told officers that he was carrying cash , although he wasn t sure about the amount of money he had , lt . william fitzgerald told the verge . , ? , ? in chiofalo s bag , they found , . in the suitcase , , he was arrested , booked , sent to cell no . , and had his possessions processed a rolex watch , two cellphones , a laptop , a bag , and the suitcase . in the bag , they found , . in the suitcase , , . chiofalo was eventually extradited back to texas , but in the seven months since he d fled , the case against him had gone to shambles . evidence had gone missing , one of the investigators was under federal indictment , and a special prosecutor had to be brought in to press the case impartially . when chiofalo appeared in court , he looked haggard , barely recognizable as the fresh faced lawyer who had run for office years earlier . under his orange jumpsuit , intricate sleeve tattoos ran down both his forearms . his lawyer blamed the da s evidence thefts for trial delays , and pushed for reduced bail . it was hard to disagree . after the hearing , chiofalo s bail was reduced from million to just , . eager to avoid trial , the prosecution arranged a plea deal , and in may , a harris county court judge sentenced chiofalo to years in prison , up for parole in about eight . according to reports , he would ve had a better deal , but decided against giving up millions that are still unaccounted for . caught red handed , lonnie blevins plead guilty to federal charges of evidence tampering . deutsch quit the da s office as soon as the charges came down , and is currently standing trial for felony theft and tampering with evidence . the da put cases the officers had worked on under re examination . the all star copy originally purchased by chiofalo at auction for , in its cgc slabthen there are the comics . the three chicago buyers , having purchased stolen goods , are now out , . it was a bad and expensive experience , one buyer told the verge . that is all i will say . tadano retrieved most of the material from the storage facilities and sold them back through the same auction houses where chiofalo had first bought them . the only exception were comics like all star , which had been sold by blevins and were kept for evidence in deutsch s trial . susan had the charges against her dropped for lack of evidence and her criminal records expunged . the civil lawsuit , susan wrote in an email , was merely a legal formality , designed so i could sign over to tadano all the property acquired post marriage and for intimidation purposes . as i recall , there is quite a bit of embellishment in the narrative . in correspondence , susan was eager to close that chapter of her life . he left a trail of destruction in his path and caused a great deal of pain and suffering to all his loved ones , susan said . the experience left her with what she called lifelong ptsd related scars . it can t be said if chiofalo , deutsch , or blevins ever read all star , but if they did , they might have read a tale about a daring heist , foiled by the chapter s hero , the atom . in his earliest appearances , the atom wears a wrestling corset and yellow leotard , armed with no superpowers except a strong sense of morality . in the story , soldiers are transporting a stockpile of government gold to a vault when they re intercepted by a group of gangsters packing tommy guns . the gangsters overpower the soldiers , disguising themselves in the stolen uniforms , and drive into the government compound . the guards greet them , and in one small , single panel , guards and crooks are framed together . dressed the same , their faces void of definition , it s impossible to tell them apart . a note on sourcing this piece was researched over six months , with public records confirmed by subject interviews wherever possible . the bulk of the information was drawn from court records , particularly the criminal cases against blevins and deutsch , as well as the criminal and civil cases against chiofalo on the civil case against his wife . we also drew from the new york state departmental disciplinary committee s action against chiofalo , which resulted in his temporary disbarment in that state . where warranted , we have removed the names of parties involved so as not to inflict further harm . design by dylan lathropedited by michael zelenko lt ! try typekit . load catch e gt