 the scene is a snowy apartment building out of the s , rendered in a bright , slightly retro palette . a janitor trudges across the courtyard , then stops , wary . someone is out there . someone large , nimble , and wearing a floppy red hat . then you turn your phone . the janitor slides away , and instead you re looking into the third floor window of a snoring tenant . move over a little more , and there s a cat eyeing a tiny bird on the rooftop . as you focus , the cat tries to pounce . another bird this one giant and angry plops down in front of it , and the cat scoots back across a line of christmas lights , chastened . and then we re back to the janitor , who starts a wild chase with a mysterious intruder who is , obviously , santa claus . this animated short called special delivery and released today is the latest project released for spotlight stories , a smartphone based video platform run by google s advanced technology and projects atap group . it s an interactive youtube video compatible with android phones , with a non interactive degree video version for ios or web users . a collaboration with uk studio aardman animations , the project is another small step towards turning a google experiment into a new artistic medium . spotlight stories started in with a one off video called windy day , created by ratatouille co director jan pinkava now spotlight stories creative director . instead of using a fixed camera , windy day asked viewers to pretend their phones were windows into a tiny , pixar esque world . they could choose to follow a mouse chasing his wayward hat , or they could soak in details from the scenery around him . it was the kind of video that could only be done with a smartphone s motion sensors , turning phones into more than little tvs . windy day debuted as a cute perk for moto x phone owners , but google quickly started thinking bigger . after the short was well received , atap started two new pieces , one of them in partnership with legendary disney animator glen keane . keane s creation , a hand drawn animation called duet , was nominated for both an annie award and an oscar . duet got us a lot of credibility within the artist community , that this is not a gimmick , this is not a sort of gamey thing that we re doing , says spotlight stories technical lead rachid el guerrab . this is actually real animation , just in a different way . this is actually real animation , just in a different way . since then , atap has been reaching out not just to the art community , but to hollywood and the world at large . it recruited furious director justin lin for the first live action short earlier this year , and it announced a story development kit , a toolbox for artists to create spotlight style animation or video on their own . we re trying to do more and figure out is this really a new form of entertainment ? says el guerrab . what are the ingredients in it that make it different from a normal film ? the creators of special delivery have a long pedigree in normal film aardman animations is behind among other things the film chicken run and the wallace and gromit animated shorts . when atap approached aardman with the story development kit , says director tim ruffle , they returned with a number of ideas that they thought would fit the medium . one of them stuck what if looking through the phone s imaginary window was more like peering into a literal one ? we kind of imagined what if rear window happened at christmas , and was trapped in your little phone in a degree world ? says ruffle . instead of following one or two characters , viewers could see snippets of life across an entire apartment block , blended with a single main storyline that would give the piece focus . it seemed so perfect for looking out into these little vignettes . aardman wasn t the first to pitch a rear window inspired spotlight short it s actually a pretty intuitive connection . but google liked the studio s vision of what pinkava calls a groovy period piece . its style was inspired by mid th century animation trailblazer upa , creator of both comedic characters like mr . magoo and surreal shorts like an adaptation of poe s the tell tale heart . aardman s animation , though , had to look good from several different possible camera angles . it couldn t be linear , and it had to progress at the viewer s pace . in special delivery , some vignettes only begin when you look closely at them , and major story events will wait until you re paying attention . instead of a screen , the team had to imagine something more like a stage . they even built a circular cardboard set as a storyboard , blocking out the movement of their characters in physical space . when you have that literal arm s length of looking through a window , you have many more options . you re giving away the camera to the audience , which is a bit nerve wracking , says ruffle . after a while , you kind of get the idea that you re trying to create an experience for people , rather than creating a show . that s a sentiment that s heard more and more often , from directors exploring the nascent field of virtual reality video . the natural progression for spotlight stories seems like a switch from holding a phone to wearing goggles of being in the world instead of seeing little pieces of it . windy day eventually got support for google s cardboard headset , and special delivery works in cardboard as well . but pinkava disputes the idea that spotlight stories is just a stepping stone towards vr . there s a difference to having a sense of being inside a world more literally , when you have vr goggles on your face , he says . but looking through a window also gives the maker of a story different options for what you can do . there s no need to worry about motion sickness , for example a major limiting factor in designing for vr . when you have that literal arm s length of looking through a window , you have many more options to kind of cheat , and do exciting and interesting tricks to tell a story . special delivery is supposed to work equally well with both . but when i try it out , i actually prefer the non cardboard version . cardboard focuses me totally on the scene , but because i have to turn with my head and not my comparatively super flexible hands , it feels as if i have less control over my view . i m distracted by the phone s low resolution in vr , which makes it harder to appreciate the crisp , stylish animation . and in a strange twist , cardboard feels more artificial . i ve spent so much time staring into screens that i ve nearly stopped noticing them , but cardboard is still a novelty that constantly reminds me of its presence especially because unlike other headsets , you have to actively hold it against your face . it s almost more technologically impressive that while the earlier spotlight stories were hefty downloads in a dedicated app , special delivery streams on youtube , making it far easier for casual viewers to check it out . google has spent the past two months playing up degree youtube videos , but special delivery s light interactive elements push it closer to something like a living environment . most of the scenes are available to you from the first moment you enter , says el guerrab . it s like downloading half of your movie in the beginning few seconds . it s like downloading half of your movie in the beginning few seconds . it s almost , i suggest , like youtube could become a basic game platform . el guerrab quickly shuts down the comparison . it s partly on technical grounds atap prides itself on making spotlight stories technical components as stripped down as possible , compared to a full featured game engine . but it s also a question of vision . the focus is on storytelling . it s a much bigger audience for us , for creators in general , he says . there s a different audience that is game developers . those distinctions , though , are blurring . el guerreb admits that there s an intersection between something like special delivery and the non traditional adventure games of telltale , and virtual reality has popularized semi interactive experiences without obvious game like elements . and while spotlight stories is still working closely with high profile artists like academy award winning animator patrick osborne , the team also hopes to release the story development kit publicly at some point next year , so creators can figure out its limits for themselves . we have at least enough material and support that we can say go create stuff with it , says el guerrab . that s our biggest push . 