 here amprsquos a little secret about los angeles , haters the traffic isn amprsquot that bad . the worst thing about driving in la is trying to stay focused on the road amidst the most beautiful and complex scenery ever created by the dual forces of nature and technology . it amprsquos a sprawling network of neighborhoods and mountains and asphalt that inspires feelings of awe , and delightful regret that no one person can ever truly understand the depth of its character . that amprsquos how i felt when i moved here three years ago , anyway , and it amprsquos the near exact emulation of this emotion that makes grand theft auto v the greatest video game that has ever existed . the action unfolds in a fictional city called los santos , and it isn amprsquot an exact replica of la ampmdash that amprsquos a simulation too banal to sell to ampndash year old men . it amprsquos more of a late night cheeseburger dorito satisfying because it amprsquos delicious , but transcendentally entertaining because it tastes exactly like a cheeseburger you amprsquod eat late at night . but we don amprsquot eat our games in . we control caricatures in a universe limited only by a developer amprsquos budget ampmdashrockstar games allocated around a quarter billion dollars for gta v , which makes it the most expensive game ever produced . that amprsquos wild , but what amprsquos truly bonkers is that around half of that went to marketing , leaving the programmers with a mere fraction of a typical hollywood budget to build a high functioning alternate reality an abridged city that contains enough recognizable buildings , neighborhoods , and freeways to make it feel unmistakably angeleno . the uncanny canyon of a million ad budget at work in downtown lasmokin amprsquo and rollin amprsquosmokin amprsquo and rollin ampldquothe light here ! it looks like . . . butter ! amprdquo david lynch on los angelesi will never forget the first time i smoked weed with franklin clinton . he amprsquos the most relatable character in los santos a working class hustler trying to get out of his aunt amprsquos house in the ghetto with a simple set of morals , clear headed except when he sits in front of the tv and smokes a blunt . as someone whose medical marijuana is never very far away from his xbox controller , i couldn amprsquot resist the urge to spark up after pressing left on the d pad , commanding franklin through the same motions . we puffed together , we wondered about the strength of the herb together , we had the same slow realization that we were actually pretty stoned together , and later we both enjoyed a buttery sunset together ampmdash although i saw mine through a picture window behind an led screen , and franklin saw his in the full glory of his actual hometown . the more time i spent driving through los santos , the more enamored i became of the light rendering in gta v . it amprsquos a simulation as supple as a well oiled baseball glove rays of sun rake yawningly across the horizon of a vinewood hills infinity pool , glint blindingly off of reflective skyscrapers , and disappear flatly into the curves of matte black muscle cars , doing more to transport you into the game amprsquos atmosphere than any other piece of programming . driving toward a sunsetty redondo beach last week my girlfriend cocked her head quizzically and asked , ampldquoare we here , or are we in the game ? amprdquoof all the colorful and intricately programmed characters in los santos , there is one that rises above to establish himself as the most emotionally complete ampmdash a stunning feat for a snot rocketing speed freak with ampldquocut here amprdquo tattooed above a dotted line on his neck . ampldquothis is not a game to me ! amprdquo trevor phillips on lifeso i fell in love with a meth cooking murdererso i fell in love with a meth cooking murdererif you amprsquove ever seen wet hot american summer , you amprsquoll no doubt remember the muse for trevor philips amprsquo character sketch gene , a perpetually stained , war ravaged summer camp cook played masterfully by christopher meloni of law and order svu fame . the anarcho libertarian philips mediates the most indelible scenes of the game he amprsquos always waking up in varying degrees of undress in locales like a shit stained pig stall , the vanilla unicorn strip club , or on a catalina esque beach surrounded by dead bodies screaming ampldquoit wasn amprsquot me ! amprdquo in a hugely entertaining opening scene that plays out like a cross between sons of anarchy and breaking bad , trevor establishes tyranny over the meth trade in sandy shores which is a thinly veiled palm desert by mowing down the lost motorcycle club amprsquos trailer park , then moving on to torch a rival producers amprsquo lab ampmdash a ramshackle house populated by scores of inbred brothers . you almost want to reach through the tv and hug the script writers for simultaneously decimating baseless notions of hipsterdomlike the best characters in contemporary television , trevor amprsquos never ending campaign of shock and awe is complemented by a constantly evolving moral compass and a genuine desire for the betterment of the world around him , even if it means burning it all to the ground . as a result , he emerges as the most reliable narrator in all of gta v . he might find a human eyelid or two in his rancid lunchtime stew , but he amprsquos also the one who discovers drywall packed into a brick of false cocaine , protecting the crew from a bad deal . he amprsquoll tear floyd amprsquos love life apart spiritually and physically on tuesday , but on wednesday he amprsquoll act as an effective marriage counselor for michael de santa on a long drive through the mountains . these commutes to far flung mission locations can take up to minutes ampmdash an eternity in game time . they amprsquod become an exercise in drudgery if it weren amprsquot for the achingly beautiful coastal scenery whizzing by , coupled with rockstar amprsquos use of these moments to bring us deeper into the emotional arc of the characters ampmdash a kind of built in cutscene scripted as a conversation between passengers . as michael and trevor make their way from southern los santos all the way to north blaine county , an analytical michael admits that he amprsquos ampldquobeen wondering about some of trevor amprsquos lifestyle choices lately amphellip the weird music , the niche drugs , amprdquo and a wardrobe that amprsquos ampldquothe opposite of fashion amphellip trevor ! amprdquo he posits like a shrink on the edge of a massive revelation , ampldquoyou amprsquore amphellip a hipster ! amprdquo it amprsquos an amazingly well scripted exchange ampldquoi am not a fucking hipster ! amprdquo is the predictable reply , ampldquoi eat hipsters for lunch ! amprdquo when michael remarks that ampldquohipsters hate being called hipsters , amprdquo you almost want to reach through the tv and hug the script writers for simultaneously decimating baseless notions of hipsterdom , and for the equally irritating new york times linkbait of what the concept may or may not mean . as the revealing journey to east paleto concludes , michael gives trevor the credit he deserves ampldquoyou amprsquore what a hipster aspires to be . you amprsquore the proto hipster . amprdquo it amprsquos one of the few conversations in which trevor doesn amprsquot get the last word . ampldquofamily work is more expensive . amprdquo ampldquodoubled ? amprdquo ampldquono . squared . amprdquolook who s talking vlook who s talking vbad sound design can ruin a good script in any medium , and games have historically gotten everything ampmdash from voice acting to interaction programming to compression levels ampmdash dismally wrong . but gta v represents a leap forward in vocalization akin to the impact that m a s h had on television writing . instead of existing in a one dimensional plane , as almost no real speech does , characters react to the events around them a tightly woven programming architecture finds people talking over one another and reacting to the people around them in real time . if michael de santa smashes into a tree while his son is explaining the art of trolling , jimmy will pause his story to tell dad that he amprsquos a fucking maniac , and resume the conversation after they amprsquore back on the road . i wondered had a video game just made me feel productive ? i often found myself testing the boundaries of interaction programming , which became kind of a mini game in itself . after a botched robbery attempt on an armored vehicle , i remembered it had been a while since michael had checked in with his omnipresent therapist dr . friedlander ampmdash so i gave him a call as i was running from the cops , my character using one arm to hold the phone up to his ear and the other elbow to smash the window of a parked hatchback . after a successful carjacking , he pressed the phone to his shoulder with the side of his face , freeing both hands to grab the wheel at and o amprsquoclock ampmdash soon i had evaded the cops , finished my session , and met my contact at the film lot on time . as we discussed my role as an associate producer in our new project , i wondered had a video game just made me feel productive ? michael amprsquos frenzied contribution to the vinewood economy is part of a larger arc that sees the central character trying to regain the trust of his estranged family he amprsquos on a mission to prove to them that he amprsquos more than just a clever thug . it amprsquos a smooth meta move for rockstar as well while critics berate its macho hyperviolence with the knee jerk moral certitude of tipper gore on mortal kombat , anyone who amprsquos invested a few days in the game will learn that grand theft auto is about far more than just , you know , grand theft auto . nuclear familynuclear familyit amprsquos not like boosting whips isn amprsquot just as important as it was in the first gta . but michael is the kind of man that owns a book called dadnaissance , and his renewed obligations to his ex stripper wife amanda license plate am nd and their millennial spawn jimmy and tracey form a series of missions that are as psychotic as they are entertaining . it amprsquos not like boosting whips isn amprsquot just as important as it was in the first gtalike a prolific instigator of niche porn titles , amanda has a penchant for fucking her instructors ampmdash first her tennis coach , and later a ponytailed , toe shoe wearing latin yogi called fabian . to prove his alpha male domination in all things physical , michael can challenge his not so doting wife in an athletic mini game that amprsquos just as complex as top spin or a controller bending yoga session that requires all the dexterity of a wii fit game . tracey amprsquos misguided quest for fame finds her at the beck and call of yet another ponytailed douchebag , a seacrestian talent show host called lazlow . after a blackmail mission fails to keep the star making predator away from his daughter , michael turns to the tattoo parlor to create a more indelible impression ampmdash rockstar raises the bar in the ampldquofulfilling disgusting ambitions of teenage males amprdquo game by allowing the player to tattoo a giant cock and balls on an enemy amprsquos back . rockstar raises the bar in the ampldquofulfilling disgusting ambitions of teenage males amprdquo gameand then there amprsquos jimmy any father and son struggle in an attempt to understand one another , but when dad amprsquos a high level thief and junior amprsquos an xbox addicted wigger with a neck tattoo that reads ampldquoentitled , amprdquo the struggle is exponentially stranger . michael tries to gain bonding points by giving jimmy a ride to buy weed from a dealer who works at burger stop , but he also brings out a ampldquospecial milkshake amprdquo that he shares with his dad , in a kind of cute attempt at togetherness . but there amprsquos something far weirder than thc in the shake ampmdash michael gets too wasted to drive home and ends up getting abducted and probed by hallucinated aliens . he escapes by skydiving out of their vessel , descending through an acid warped sky over los santos and eventually waking up in his undies on a random vinewood lawn . it amprsquos a psychedelic ride more accurate than anything in enter the void and , as an immersive experience , far more expressive than anything that could be felt in a simple film . protip jumpstart your love life by bashing the yogi amprsquos head in with an ifruit laptopdon amprsquot mess this upclose encounters of a dedicated fatherit amprsquos complicatedblurred linesblurred linesone of the most important artistic advantages of creating a painstakingly detailed universe from scratch is the writers amprsquo ability to make cultural observations about the modern condition that wouldn amprsquot be possible in a less developed landscape . there are scores of moments that articulate my own fascination with the private lives of humans in ways i never could by simply writing words on a page . my favorite is the email that michael gets after reconnecting with his social media obsessed daughter pictured above . the stupid spelling , the extraneous punctuation , the teenage aversion to formal communication amphellip they amprsquore all details of tracey amprsquos personality we could have surmised , but rockstar uses the moment to showcase another subtly amazing act in the human history of los santos . i could go on and on the satirical yet better than real life radio stations hosted by gilles peterson , flying lotus , and lee ampldquoscratch amprdquo perry complete with ads hawking celebrity branded headphones and medical cocaine . the ifruit app on your real world device that allows you to train franklin amprsquos pit bull and customize your cars , and which spawned a clutch of spyware fakes in the google play store . there amprsquos the bawsaq stock market that you can invest in through a real world web browser , the slowly creeping pause music reminiscent of daft punk amprsquos tron legacy score . it amprsquos a never ending playground of unparalleled construction that demands answers to philosophical inquiries we amprsquove never before needed to entertain . the most beautiful spoiler alert you amprsquoll see all weekgta xxviigta xxviibecause i amprsquom the owner of a first gen xbox with a failure prone disc drive , i installed the game on a usb enabled microsd card . if you haven amprsquot seen one before , it amprsquos a laughably small piece of silicon if all of los santos fits onto a chip smaller than my pinky nail in , what , exactly , are the chances that we aren amprsquot living in a period piece programmed by rockstar mars in ? gta v has given me the greatest proof yet that those odds are infinitely slim ampmdash i am not a scientist , but as a gamer i can see that what i just finished playing transcends traditional definitions of a game . at its core , this is an experiential turing test that knocks on all the right doors of a matrix flavored singularity . if that makes me a technocratic solipsist , so be it . i amprsquom just glad rockstar amprsquos budget has gone up enough in , years to create a sunset as beautiful as the one i see every day out my window ampmdash even if it amprsquos probably just an exquisitely rendered simulation . 