 around am on january st , , a small group of protesters gathered in the driveway of an understated million four bedroom family home in berkeley and unfurled a hand painted banner that read google amprsquos future stops here . the house belonged to anthony levandowski , a google engineer best known for leading the self driving car project . the protesters claim levandowski left his house on a previous day wearing google glass , carrying a baby and a tablet , but only paying attention to the tablet . today , however , levandowski did not emerge . the protesters passed out a two page flyer to levandowski amprsquos neighbors and loitered . after about minutes , they left to go block the path of a private google shuttle bus . people like levandowski are gentrifying neighborhoods , flooding the market with noxious commodities , and creating the infrastructure for an unimaginable totalitarianism , the flyer said . it encouraged people to block buses , steal from the techies they babysit for , and take down surveillance cameras . the flyer is signed , the counterforce . the counterforce objects to the tech industry altogetherthe rent has long been high in san francisco . aggressive land use policies restrict the amount of new housing that gets built , while greedy landlords have started evicting long time tenants on flimsy pretenses in order to shake off rent control . but in recent months , rapidly rising prices have stoked resentment toward tech workers who are seen as gentrifiers . some activists have zeroed in on the private company shuttles that stop at city bus stops but only pick up their own employees . others are shaming developers and landlords , attempting to pressure them into letting tenants stay . the counterforce is more ambitious . named after a resistance group in the thomas pynchon novel gravity amprsquos rainbow , the group objects to the tech industry altogether . we want to destroy the capitalist system , create a new world without an economy , and push back against the alienating technologies that are coming to dominate the cultural and physical landscape , a representative tells the verge in an email . it amprsquos easy to criticize the tech sector for things like its lust for personal data , ampnbspzealous belief in its vision for the world , and enthusiasm for ampnbspthrowing insane amounts of money after inane levels of convenience . there amprsquos also the timely argument that the internet has led to the surveillance state under the national security agency . there is even a case to be made , despite its overwhelmingly popularity , that the internet itself is bad see pynchon amprsquos most recent book , or the active debate in the orthodox jewish community . what if we were to give up the productivity gains of the industrial revolution and stick with musical instruments , printing presses , and windmills , as the counterforce suggests ? what if we were no longer obsessed by the desire to , as one of pynchon amprsquos anarchists put it , draw ever more complex patterns on the blank sheet ? the counterforce wants to start that debate . but despite the sexy name , it amprsquos not the group to argue for it . sorry about the rent stuff . four protesters visited the san francisco home of kevin rose , founder of digg , former silicon valley poster boy , and now a partner at google ventures , at around am on sunday , april th . rose amprsquos wife darya came to the door , where they handed her a flyer and started chanting , your bubble amprsquos about to bust , your google belongs to us and demanding interface with her husband . shaken , she shut the door and called rose , who was down the street building a skate ramp for a nonprofit organization . compared to the rhetoric , the actual confrontation was mild . a representative for the counterforce sent a short video from the encounter to the verge for publication , adding that , we think the video would add something to the conversation , as it makes it all very human , mundane , and awkward . the video shows a girl who looks to be in her s and features the voices of another young sounding woman and two men . they accuse rose , who is sitting on a garden wall on the sidewalk , of driving rents up by funding startups through google ventures . sorry about the rent stuff , he says . it amprsquos mostly landlords though , right ? no , it amprsquos people like you , one of the girls says . you amprsquore creating five jobs for some guys who are sitting around in a rompus room sic , you know , doing yoga , a man amprsquos voice says . and then we amprsquore serving you guys coffee . you amprsquore creating five jobs for some guys who are sitting around in a . . . room , you know , doing yoga . rose tries to score a few points by noting that the group is filming video that they plan to post on youtube using an android phone , both owned by google . the counterforce says it is not hypocrisy to use free technology . our group is diverse and we spend our lives mostly offline , they say in an email . some of us use smartphones more than others . nearly all of us agree that technology and information are addictive for various reasons . the video ends anticlimactically after the group confronts rose with a joke he made in on a podcast about stabbing women in the chest with scissors . afterward , the counterforce released a statement demanding that google donate billion to build anarchist colonies around northern california where people could live for free , thereby solving the housing crisis . meanwhile , another group or groups using the name the counterforce have claimed responsibility for blocking shuttles that transport amazon workers in seattle . andrew leonard wrote in salon that the counterforce was taking the san francisco protests to a new , absurd and potentially dangerous level . what is wrong with these people ? echoed leo laporte , the host of the popular tech podcast this week in tech , who interviewed rose after his encounter . this is so ridiculous ! tweeted gary shapiro , the head of the consumer electronics association . tech being vilified in san francisco again . i find it ethically questionable , singling out individual people , says enrico moretti , a professor of economics at the university of california , berkeley and the author of a book that estimates that every new tech job creates five additional jobs outside the tech sector . i don amprsquot think it amprsquos representative of how people feel about this . that said , i think it amprsquos working . the more obnoxious tactics do seem to be getting attention . in december , max bell alper , a union organizer , pretended to be a google employee yelling at protesters . he was initially condemned by other organizers , but some changed their minds after the video went viral . protesters have continued to block buses on their way to work , but they most often grab headlines when there amprsquos a twist . in oakland , one group slashed a google bus amprsquo tires and threw a rock through its window , while another protester vomited on the windshield of a yahoo shuttle . on friday , a third google employee was personally targeted by another protest led by a group called eviction free san francisco . jack halprin , an attorney at google , attracted a small crowd of protesters to his home angry about his attempt to evict seven tenants , possibly so he can occupy the entire building himself . i don amprsquot think it amprsquos representative of how people feel about this . that said , i think it amprsquos working . i would draw the line around , if anybody was to get hurt , erin mcelroy of the anti eviction mapping project , who was at the halprin protest , says when asked which protest methods cross the line . i amprsquom not opposed to pointing out certain higher ups for what they amprsquore doing by any means . i think that is effective . companies have started to respond to the unrest google made a donation to provide free public transportation for low income youth . a growing class gap exists in san francisco and , as with the occupy wall street movement , the have nots have found a target . the more extreme protests reflect a ampnbspgrowing dissatisfaction that is reinforced every time the disenfranchised see a tech shuttle make its daily rounds or read about school teachers and disabled children being given a day notice to leave their homes . the counterforce is definitely a fringe element . the question is whether it could be an indication of what amprsquos to come if the class gap persists or gets worse . the group is confident it is at the precipice of a complete anarcho primitivist rebellion against the technocracy . get ready for a revolution neither you nor we can control , a revolution that will spread to all of the poor , exploited , and degraded members of this new tech society and be directed towards you for your bad decisions and irresponsible activities , the group wrote in an open letter to google . we advise you to take us seriously . 