 the next time you ponder your poop before you flush , one thing to keep in mind is that your feces passed through a lot of important organs on their way out . and if you don t take a peek , well , congratulations on your moral superiority , i guess ? so it might be possible that your stool can tell you when there s something wrong with the squishy internal rube goldberg machine that converts food into feces . ponder your poop before you flushi have a lot of questions about what this external nugget of evidence says about the inner workings of my body is that the shape it s supposed to be ? when did i eat that corn ? why is it blue ? that only happened once . the quick and dirty version of the digestion process starts as soon as we take a bite . little molecular wrenches called enzymes start dismantling our food in the mouth , then the stomach . in the small intestine , enzymes do even finer work breaking down fats , proteins , and starches into molecules small enough to pass through the intestine s walls and into the bloodstream . that s how you absorb the food s nutrients . muscle contractions called peristalsis push the food now a soupy , messy slop along to the large intestine , where water is sucked back into the body . what you re left with is , usually , is a somewhat solid m lange of indigestible food leftovers , microbes , dead cells , and all sorts of waste products our bodies need to expel . the stool hangs out in the rectum before squeezing out through the anus . once the poop is in the toilet , what can it tell you about your body ? since the porcelain bowl isn t a magic mirror , i quizzed gastroenterologist justin sewell from the university of california , san francisco while he grabbed a quick lunch on the other end of the phone . a photo posted by nabhan al abdullatif nabhan illustrations on feb , at am pst earth tones are healthy but so are lots of other colorspoop can come in a rainbow of colors depending on what you eat . but earth tones like brown , yellow , and green are the most common , sewell says . these muddy hues are the result of mixing digested food with broken down bits of dead red blood cells that get dumped into the small intestine along with bile , an enzyme produced by the liver to digest fats . there s a huge range of normalif your poop falls outside this range of shades like , say , blue , it s not necessarily unhealthy . but if your poop is gray , black , red , or maroon , those colors could be signs of a health problem . pale or gray could mean that something is preventing bile and its accompanying red blood cell waste from reaching the small intestine . that could be from a problem anywhere in the liver , the gallbladder which stores bile , and the connecting ductwork . often , people with gray poops show other signs of liver problems , like jaundice . flickr justin dolske cc by sa . black , red , or maroon hued poop can all be from bleeding . tarry and sticky stools usually suggest bleeding from the stomach or upper small intestine like from an ulcer , for example . dark red or maroon poops could mean bleeding in the upper colon or lower small intestine . red diarrhea could be due to an inflammatory bowel disease like crohn s disease or ulcerative colitis or it could mean that your colon is infected with bacteria like certain strains of e . coli . and bright red blood on the toilet paper could be due to hemorrhoids itchy , swollen veins in the rectum or anus that bleed . that s the much more common , and much less scary option because it could also be from polyps or colon cancer . poop can come in a rainbow of colorsbut remember , poop is food waste so you might just be seeing the results of something you ate . iron supplements or pepto bismol can also make your poop black , and beets can make your poop red . it also turns your pee red . i thought i was dying the first time this happened . there s no ideal poop shapewhen i create a perfect , uninterrupted log i feel victorious like i peeled an apple without breaking the spiral of skin . but sewell tells me that my quest for the perfect poop is misguided there s no such thing . i ve had people bring me pictures of their poop and say this is not right , it s supposed to be a perfect , smooth log shape . and yes , for some people that s normal but for other people , that s just not the way their body works , he says . there s no ideal poop . there s no ideal poop . poop types and shapes can grouped into seven categories in the bristol stool scale , which describes the range of imaginable stools from hard little rabbit pellets type one a sign of constipation to watery diarrhea type seven which could be due to anything from an infection to having just gone for a run . as long as your poop falls into types two through six on the scale , you re probably doing just fine . wikimedia commons cabot health cc by sa . anywhere from formed logs to soft and falling apart is fine and that just depends on individual people s bodies and their diet , sewell says . if it s hard or sticky , however , you might want to add fiber and water to the menu . if it s mushy or watery , drink more water to rehydrate . food bits are fine , but lots of them is weirdsighting food in poop isn t unusual , sewell says . but pay attention to how the food looks . it s totally normal to find pieces of corn kernels , for example , which have indigestible bits made of a plant fiber called cellulose . if you eat a bunch of greens , you re going to see pieces of partially digested plant material come out , sewell says . and the chunks can be bigger or smaller depending on how well you chew . pixabay public domain but if your poop is almost entirely composed of recognizable food bits , it could be signs of a digestion problem . your gut might be squeezing food through too quickly to get properly digested . anything from parasites , to certain types of gastrointestinal infections , to even irritable bowel syndrome and severe celiac disease can get peristalsis moving faster than it should . so if what comes out strongly resembles what went in , maybe you should see a doctor . mucus and fat aren t okayif you see mucus on your poop , that can be a sign of an autoimmune disease or an infection . but what does mucus even look like when it s coming out of an orifice other than your nose ? it s white , semi solid , and stringy , sewell says . like egg drop soup , he adds . seeing that in the toilet bowl suggests inflammation , most likely in the lower gut . the inflammation could be from ulcerative colitis or crohn s disease or from some kind of parasitic , viral , or bacterial infection . a photo posted by nabhan al abdullatif nabhan illustrations on jul , at pm pdt be on lookout for fat in poop as well . a fatty stool usually floats and can leave an oil slick on the surface of the water . after you flush , there might be orange ring of what looks like pizza grease that lingers around the bowl . like when you re cooking something oily , sewell says , and you pour out the water , and there s a rim of fat that sticks to the edge of the container . fatty poop can come from a number of things including diet pills like alli that can make fat leak out your butt . it can also be a sign of pancreatic or liver disease , because it means the enzymes they produce that should be breaking down fat aren t doing their jobs . intestinal disorders like crohn s disease or celiac disease can cause this , as well . so what does your poop say about you ? the main thing to keep in mind is that there s a huge range of normal . that also includes the frequency with which you poop generally , anything less than three times per week is constipation , and anything more than three times a day is too frequent . most people poop one to two times a day , or once every other day , sewell says . variation in urgency is common , too having to go right now isn t unusual , but if that s a constant sensation , you may want to check in with a doctor . pay attention but don t obsess . i think it s healthy for people to look at what they produce , note any major changes , and ask their doctor about it , sewell says . people do obsess over having , they want the perfect shape poop , they want it harder , they want it softer . it s not really much under your control besides eating more or less fiber , or consuming more or less water . so pay attention but don t obsess . because public domain 