 the best known war themed video games convey one very specific aspect of conflict the actual fighting . whether it s call of duty or battlefield , they re games where you interact with the world using the gun in your hand . this makes for an often exciting , adrenaline pumping experience , but it also glosses over how war influences anyone other than a soldier . a new wave of games is looking to change that by showing war from a range of different perspectives in order to make you think about it in a different way . seeing things from different perspectives exercises the imagination , tale of tales design duo auriea harvey and micha l samyn tell the verge over email . and imagination is what is need to make the world a better place , to recognize what is wrong , and to fight against oppression . best known for art games like the sensual luxuria superbia or the existential bient t l t , tale of tales is currently developing a first person exploration game called sunset , for which it just launched a kickstarter campaign . set in south america in , the game takes place in the midst of a sweeping revolution overtaking an unnamed country . sunset stars angela burnes , an american who takes on a housekeeping job while living abroad . every day you have one hour before sunset to clean the expansive apartment of playboy gabriel ortega . as you inevitably start rooting through his belongings , you slowly become pulled into a story about overthrowing the country s ruthless dictator . the game is slated to launch next year . the gameplay is similar to that of gone home there s no real action , per se , it s more about soaking up the environment and searching for clues . at certain points you ll be given the chance to make a choice that will influence angela s role in the events that unfold . you can also just take some time to mess around with ortega s cool automated shutters , the pinnacle of s gadgetry . the concept originated with an old prototype the studio built called the apartment . in it , players could eavesdrop on the lives of people living in a single apartment and move objects around while they were asleep to influence events . it s a concept that has since been used in games like the novelist , and eventually harvey and samyn combined that idea with a burgeoning story about south american dictatorships in the early s . a device that gives us the opportunity to contemplate things from many different angles . we more or less randomly picked the year , the pair explain , but it s a very interesting time . it s the moment when two world views collided the old , traditional , hierarchical world where experience and elegance expressed civilization versus the new antiauthoritarian , hyper individualized world where freedom justifies everything . to some extent , the apocalypse happened in and nothing has really changed since then . for the studio , a video game was the ideal choice to tell this kind of story . a video game for us is a device that gives us the opportunity to contemplate things from many different angles , they explain , without the need to make final decisions . sunset is a game about war where you don t experience the war itself , whereas this war of mine goes in the opposite direction . developed by bit studios , a team best known for the sci fi strategy series anomaly , this war of mine is all about staying alive . you control a group of survivors during an ongoing conflict , scrounging supplies so that everyone is fed and healthy . it s dark and gray and incredibly depressing sort of like experiencing the aftermath of a huge battle that you don t see in call of duty . it s due to launch later this year we re translating our knowledge of war into game mechanics . for senior writer pawel miechowski , there were two key moments that lead to the creation of the game . first , he was struck reading an article from a supposed survivor of the conflicts in bosnia , detailing the struggle to stay alive amidst great hardship . in the story much like in the game every possible resource is precious , whether it s food , medicine , or weapons . losing one at the expense of the other can be a difficult and sometimes damaging decision . these ideas helped shape the game . we re translating our knowledge of war into game mechanics , says miechowski . while the article helped inspire the mechanics of this war of mine , it was another video game that convinced miechowski and the team that a difficult topic like this was a good fit for gaming . lucas pope s papers , please is a low fi game about being an immigration officer during a fictional eastern european conflict in the s . it s an experience that forces you to make lots of terrible decisions and drives home just how bleak life can be it also went on to be a commercial success and won the grand prize at the independent games festival . it s the moment , miechowsky says of papers , please s role in making more serious games mainstream . despite their similar themes , sunset and this war of mine are two very different games , but there s one important aspect the two share in common they re about fictional conflicts , not real wars . and that was a purposeful decision . sunset is very much inspired by events that happened in the s in south america , but we are really using this as a vehicle to talk about the world today , say harvey and samyn . if we would directly address the complex contemporary issues , the attention would be diffused because we simply don t have enough distance yet to really judge what is going on today . but we hope that sunset sharpens our senses and helps us in this task . on a basic level , we re all the same . for bit , using a real world conflict as a setting would have actually taken away from the message the studio wanted to get across . religious beliefs or political opinions are completely irrelevant when you have to struggle for food or when you have to sacrifice someone because you need to protect your family , miechowski explains . the message is that it could happen to anyone in any city . on a basic level , we re all the same . battlefield isn t going anywhere anytime soon . but as blockbuster titles increasingly focus on the excitement of battle at the expense of the realities of war , more and more smaller titles are filling in the games . from the works of tale of tales and bit , to the provocative fps spec ops the line and war correspondent simulator warco , we re getting a clearer picture of conflict through gaming . and the success of games like papers , please prove that it s a picture that players want to see . i don t have anything against action games , says miechowski . in fact , battlefield is one of my favorite ones . i just think we should not forget the real face of war . 