 marie was feeding her twin daughters when the raid began . it was a little after pm on a thursday , and she heard a loud commotion outside her apartment in the suburbs of paris . the order came minutes later police ! open your door ! marie panicked and rushed to move her one year old girls into another room before opening the door . but the police couldn t wait . within seconds , they had broken her door and forced her to the ground . there were about officers in total , she said , and some were dressed in riot gear . the children saw it all from the dinner table . as one officer held marie on the ground , the others set about rifling through her apartment , looking for incriminating evidence against her year old husband , who was still at work . the officers didn t produce a search warrant , but a paper that they hurriedly forced her to sign said that the raid was carried out under france s new state of emergency laws . the raid order , obtained by the verge , lays out three accusations against her husband he knew jihadists who had been killed , he knew people who trafficked fake passports , and that he belonged to unnamed muslim associations that promote religious radicalism . marie says the accusations are false . she and her husband are french muslims , and they regularly go to mosque , but she says they re far from conservative . she doesn t wear a veil over her long red hair , and he s already been subjected to thorough background checks for his job in the aeronautics industry . neither has ever traveled to the middle east . the police eventually tracked down marie s husband as he was on his way home and brought him home in handcuffs . the two were questioned in separate rooms late into the night . the officers finally left around am , but not without copying all the data from their smartphones and computers . no charges were filed . the officer who was in charge came and said , okay , we re going to leave now , marie , , said in an interview last month . two weeks had passed since the raid , but she still couldn t talk about it without breaking down in tears . and that was it , she continued . they just said goodbye no explanation for the how or why . aurelien meunier getty imagesmarie isn t the only one looking for answers . there has been a steady stream of similar stories in the french media since president fran ois hollande implemented a state of emergency following november s terrorist attacks in paris , which killed people . the laws , which were ampnbspextended for three months in november , give security forces expanded powers to conduct warrantless house raids , seize personal data , and place people on house arrest all without authorization from a judge . thousands of raids have been carried out at homes and businesses , and hundreds of suspects have been placed under house arrest on what some say are tenuous grounds . ampnbspa un human rights panel , amnesty international , and other rights groups have condemned the state of emergency laws , but hollande s administration has shown no signs of backing down . this week , the president formally requested that the state of emergency be extended for another three months . on wednesday , a high court rejected a rights group s appeal to suspend the state of emergency , saying the country still faces imminent peril . next week , french lawmakers will debate a bill that would enshrine state of emergency laws into the french constitution , making it easier for the president to activate them and more difficult to mount legal challenges . hollande is also pushing for a controversial proposal that would allow convicted terrorists with dual nationality to be stripped of their french citizenship a measure that has long been supported by far right politicians , and which prompted france s justice minister to resign this week in protest . french prime minister manuel valls has defended the state of emergency , saying that the raids are based on objective suspicions , and that the measures should stay in place until we can get rid of daesh , using the arabic term for isis . the laws have also enjoyed broad political and public support a recent ampnbsppoll from the huffington post and itv found that nearly seven out of are in favor of extending the laws beyond their february th expiration . they can t make the muslim minority pay for their own incompetence . but there is mounting evidence to suggest that security forces are overstepping their bounds , implicating people with no connection to terrorist groups and targeting others based on little more than mosque affiliation or social media posts . political activists and protesters have been caught up in the anti terror crackdown , most notably during the cop climate change conference in december , and human rights groups say the laws have had a disproportionate impact on france s muslim population the largest in western europe . what the government is doing is sending a message that they re doing something , but they re doing the wrong thing , said yasser louati , spokesperson for the collective against islamophobia in france ccif , an organization that provides legal support and consulting services for french muslims . they can t make the muslim minority pay for their own incompetence in not protecting the french people . louati says his organization has received complaints since the emergency laws went into effect , including related to house arrests . so far , eight cases brought to the ccif have been overturned in court , louati says , but many of those targeted are still afraid to speak out , for fear of further repercussions . that s why marie asked that i not use her real name in this article . a paris region police prefecture declined to provide further details on what motivated the raid on marie s home . the interior ministry did not respond to multiple requests for comment . kenzo tribouillard getty imagessince the november th attacks , french security forces have carried out nearly , house raids using their expanded powers , and people have been put on house arrest . the raids have led to arrests , and legal proceedings have been opened , most pertaining to drug or weapons charges . so far , only four terrorism related investigations have been opened . but the laws have been enforced with little transparency , making it difficult to gauge their effectiveness . cl mence bectarte , a lawyer at the paris based international federation for human rights , says that aside from announcements about the volume of arrests and weapons seizures , lawyers and rights groups have nothing else to understand the legal grounds , the factual grounds of these measures . we cannot measure the effectiveness of the state of emergency laws because there are no facts that would enable us to do so , bectarte said . france has never been a place where civil liberties were well protected . media reports have helped fill in some of the blanks . in nice , a six year old girl sustained head injuries after police broke down the door to her family s apartment at am and interrogated her father . they had the wrong address . a muslim man in toulouse said his wife and two year old son were left traumatized by what he called a brutal raid , when police broke into his apartment in search of weapons . there were none . in perhaps the most notorious case , armed police stormed the pepper grill restaurant outside paris in november , breaking open the door and ordering the room full of diners to put their hands on the table . the restaurant , which is owned by a muslim man and serves halal food , was believed to hold people , arms , or objects linked to terrorist activities , according to the raid order . no contraband was found and no charges were filed ampnbspsurveillance footage of the raid was later posted online . four days later , interior minister bernard cazeneuve issued a memo ampnbspreminding all police prefectures to carry out raids with respect for the law , marking the first implicit acknowledgment of possible overreach . france has passed different anti terror laws within the past years , each one moving the needle toward state power and away from civil liberty , says jonah levy , a professor of comparative politics at the university of california berkeley and an expert on french politics . the country has also cracked down on online speech , jailing those who express support for terrorist groups or other forms of hate speech on social media . despite liberty , equality , fraternity , france has never been a place where civil liberties were well protected as compared to other democracies or european countries , levy said . kenzo tribouillard getty imagesfrance s most recent anti terror legislation was ampnbsppassed in may , following the january attacks on the offices of satirical magazine ampnbspcharlie hebdo and a kosher supermarket in paris . the law , which has been likened to a french patriot act , allows officials to monitor emails and phone calls of would be jihadists without court authorization , and forces telecommunications companies to store customer metadata and make it available to the government on demand . calls for more aggressive legislation have only intensified with the rise of the far right national front party , which has pushed a nationalist , anti immigrant agenda . officials have defended the measures as necessary to confront what they describe as a unique security threat . french officials foiled terrorist plots last year , the interior ministry announced last month , but it s unclear whether more expansive powers would actually help prevent terrorism . the men responsible for both the charlie hebdo and november attacks were on french authorities radar , but were dropped either to pursue other threats , or due to poor intelligence sharing . think about the children who hid during these raids . there are also fears that hollande s response to the november attacks could further alienate french muslims . many muslims remain socially and economically isolated from the rest of france , and there are signs that tensions have heightened following last year s terror attacks . figures released by the interior ministry this month showed that anti muslim crimes were committed last year in france , more than triple the number tallied in . the problem is that now they are just sowing the seeds of further radicalization in the most fragile elements in the french population , louati said . think about the children who hid during these raids , who saw their mothers humiliated , their fathers being violently handcuffed to the ground , their apartments completely trashed by the police . marie s daughters are still too young to understand what happened the night their home was raided , and she hopes they won t remember it when they re older . but she said they re more restless following the incident , and are more difficult to put to sleep . one of the twins now cries uncontrollably whenever there are more than a few people in their living room . marie is still struggling with the trauma , too . i m afraid to be at home , she said . the slightest shut of a door , the slightest noise it stresses me , it makes me panic . she s also worried that the raid may cause problems for her husband at work , and still has no idea where the data seized from their computers and phones ended up . the family has since hired a lawyer and filed a complaint in french court , seeking damages for what marie describes as a baseless invasion of her home . they can t just break into our lives and turn everything upside down , she said . i need to know that this won t happen again . 