 paris is still very much on edge after last week s attacks on the offices of satirical magazine charlie hebdo , which precipitated a three day manhunt and left dead . thousands of soldiers have been deployed amid fears of further violence , as government leaders and intelligence officials try to make sense of france s worst terrorist attack in decades . investigations into the massacre are ongoing , and other suspected accomplices are still at large , but questions are already swirling over how france and its neighbors will respond and what it could mean for civil liberties . we must respond to this exceptional situation with exceptional measures , french prime minister manuel valls said before france s national assembly tuesday evening . valls , who earlier declared france at war with radical islam , outlined new anti terror proposals during his address , including stronger surveillance of the internet and social media . he cautioned , however , that any new measures must not deviate from the principles of law and values . our main concern is that the french government gives the time to reflect , there are currently no concrete proposals on the table , and french leaders appear to be treading carefully at a time of heightened tensions among ethnic and religious groups . but the post tragedy rhetoric from politicians in france has fueled media speculation of a new patriot act la fran aise a reference to the us anti terror legislation that was rapidly passed in the wake of the september th attacks . in the us , the patriot act laid the groundwork for unprecedented government surveillance and warrantless data gathering , at the expense of civil liberties . following last week s violence , rights groups fear a similar fate may await france and other european countries , where overreacting to what was widely seen as an attack on free speech could curtail much broader freedoms . our main concern is that the french government gives the time to reflect , says cl mence bectarte , a lawyer at the paris based international federation for human rights , to think about what happened , to think about it in an intelligent manner , and to draw conclusions that will be the result of a process . not to react upon emotion . although france initially criticized the us following revelations about the nsa s data collection programs , its government has not hesitated to expand its own reach . in , documents leaked by edward snowden revealed that france has an nsa like data collection program of its own , and late last year , parliament passed a law that permits the government to block any websites that promote jihadism . a law that went into effect this year allows security and intelligence services to collect data on internet users in real time , without legal authorization , and to order telecommunications and internet companies to hand over user information . an estimated . million people demonstrated in paris on sunday in support of charlie hebdo . photo credit dan kitwood getty images intelligence authorities say such spying technology plays an important role in deterring attacks . prior to last week s attack , fears were already high over the large number of jihadist french nationals who had returned home from fighting in syria and iraq . after the shooting at charlie hebdo , president francois hollande said that several terrorist attacks had been disrupted in the preceding weeks . but the country s vast surveillance machinery appears to have missed this month s attacks , despite the fact that the two chief suspects , brothers sa d and ch rif kouachi , were known to have links to terrorist groups overseas . of major concern to french and other european lawmakers is the online propaganda that terrorists groups like isis have begun using to recruit jihadists living abroad . france blocked some websites following last week s violence , but activists fear that such powers set a dangerous precedent for free speech . mass surveillance doesn t only infringe on our privacy , but also our ability to speak freely , jillian york , of the electronic frontier foundation eff , wrote in a blog post this week . the knowledge , or even the perception of surveillance , can prompt writers to think twice before touching upon a given issue . european leaders echo calls for greater surveillanceelsewhere in europe , some are using the paris attacks to call for expanded surveillance powers . on sunday , as more than million people flooded the streets of paris in support of the free speech principles that charlie hebdo embodied , a group of european ministers issued a joint statement calling for internet service providers to more swiftly report and remove online material that aims to incite hatred and terror . we are concerned at the increasingly frequent use of the internet to fuel hatred and violence and signal our determination to ensure that the internet is not abused to this end , the statement reads , while safeguarding that it remains , in scrupulous observance of fundamental freedoms , a forum for free expression , in full respect of the law . earlier this week , prime minister david cameron said the government should be allowed to read encrypted messages on smartphone apps like whatsapp and snapchat , adding that the paris attacks proved the need for greater government access . experts say an outright ban on these apps wouldn t be wise or even feasible , but privacy advocates say cameron s comments speak to larger , more troubling trends . where does it stop ? i nstead of trying to address problems with the existing expansive surveillance powers , governments merely see these crises and fearful times as an opportunity to simply to ask for more , mike rispoli , spokesman for the london based watchdog privacy international , wrote in a blog post tuesday . short of creating a society in which thoughts themselves are monitored and controlled by the state , no amount of surveillance powers endowed upon our governments can ensure that all acts of fanaticism and violence can be predicted and prevented . online rights groups hope public pressure may dissuade european governments from expanding their spying powers , though they acknowledge that recent history doesn t bode well . nearly every major terrorist attack in the past couple of decades has been followed by new legislation of some kind , york said in an email wednesday . france just pushed through new anti terror regulations in november , and the prime minister is already saying that more will be necessary . where does it stop ? these politicians haven t demonstrated the need for more surveillance , yet it s always their go to solution . 