 compare table width margin bottom px compare table h font family ff din web condensed , helvetica , sans seriffont size . em margin bottom px compare table . twocol width article . permalink compare table p font size auto line height auto compare table . twocol strong font size px color darkslategray compare table . twocol strong . larger font size px compare table . twocol strong . smaller font size px compare table . onecol width compare table . onecol h text align left font family ff din web condensed , helvetica , sans seriftext transform uppercaseborder bottom px solid ccc color fa b a margin top pxfont size . em compare table . onecol , . twocol float left box sizing border boxmargin right . compare table . ct row display block compare table . last margin right compare table p . titan label border top px solid ecolor e margin top px compare table p . google label border top px solid ffa color ffa margin top px compare table p . caption margin top px font size px media max width px compare table . twocol width compare table h font size pxmargin top px earlier this week , news broke that facebook was working on a possible acquisition of titan aerospace , a company that produces solar powered drones . these aircraft can travel in around the globe , relying on the sun for power to stay aloft for years at a time . they carry a payload of up to pounds . why does a social network need a high tech satellite ? reportedly , facebook wants to bring internet access to parts of the developing world that haven amprsquot built out the infrastructure for web access on the ground . that amprsquos a noble mission , although facebook certainly has a bigger business agenda as well . most interestingly , the move means that facebook is now competing directly with google and its project loon to bring internet access to the rapidly shrinking landscape of the unwired world . loon , which has been in beta testing since , uses a swarm of weather balloons that cruise through the stratosphere and beam web access down to special receivers on the ground . so which approach is better loon or drone ? a long history of failed attempts to provide aerial internet accessthere is actually a long history of failed attempts to provide aerial internet access . starting in the s at least five big projects were announced , including iridium and globalstar , both of which aimed to provide cellphone coverage . they were actually built but promptly went bankrupt . teledesic , a venture funded by by bill gates , paul allen , and saudi prince al waleed bin talal , got a lot of people interested but was scrapped before it launched its first constellation . one problem with these early efforts was that people on the ground required bulky , custom handsets in order to receive the signal . but the rapid and widespread proliferation of cheap , powerful smartphones means that amprsquos no longer a major obstacle . fixed wing drones are more reliable when it comes to flying longer distance due to their low consumption of battery power , says chris sanz , ceo of skycatch . a big balloon with hot air is much riskier to keep in the air and moves more slowly . on the other hand , balloons are far safer and more commonplace . one danger i can think of is one of these drones falling into a populated area , says sanz . at feet wide and weighing in at pounds , a solara could do a lot of damage if it fell out of the sky . google loon vs . titanlongevity daysgoogle loon daystitan solara size ft wide ft highgoogle loon ft wingspan . ft long titan solara payload lbsgoogle loon lbs titan solara altitude , ftgoogle loon , fttitan solara data g gt . gbps google loon gbpstitan solara coverage sq migoogle loon sq mi titan solara click labels to see sources . getting the aircraft over the right area remains tricky . percent of the world is water , and of the part that is land , percent isn amprsquot very interesting or populated , says iain mcclatchie , an aerospace engineer who formerly worked on drone projects for google . drones are much more likely to be able to maintain position . but both they and the balloons are going to get pushed around a lot by stratospheric winds , which can get up to miles per hour . one danger . . . is one of these drones falling into a populated area . the lightweight nature of google amprsquos balloons , however , comes with certain advantages . free internet access sounds benevolent , but flying dozens or even hundreds of aircraft in constant orbit over a sovereign nation can raise a lot of questions from local governments . whatever goes into china amprsquos airspace is going to end up on the ground , says mcclatchie with a chuckle . project loon is far more innocuous , joining upwards of , weather balloons that orbit the planet at any given time . given the us history with drones , many countries may be nervous about allowing a private fleet of them to orbit in their airspace , even if facebook promises they amprsquore doing nothing beyond providing internet access . in terms of durability , however , project loon faces some challenges . the weather balloons they are using are very thin and wear out pretty quickly . since you can amprsquot really predict when that will happen , a lot of balloons end up in the ocean , says mcclatchie . drones are much easier to bring in for a landing when you need to make repairs or update the software . whatever goes into china amprsquos airspace is going to end up on the ground . google amprsquos approach may rely instead on sheer numbers . the actual balloons are way , way cheaper than drones , of course , says mcclatchie . although the electronics on each balloon are still pretty expensive . given that things are still in the experimental phase , google may prefer to lose weather balloons that cost a few hundred dollars instead of drones that cost a few million . the major cost of drones , especially ones optimized for super long flights , is crashing them , mcclatchie notes . so why take all this expensive risk ? in both cases , the rationale so far has centered around the idea of bringing internet to people in undeveloped areas , the so called next billion who will be joining the internet and rising into the middle class . mcclatchie acknowledges this is a piece of the puzzle , although he suspects there amprsquos more at play . this technology is moving towards providing robust internet access for mobile devices . in terms of a return on the cost , just providing that service to people in rural africa and asia doesn amprsquot make sense . it amprsquos a gold rush for a prime piece of real estate . a new ruling from a judge at the national transportation safety board has paved the way for commercial drone flights to begin legally in american skies . project loon and facebook amprsquos drones could , someday soon , also be used to help provide internet access in rural america , where broadband access is spotty and expensive . right now the stratosphere is wide open , says mcclatchie . it amprsquos a gold rush for a prime piece of real estate that the big internet companies think will be very valuable in the decades to come . 