 we start with shots of jameson at pm , because las vegas feels like a place to do shots . i move on to four roses on the rocks , while casey newton gets started on old fashioneds . my notes indicate a long and serious discussion about the attractiveness of jarvis cocker at pm , followed by casey stealing a colleague s drink at pm . i m not leaving this bar until your handwriting looks like you ve had a stroke , casey informs me around pm . you re just going to have to keep ordering those roses . i order my fourth drink immediately . by pm , casey and another colleague are deep in discussion regarding their romantic lives . then the notes get sparse . at am , i have the hiccups , but by am , i m cured . shortly after that , casey and i get in a cab headed back to our hotel . i suspect there was a minimum of roses between casey and me by the time the evening was out , plus another shot of jameson to send us into the cab , and then beers with the video crew when we got back to the hotel . i meant to keep track of how much i was drinking , but then i got drunk . ordinarily , i like a glass of wine with dinner , but that s about it . that night , though , i was actually looking to get hungover . i d heard about an iv hangover treatment and i wanted to see if it actually worked . i m not leaving this bar until your handwriting looks like you ve had a stroke . wait , but how do hangovers work ? even though about three quarters of people who drink experience at least one hangover a year , we don t really know how they work . which is strange , because hangovers contribute to workplace absenteeism , worsen job performance which matters a lot if you re , say , operating heavy machinery while hungover , impair memory and learning , and lead to what researchers refer to as a feeling of general misery . about percent of adults in the us . million workers are hungover on the job , a study found . here s what we do know if your bac gets above . , you re probably going to be hungover . you ll feel your worst when you get close to zero , about to hours later . the hangover happens when a person s blood alcohol concentration falls sharply the nadir of symptoms occurs when the bac is close to zero . the symptoms that clinically signify a hangover will be familiar thirst , dizziness , nausea , headache , concentration problems , and headache and i would experience them all the following morning . but no model exists for why these things happen in the first place . hangovers also affect the mood they make people anxious and depressed . this is what kingsley amis called the metaphysical hangover in everyday drinking when that ineffable compound of depression , sadness these two are not the same , anxiety , self hatred , sense of failure and fear for the future begins to steal over you , start telling yourself that what you have is a hangover , amis writes . you are not sickening for anything , you have not suffered a minor brain lesion , you are not all that bad at your job , your family and friends are not leagued in a conspiracy of barely maintained silence about what a shit you are , you have not come at last to see life as it really is . it is worth noting that amis family and friends were leagued in a barely maintained silence about what a shit he was amis was an alcoholic . a lot of people think dehydration causes hangovers . dehydration probably does have some effect alcohol does affect the levels of a hormone called vasopressin that regulates how the body retains water this is why people urinate more often while drinking . but the levels of minerals called electrolytes that help water function in the body don t differ between the hungover and the un hungover , which suggests dehydration isn t the primary cause . other theories for the origin of a hangover include low blood sugar and acetaldehyde , but there s not great evidence for them , either . there are a few other things that may affect how serious a hangover is , without necessarily causing the condition . sleeping badly probably doesn t cause hangovers , but it certainly doesn t help alcohol messes up most people s sleep patterns . there are also compounds called congeners , found in grains , wine skins , or casks used in making the beverages , that appear to make hangovers worse i drank bourbon with casey because it s tasty , but also because it was likely to give me a bad hangover whiskey has a lot of congeners . and while most booze we drink is composed of ethanol , traces of other kinds of alcohols slip into some drinks . one of those compounds , called methanol , metabolizes into formaldehyde and formic acid , neither of which are going to make someone feel good . the main suspect in causing a hangover is the immune systemand the main suspect in causing a hangover is the immune system . proteins called cytokines part of how the immune system talks to itself had already been identified as a likely cause by a overview paper on hangovers in the annals of internal medicine . cytokines also , as a special bonus , can make a person feel really bad . you know how miserable it is to have a cold ? that s not the virus s fault that s your immune system . in a recent study of men who got drunk and then had their blood tested while they were hungover , korean scientists found higher levels of cytokines associated with autoimmune disease . these included tumor necrosis factor alpha , which is also responsible for rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease . fortunately , if immune inflammation is the root cause of the hangover , the cure may be pretty simple anti inflammatories . some anti inflammatories are available over the counter , like aspirin , ibuprofen advil , or naproxen aleve . upon discovering researchers had made this connection , writer adam rogers whose excellent proof is a must read for alcohol loving nerds began dosing himself with ibuprofen after drinking , before going to bed . this is similar to what casey did he took aleve before bedtime . so , we don t know a lot about how hangovers work , which makes it very hard to design a good cure . there is no data on the usefulness of an iv in fixing a hangover . that s not to say it won t work it might . but i have no way of knowing in advance whether i ll be wasting my time and the verge s money at hangover heaven . my hangover goes to heaven i wake up around am after casey s and my rampage . it s a bad scene . the hotel room is too bright and smells like stale beer . my head hurts . my tongue is the texture , approximately , of felt . my eyeballs feel as though they d been pulled from my skull , rolled around in some grit , and ineptly replaced even my eyelids hurt . i fumble for my sunglasses and discover that very small porcupines had apparently crept down my gullet in my sleep they are now using my stomach as a bounce castle . i feel bad . i meet casey for breakfast , in the sense that i watch him eat his . for me , hot coffee is untenable . even the very bland oatmeal i ve chosen is too much for me . casey is in better shape , the shit . so then it s time . i take a cab to hangover heaven . the driver accelerates and brakes so sharply i am in danger of puking . i also manage to leave my phone in the back seat while i pay for the cab something i don t realize until about half an hour later . nausea , check . concentration problems , check . i feel badhangover heaven is located in an unpromising looking strip mall a van and what appears to be a decommissioned ambulance with the hangover heaven logo are parked outside . the clinic is run by jason burke , , an anesthesiologist who noticed that people who are recovering from anesthesia seem an awful lot like hungover people . basically , this started when i was working in a recovery room , burke says . i was seeing people in the recovery room with postoperative nausea and vomiting , headache , dizziness that type of thing . they re exactly the same ones people have with a hangover . so i thought , these same medications would work well for hangovers . jason burke of hangover heavenwhen we arrive for my am appointment , the place is mostly empty , and burke greets us warmly he speaks with a slight drawl . he has expensive looking teeth , which i see often , since he smiles readily and widely . his shoulder length brown hair is pulled into a ponytail . burke , who favors bordeaux and california cabernets , has the air of a surfer bro who just happens to have gone to medical school . i am steered into a dim room , where i sit down in a large leather recliner . i am asked to rate my symptoms nausea , headache , anxiety , and overall hangover severity on a scale from to the medics determine my hangover is severe enough to warrant the rapture package , the most expensive one on the menu . i am hooked up to an oxygen tank , and an iv is inserted into my right arm , where i receive an anti emetic to keep me from vomiting , an anti inflammatory ibuprofen in iv form , and heartburn medication . i m also getting alpha lipoic acid , an antioxidant that interacts with my blood sugar . the fluid from the iv makes my upper right arm cold . the medics determine my hangover is severe enough to warrant the rapture package after a trial run with volunteers , burke purchased a bus as a kind of soft opening for his business . real estate in las vegas often requires a five year lease , he says he didn t know if the business was going to work , and he didn t want to get stuck paying the lease if hangover heaven went bust . with a bus , if things didn t work out , he could just sell it . more than half of burke s clients never enter the clinic at allthings worked out burke leased the site where i was treated . hangover heaven treats , people a year . but more than half of burke s clients never enter the clinic at all for a fee , a physician or nurse practitioner will come to your hotel room . his clientele generally stay at high end casinos and are spending about a day on their vacation to miss a day of their vacation is a big issue , burke says . hangover heaven does its best business during convention season , march madness , and super bowl sunday . the treatments range in cost from for an iv plus vitamins , to the rapture package at . this seems expensive . on the other hand , i had actual drugs given to me by actual medical professionals . that s pretty much always expensive . burke views his work as a harm reduction strategy people are going to drink no matter what . he hopes to make them less miserable and turn a profit doing it . it s just the nature of las vegas , he says . people come here to drink . they want to blow off some steam . alcohol is part of that . the conference circuit can be particularly brutal some of burke s clientele are performers and executives who are puking their guts out just hours before they re due onstage for their keynote . partway through the interview with burke , a female nurse comes over and interrupts time for my vitamin b shot . we retire to the restroom , for privacy type reasons . as i slide my leggings down , i realize that getting a vitamin b shot in the ass is the closest i will ever come to being a kennedy . the shot is basically painless . i return to the recliner , wheeling my iv with me . burke chalks up some of the misery of hangovers to vitamin deficiency . from what i can tell in the research literature , a vitamin b analog called pyritinol does have positive effects on hangovers . there doesn t seem to be much else on the role of vitamins . burke s business hinges , in part , on selling vitamins his supplements , a packet of four , claim to prevent hangovers for one night of moderate drinking . he clearly believes in what he s selling , but the research i ve seen doesn t back it up . i email him after our meeting to ask if i ve missed anything he admits the science is scant . so little good science has been done on hangovers that extrapolation is necessary , he writes . by the end of the interview about minutes after i sit down i ve improved , though i m still a little queasy . i had been wondering , given the relative emptiness of hangover heaven , how this was a viable business . but just as i ve recovered , things start to get busy of course , am is a little early for the painfully hungover to heave themselves upright . burke walks me to the counter as a group of somethings come in . he greets them warmly hangover heaven has frequent fliers , and this crew had been in the day before . back at the hotel , the cabbie from the morning arrives to drop off my phone . i meet casey . i feel great , and i am ready to gloat about it . how s he doing ? oh , i feel fine , casey says . i took more aleve . i wish hangovers were taken more seriously by the research community . they re so common that knowing more about them would probably benefit most of the population . the relatively scant research into hangovers means that i can t say , conclusively , whether casey s method of handling his hangover was better than mine . it means i also can t tell whether jason burke is right about the role of vitamins and antioxidants in hangover recovery though anti hangover vitamin pills make me deeply suspicious . vitamin studies are notorious among the research community for being inconclusive . anyway , if you ve got the money , getting an iv and medical care probably can t hurt . but for the rest of us plebs , there s always painkillers and water . 