 imagine a future where you tap an app on your smartphone to summon a self driving car . heard this one already ? okay , what about when your robot car drives into an airless tube hundreds of miles long and careens across country at close to the speed of sound ? now are you impressed ? this completely outrageous vision of the future comes courtesy of hyperloop one , the occasionally troubled los angeles based startup working on elon musk s vision of an ultrafast transportation system . the company is currently gearing up for its big kitty hawk moment later this year , when it will conduct a full system test in the desert north of las vegas . but while we re still a long way off from seeing a fully functional hyperloop in operation , hyperloop one s top executives are already thinking ahead to a future where lightning quick travel is as commonplace as automated vehicles , and vice versa . some of the startup s top brass were at ces in las vegas earlier this month meeting with companies that are working on driverless technology to discuss possible mergers in their respective missions . josh giegel in between meetings , i sat down with hyperloop one co founder and president of engineering josh giegel and nick earle , senior vice president in charge of global field operations , to talk about the company s progress and when the world could see a working , passenger ready hyperloop . both met recently with representatives from two computer chip makers , intel and nvidia , to talk about their respective efforts to expand into the automated driving space , as well as with supercar company mclaren . but it wasn t just about gushing over each other s futuristic pipe dreams , earle said . rather it was about a realistic effort to find a way to link self driving cars to the ambitious and costly transportation system . we want any autonomous vehicle to go into our system . the idea is you have a transmitter in your car , earle said . as you approach the hyperloop , it would be like a fast pass on the freeway . so you actually get the ability to open the air lock and drive into the tube . in talking to these companies , earle says he describes hyperloop one as the wan , or wide area network , of transportation that should be able to interface with all the local area networks , or lans . we want any autonomous vehicle to go into our system , he said . this is the type of starry eyed thinking that gets the hyperloop routinely dismissed as a great but ultimately outlandish idea . critics say the costs alone hyperloop one s own estimates put it at around . million per mile of tube make it largely unrealistic . but hyperloop one is barreling ahead , bolstered by million in seed funding , green lights from countries like the united arab emirates and finland , and faith that it is the company best positioned to make the dream of mph , tube based travel a reality . it maintains that it will perform its first full system test sometime within the first three months of . in preparation , a team of around engineers and contractors are busy building a test track at a site in north las vegas , near where the company conducted its first public test in may . the test will feature a magnetically levitating pod using electromagnetic propulsion to travel a distance of meters , or less than a mile , through an airless tube at a speed of over mph . it should be more exciting than hyperloop one s first public test last may , which featured a foot long sled flying down a short train track and then crashing into a pile of sand . perhaps ironically , giegel stressed the need to move slowly and iteratively as it develops its ultrafast technology . it s a drawing on a piece of paper until somebody proves it . it s a drawing on a piece of paper until somebody proves it , he said . and right now , we have the team capable of doing it . and we are doing it . if it works , the hyperloop could vastly simplify intercity travel and freight , reduce congestion and pollution , and potentially revolutionize transportation worldwide . when he first introduced the idea back in , musk called it a fifth mode of transportation . the other four being cars , trains , airplanes , and boats . there s no question the hyperloop could be transformative . . . in a perfect world , that is . in the meantime , hyperloop one needs to raise sufficient amount of capital to fuel its high velocity dreams . last week , the company promoted brent callinicos from senior advisor to chief operating officer and chief financial officer . callinicos was brought on board last october from uber , where he helped build the ride hailing startup into the world s most valuable tech company . earlier this month , hyperloop one announced the winners in a global challenge it launched to find additional possible routes across the world . over , submissions were whittled down to semifinalists from countries . one route suggests a triangular hyperloop linking austin , dallas , and houston . another would build a hyperloop between mumbai and delhi . the company will host three events over the next few months to showcase the winners february th in new delhi , april th in washington , dc , and april th in london . the next round of finalists will be announced in may . not every one of these will become a hyperloop route , but they provide a snapshot of the level of international enthusiasm that exists . indeed , while the first test will be conducted in the us , the first operational hyperloop is most likely to be built between dubai and abu dhabi , thanks to the full throated support from the dubai roads and transport authority . earle stressed that without a government buy in , its doubtful the costly system could obtain the land rights and right of way permissions necessary to achieve its promised speeds . the startup also has feasibility studies underway in finland and sweden , the netherlands , switzerland , moscow , the port of los angeles , and the uk . the company s recent flurry of activity is meant to convey the message that hyperloop one is a serious business working on a serious transportation project with global implications . millions of people take airplanes every day and their faces don t peel off . but it also appears to be an attempt to shift the conversation away from the embarrassing and reputation damaging lawsuit filed last year by hyperloop one s former chief technology officer . the company countersued and eventually both lawsuits were settled in november . no doubt , was a bit of a roller coaster for hyperloop one . this year could be even rockier , depending on the company s ability to demonstrate its viability to its investors , its government partners , and the public , especially those who aren t convinced that humans were meant to travel at mph on the ground . i get this all the time , people say to me , oh , your face will peel off and you ll turn to mush , earle said . but it s basically like an airplane feet off the ground . millions of people take airplanes every day and their faces don t peel off . hyperloop competition in texas last year