 my partner and i step through a portal and into a bright , vaguely mayan temple . i pick up a torch to light the way , and we set off on our adventure over the course of less than ten minutes , we find a hidden passage , escape from a huge serpent in an underground lake , climb hundreds of feet to a beautiful vista , and , after getting through a cramped hall full of spiders , fulfill a mystical prophecy about a fractured star . dream parkfrom giant robots to haptic spiders , the real future of virtual worlds by adi robertson ampamp ben poppermy partner and i step through a portal and into a bright , vaguely mayan temple . i pick up a torch to light the way , and we set off on our adventure over the course of less than ten minutes , we find a hidden passage , escape from a huge serpent in an underground lake , climb hundreds of feet to a beautiful vista , and , after getting through a cramped hall full of spiders , fulfill a mystical prophecy about a fractured star . then we take off our headsets , and it all disappears . i m standing on stage playing a game called the curse of the serpent s eye in the void , an experience created by the utah based company of the same name that is one part virtual reality , one part video game , one part interactive theater , and one part haunted house . its creators call it hyper reality a virtual experience overlaid onto physical space , creating impossible places that visitors can touch as well as see . instead of a torch , i m carrying a wooden dowel studded with small , shiny balls . instead of the hissing snake , i see what look like powerful fans . and instead of the straight golden walls , there s a round and nearly featureless gray labyrinth , turning us in circles forever . on july st , after months of running limited beta testing , the void is opening its first public attraction a ghostbusters themed experience in new york city s times square , located inside the madame tussauds wax museum . for , visitors can strap on a vr headset and a backpack computer fashioned into a ghostbusters proton pack , pick up a matching gun shaped plastic prop , and act out a cinematic fantasy in real life . after opening a door into a small new york city apartment , they re accosted by tiny pink poltergeists , then make their way into an elevator and out a th story window . a flock of living stone gargoyles and one angry victorian spirit later , everything seems fine until a familiar marshmallow shaped face appears in the window . ghostbusters dimension is short and linear , although there are supposedly hidden easter eggs for visitors to find it s a walk through three person experience , not a vast virtual world . but as technological achievements go , it s a stunningly intricate one . players can see full body avatars of their companions thanks to tracking markers on the headset and gun , and they walk freely through a tremendous amount of space by vr standards . haptic feedback simulates the feeling of getting hit by a thrown object or friendly proton pack fire , and mist accompanies the whooshing of a ghost . we tried it , and it may blow your mind if you ever get a chance to try it too . over the last four years , virtual reality has emerged as one of tech s most exciting new sectors facebook , google , samsung , and sony are all in the process of producing and marketing virtual reality hardware . most of those devices are are being sold directly to consumers the experiences they offer games , short films , and the like are meant to be played at home , sitting in a chair or else tethered to a nearby pc and power supply . but there s an entirely separate category of virtual reality that won t be possible at home . you ll be able to walk freely , without tripping over wires . you ll actually feel the heat of a fire on your face , and the weightlessness in your stomach during a fall off a skyscraper . these are the virtual reality experiences currently being built into arcades , attractions , and theme parks . shot on location at quassy amusement parkin february of this year , china s shanda group announced it would invest million in virtual reality and build a vr theme park built in collaboration with the void . imax , the widescreen theater chain , is working with the swedish game studio starbreeze to bring premium location based virtual reality to multiplexes , malls and other commercial destinations . and established amusement parks are layering virtual reality onto their existing rides six flags is currently upgrading nine roller coasters into vr experiences this summer . in one way , there s something contradictory about driving all the way to a theme park to get into a virtual world . in another , virtual reality seems like an arbitrary term to throw around , when theme parks already offer simulator rides and d theaters does adding a headset fundamentally change the experience ? but if these attractions catch on , they could give people a new way to live out the fantasies that disney , warner brothers , and other companies have used to build multi billion dollar empires . and to companies like the void , vr isn t just a new technology . it s the key to building another world . as futuristic as something like the void feels , we ve been on this ride before before . in the early s , companies large and small started mixing vr experiences with real world attractions , putting a new spin on arcades and theme parks . and the idea started growing long before then . in the late s , two teenage students at the merchant marine academy in new york jordan weisman and ross babcock saw their first training simulator . the sim was a crude and extraordinarily expensive re creation of a ship s bridge , designed to help pilots learn to steer . but in it , they could see the future of entertainment a world where instead of going to see a science fiction movie , someone could buy a ticket and step onto a starship , joining a crew of like minded participants . inspired , babcock and weisman dropped out of the program , wired together a series of apple ii computers and attempted to imitate the multi million dollar military system . it s a good way to fry motherboards , weisman recalls . but we saw a glimpse of what we could get . investors didn t agree , so the two put the dream aside and founded a company called the fasa corporation , which produced some of the s most beloved board and tabletop games titles like mechwarrior , shadowrun , and crimson skies . eventually , fasa s games had earned the pair enough money to revisit their original idea . with babcock and his father morton , jordan weisman founded virtual world entertainment , its name evoking a freshly coined term for a science fictional idea virtual reality . virtual world built a series of cockpit like pods with complicated physical controls and put them in what the company called a battletech center , the first of which launched in chicago in . while spectators watched on televisions outside , players could pay to and pilot a three story robot through a minute firefight . enclosed in the pod , they would look through a video screen and see an endless alien desert , inhabited only by their teammates and opponents mechs . despite its name , virtual world consciously avoided the head mounted displays that define vr today . when you strap this big stupid thing to your head and back in those days , it was an even bigger , stupider thing you look like a fool to everybody else , says weisman now . one of the things you don t want to do when you re going out for an evening of entertainment is look stupid . on their own , battletech pods were more like arcade cabinets than rides a few outposts found their way into the restaurant and arcade chain dave ampamp busters . but with funding from tim disney walt s grand nephew , vwe imagined building larger centers with a range of games that would appeal to everyone , somewhere between a high tech arcade and an indoor amusement park . in , the company opened a pasadena based virtual world center adorned with proto steampunk decor from a fictional virtual geographic society , complete with a bar and restaurant . the mid s saw a lot of vr related entertainment centers , few of which survivedby the mid s , vwe was just one example of companies building vr related entertainment centers , from sega s gameworks arcade to the more theme park like iwerks cinetropolis . uk based inventor jonathan waldern was selling his virtuality headsets as stand alone vr arcade machines . and disney the big one had taken notice . around , the walt disney company assigned its imagineering r ampampd group a secret mission to as team member bill redmann now puts it demonstrate , at any cost , a disney quality vr . its first attempt was one of the coolest sounding theme park rides to never see the light of day . imagineering looked at disney s upcoming movie slate and chose the rocketeer , a retro futuristic superhero movie that , fortuitously , put its hero in a giant helmet . players would sit on a stool and suit up with realistic looking haptic jetpack and a fingerless leather glove with a throttle , and an attendant would offer them a replica of the movie s golden helmet . at the last minute , they d switch it out for a bug eyed simulator helmet mounted from the ceiling , and players would go flying off in virtual reality . but the project , with its expensive military grade tech , was deemed too hard to put in a park . it would take a few more years for the public to see virtual reality , disney style . in , the epcot center opened an aladdin magic carpet ride , putting visitors in a custom headset that resembled an alligator s snout . then , in , the company launched a full indoor theme park devoted to interactive rides disneyquest , located at disney world in orlando , florida . the first location , which housed attractions based on properties like the film hercules and disney s pirates of the caribbean ride , was soon followed by another one in chicago . the orlando disneyquest drew steady crowds , but its successor in chicago quickly stalled , until disney shut it down and scrapped plans for a third center in philadelphia . meanwhile , virtual world had overestimated how quickly it could grow the big virtual world centers hadn t done appreciably better than their smaller progenitors , while leaving the company with higher upkeep costs . after microsoft bought fasa s computer gaming operation in , the centers gradually shut down . in fact , it was a bad time for almost any location based entertainment , whether or not it was strictly vr . iwerks opened just two of its proposed cinetropolis locations before losing so much money it dropped the idea . a much hyped sony entertainment center in san francisco slowly morphed into an ordinary mall . the dave ampamp busters chain kept some battletech pods running for a while , but even that damned the idea in its own way . vr wasn t a new medium it was just another attraction in the back of a restaurant . decades later , both battletech and disneyquest have had a long if limited half life . the orlando disneyquest remains open after nearly years , and battletech s pods retain a cult following and resale market , years after the original centers demise . but until the oculus rift jump started virtual reality development in , it was an idea that belonged firmly in the past . if you were to pick a place for one of the world s hottest virtual reality attractions , there are more likely cities than lindon , utah , the void s home base . around miles south of salt lake city , lindon is nestled in the flatland between utah lake and the southern end of the wasatch mountains . much of its architecture is so aggressively nondescript that the void s offices could be housing anything from a dentist s office to a top secret government facility . once we re inside , though , there s no doubt it s the right place . the void prints its logo on absolutely everything the walls , the floors , the packing crates , the giant inverted black pyramid hanging from the rafters . when ceo ken bretschneider greets us , it s in the same void t shirt we see on almost everyone in the office , a baseball cap pulled over his slightly shaggy blond hair . the void evolved out of plans for a steampunk theme park called evermore , conceived by bretschneider and his partner curtis hickman . while laying the groundwork , they hired a visual effects director named james jensen for help . jensen pitched a longtime dream an experience that would map a virtual world over real space . by , the three had abandoned the traditional park idea and announced the void , where they now share executive duties . the void is one of a few companies trying to sell visitors on big , walkable vr worlds . its main competitor is australian company zero latency , which plans to open a location in tokyo next month , and the lower profile american company vyocor is considering a similar project . landmark entertainment group expects to open a live center full of vr attractions in china next year . in a broader sense , it s also competing against location based entertainment like laser tag , haunted houses , and escape the room games . the void s creators , though , say they re offering something that s never been done . the experience of the void starts with a custom rapture vr headset and backpack computer , built in partnership with several outside engineering companies . rapture is a souped up version of consumer virtual reality gear , wired to a haptic vest that simulates everything from an exploding wall to the tickle of spiders . the hardware specifics vary by experience ghostbusters headset is a modified oculus rift dk , with the promise of the void s more advanced design down the line , and the team created a prop proton pack gun that players hold throughout the experience . in utah , the headsets are full custom hardware , embedded with working leap motion hand tracking sensors . for now , everything else is tracked by cameras located above the stage , but the team is working on a more accurate radio frequency based system called spire . the company s biggest achievement , though , is simultaneously more sophisticated and lower tech . every void experience takes place on a custom built stage , undergirding the virtual experience with real heft . press a button , and you ll feel it under your fingers sit in a chair , and it will hold your weight . the farther you go , the more fantastical things become . the underground lake in curse of the serpent s eye exudes real mist that cools your face when the serpent jumps at you , a platform lifts you out of its reach , convincingly rumbling under your feet . but when you take off the headset , your mayan temple turns into a monochrome shadow world . in the game , i held a torch to a stone door , which blew up in my face to open a passage . but the stage i was on has no doors instead , there s a permanent gap in the corner of the room , one i never noticed while running my hands along the walls . what , i ask hickman , was i actually doing ? he doesn t exactly answer me , but he gives a general explanation i was being distracted . the idea is just to direct people away from the method from the thing you don t want them to see . hickman is a veteran magician who performs as the amazing curtis and virtual worlds are his ultimate illusion . one of the void s most remarkable tricks is something called redirected walking players walk down what they see as straight corridors , but the stage s walls are subtly curved , nudging them in circles to make short paths feel endless . by combining virtual and physical experiences , the void s creators promise a hyper reality far more transportive than normal virtual reality . visitors seem to agree . the company s youtube channel includes testimonials from the likes of aaron paul , who calls it easily the greatest experience , truly , i ve ever had which , coming from a man who starred in breaking bad , is saying something . but when i try it , the void in both ghostbusters and curse of the serpent s eye is grasping at something it hasn t yet reached . the haptic vest and headset are too big for me , so i m constantly reminded of their presence . in the temple , my virtual hand keeps accidentally warping away from its proper location to stick to the torch , even when my partner s holding it . the redirected walking is interesting , but i don t remember traveling radically farther than i actually have it s actually far less surreal than a non vr art installation i ve experienced elsewhere . more importantly , everything i can do just reminds me of what i can t . i can feel the rough stone of the walls , but i can t trace the elaborate carvings on them . heat emanates from a brazier where i light a torch , but not the torch itself . at one point , i m convinced that i should jump off a ledge , but there s no fall someone just pulls me back . none of these stop the experience from being fun , clever , and a little uncanny and some of the issues only appear when you re given time to take a breath and explore the world , which the fast paced ghostbusters experience doesn t allow . i think you don t have to have it percent , says bretschneider . when the void s beta testers feel something approximating a wall , he says , they re satisfied especially when special effects like mist and heat come into play . it kind of reinforces to the brain that it s real enough . and as the technology improves , they ll have to start deciding how real they want things to get . the void is fun , clever , and a little uncanny but will it inspire repeat business ? right now , none of the void s special effects can produce much more than psychological discomfort . but hickman says that if they used the haptic vests full force , the team could make things like a shooting game where you re genuinely worried about getting hit not because it would cause permanent harm , but because it would be distinctly unpleasant , like a paintball shot . someday i kind of hope we get there , in a place where we can have real , almost punishing feedback for decisions and things that you do , without us being sued into the ground . but that s a long way off , because right now , nobody knows what the void will become . its first appearance will be in the form of small , linear attraction stages , like curse of the serpent s eye and ghostbusters . bretschneider says they ve established a solid way to get enough paying customers through put groups of two or three players in at once , wait for them to clear a segment of the experience , then send in the next group right behind them . the experiences would change over time , and players could earn points that would apply across different attractions , creating a single avatar that could be adapted to each setting . this , however , is just the first step . the void s final goal is a series of large , theme park like regional centers filled with what the team calls dimension stages open ended experiences in a space four times as big as the x foot ghostbusters stage , capable of holding between and people at a time . the dimension stages sound a bit like a complex live action role playing session , or maybe non traditional theater like sleep no more , both of which hickman says he looks to for inspiration . they could be anything from a spaceship simulation to a high fantasy world . virtual reality is a safer bet now than it was years agothe closest i got to a dimension stage was a plastic model of a maze , resting on a coffee table in the company s utah warehouse . the team has never built one , nor have they started building any of the centers that would hold them . and while it s not hard to see how a movie themed experience could flourish in an already popular location , it s harder to draw a path from there to a full fledged theme park . the void centers aren t necessarily doomed to the same rise and fall as the battletech centers or other s projects , and vr in general is a safer bet now than it was years ago . but the company s founders admit they re taking a big risk even if they re confident it s a worthwhile one . with how much the world is turning to their computers and being social through their computers , and being stuck with these screens , i find it a comfort to know that we re going to provide them a social outlet that will give them an opportunity to get out of their house , still be embedded and involved with technology , yet socially connected to the people around them , says hickman . to me , that s something that the world wants , and i m going to give it to them . it s a slightly paradoxical idea that people will drive to an entertainment center to escape being social through their computers , only to put the computers right back on once they arrive . it banks on the void s stages to add something unique enough that people will keep coming once the novelty wears off , as it did with virtual world . today , though , they re looking toward virtual reality to make everything old seem new again . virtual reality may be an even better bet at locations that already attract crowds of thrill seekers . no matter where you are at the six flags in maryland , you can see the superman ride of steel roller coaster . built in , the coaster climbs to feet on its first ascent , a red steel ridge that rises above everything else in the park . in reality , that first descent takes you down at a degree angle , reaching a top speed of miles an hour . it s a steep drop , sure , but my experience was a little more intense . i had a samsung gear vr headset strapped on , blocking out my view of the real world , immersing me in a virtual scene synced to the ride . as the train car was climbing , lex luthor lifted me above a skyscraper while superman battled laser wielding robots . and then , when the train car took its first fall , the degree drop was transformed into a sheer degree plunge , amplifying the terror to new heights . the graphics you see inside this virtual experience aren t great . they reminded me of pc games from at least five years ago . after all , the system is powered by a stock samsung smartphone , an s no different than the one you or i might carry in our pockets . there is no high end gaming pc with a top notch graphics card tucked underneath your seat . but relatively simplistic graphics become utterly convincing once the ride really gets going , and the physical forces of the coaster the weightlessness during free fall , the four and a half gs around the turn perfectly match the visual storyline . lt ! function var l function new pym . parent theverge superman graphic , https apps . voxmedia . com at theverge superman if typeof pym undefined var h document . getelementsbytagname head , s document . createelement script s . type text javascript s . src https cdnjs . cloudflare . com ajax libs pym . . pym . js s . onload l h . appendchild s else l gtvirtual reality companies pride themselves on the ability to create a sense of presence , a physical belief that you are actually in another world . the cliche example is to present a user with a virtual cliff . if they know it s not real , but still can t bring themselves to walk off , then the system has done its job , tricking the lizard part of their brain , instilling their body with belief in the simulation . adding physical effects to virtual reality makes it much easier to achieve presence , or heighten the actual experience , what the void has branded hyper reality . for theme parks , virtual reality offers a tantalizing opportunity convert old rides into new experiences without having to spend millions on materials and construction . take the revolution , a forty year old coaster at six flag s magic mountain location in california . once upon a time it was the world s tallest coaster , and the first with a complete loop , an innovative and award winning design . but it only took a few years before competitors built taller coasters and bigger loops . compared to the coasters designed today , the revolution looks quaint . with vr , we can take a coaster like that , and make it feel truly revolutionary again , says sam rhodes , six flags corporate head of ride design . since we ve added the virtual reality element to the revolution , ridership has tripled . theme parks have been moving in the direction of virtual reality for years , driven by the media portfolios of their corporate parents . six flags has a long history with time warner , and it competes with parks from walt disney and nbcuniversal . vr has the potential to really change the business , said tyler batory , an industry analyst specializing in theme parks . the fact that you can change the theme of the coaster to match the season or the movie is way better than building a brand new coaster . you take a ride that s old , visitors don t really like it that much anymore , something like vr can breathe a lot of new life into it . i asked rhodes what he thought of experiences like the void . he had tried it himself , and acknowledged that it was worked well as an immersive experience , but was skeptical of the business model . it would be hard , he said , to turn a profit charging people for just that experience , especially if people only went through in small groups , with each session lasting five minutes or more . at madame tussauds in new york , the void costs on top of a ticket for the wax museum , for a minute experience that can fit only three people at a time . ours is part of the ticket price , and it s every seat on every train , so that s a lot of people . at the event organized by six flags , i met a group of hardcore riders who were also invited along to try the superman ride . they were from the american coaster enthusiasts , a non profit group whose mission is simply to ride and enjoy as many roller coasters as they can . initially , the members seemed skeptical of vr s place in a theme park . honestly , i thought it was gonna be a cheap gimmick , said matthew ferrell . but after riding the superman vr experience times in one morning , he came away a believer . i really came in thinking it would be nice , but not expecting to love it , and it turned me in a positive way i didn t see coming . you get completely pulled out of your world and pushed into this other world where everything looks and feels real . it felt like a movie , but i wasn t a passive participant , i was there , being saved . the experiences currently being built for theme parks , malls , movie theaters , and arcades will act as an catalyst for the still nascent virtual reality industry . i would be willing to guess six flags will put more people through vr for the first time over the next few years than anyone , says rhodes . we estimate million people will ride vr coasters with us this year alone . that compares with around one million monthly active users of samsung s gear vr , the last metric the company shared . given the high bar for owning a htc vive or oculus rift , it s a safe bet that far more people will try room scale vr for the first time outside their own home , likely by visiting an experience like the void or zero latency . companies like the void will also give consumers a taste of the near future , a first glimpse of the kind of technology that will trickle down to the home after a few years . vr headsets sold directly to consumers are limited by a price most people can afford . the void , by contrast , plans to spend as much as , on a single headset so that it can deliver a high end experience worth the price of admission . i feel like we re in the early days of video games here . theme parks and the like won t just be testbeds for consumers to experience the bleeding edge of vr . they will also likely be the first to introduce consumers to vr s more complex cousin , augmented reality . right now most ar experiences involve bulky headsets with a limited field of view . but as the technology continues to get cheaper , smaller , and more powerful , new experiences will be possible . you ll see the normal coaster , as it is , but you ll have a monster attacking the rails , says thomas wagner , ceo of vr coaster , which built the technology six flags is using at its parks . there is tradeoff with these two mediums between immersion and isolation , between losing yourself in a fantasy and the alienating experience in a headset . i sat next to our cameraman on the superman coaster , but in vr , the seat next to mine was empty . one of the big promises from companies like the void is that you can share the experience with friends . during the ghostbusters experience , it worked really well . i could see my teammates and work in tandem with them , crossing the streams on our proton packs when it was time to take out the stay puft marshmallow man . zero latency offers a souped up version of laser tag , letting you battle hordes of zombies with friends you can see in virtual space . it s all strange , heady stuff . but in a best case scenario , we ll be looking back in years from some new plateau of immersiveness , trying to remember why touching a gritty wall in a headset seemed like a transcendent experience . i look forward to that , actually , says the void s curtis hickman . i feel like we re in the early days of video games here , where we ve got these sprite sheets jumping around on a screen and people are like , this is mind blowing , you know . but beneath it all are the fundamental rules of magic and magic , he says , never changes . the gimmick of it , the idea ooh i m in vr and i m moving around , that ll get old , that ll become normal . but this effect of genuinely feeling like you re somewhere else , because the illusion design has made you feel that way i don t know if that will ever go away . it s hard to know if companies like the void will thrive as businesses . even if visitors find the experiences extraordinary , the combination of steep prices , short experiences , and relatively small numbers may not pan out . but it seems almost certain that whatever virtual reality s place in mass culture , it will find a place outside the home . the novelty of the newest tech will always wear off when the next generation of hardware eclipses it . but you can t quite simulate the drop in your stomach when you plunge off a real cliff , or the experience of real heat on your skin and wind in your hair . until people start building coasters in their backyards or converting their living rooms into fun houses full of props , there will be a certain magic that is only available when you actually get off the couch . produced by frank bilead image ampamp design by james barehamphotography by tom connors and miriam nielsenedited by michael zelenko