 it was the first week of april , , and new york s chelsea market , typically packed with hordes of noisy tourists , was quiet . it was close to midnight , but five stories above , things were tense . the building is a former cookie factory , and the outlines of ovens still scar the brick walls . in their place , a vast array of screens are now mounted , each tuned to a live video feed . joe inzerillo and his team had their eyes glued to the glass , hard at work trying to wrangle the internet into doing something it was not built for . the changeuphow baseball s tech team built the future of televisionby ben popper it was the first week of april , , and new york s chelsea market , typically packed with hordes of noisy tourists , was quiet . it was close to midnight , but five stories above , things were tense . the building is a former cookie factory , and the outlines of ovens still scar the brick walls . in their place , a vast array of screens are now mounted , each tuned to a live video feed . joe inzerillo and his team had their eyes glued to the glass , hard at work trying to wrangle the internet into doing something it was not built for . the launch of hbo now was just a few days away , but the product wasn t finished . with both hbo and apple promoting it heavily , the team had no idea how many people might tune in that first day . the stakes were high , says inzerillo . it was not lost on anybody here how important this was for our company , but also for this industry . because if hbo now had come out and face planted , there would be a lot of naysayers who turned around and said , see , this is why the adults need to handle television . game of thrones is our world cup . six months earlier , hbo had announced it was cutting the cord , finally offering consumers access to their programming without signing up for cable or satellite television . but the in house streaming service it had previously built , hbo go , had experienced high profile outages during the season four finale of game of thrones and the premiere of true detective . hbo now was set to launch alongside the newest season of got , and it had to be perfect . game of thrones is our world cup , ampnbspsays bernadette aulestia , who runs hbo s digital distribution . and so hbo went to the company that set new records for online streaming during the world cup , a strange tech startup hidden inside of a sports league , major league baseball advanced media , or bam for short . bam began as the in house it department for the league s teams , a small handful of employees originally tasked with building websites for teams and clubs . but over the last years , bam has emerged as the most talented and reliable name in streaming video , a skill set suddenly in very high demand . bam competes for clients with streaming tech companies like neulion and imagine communications , as well as big telecommunication outfits like verizon . but , says dan rayburn , a streaming industry analyst , there really isn t anybody who does the true end to end solution like mlb does , especially at scale , out in the market . their technical chops are the best , bar none , he adds . they set the standard . the internet , as a technology , was never designed to do something like this . hbo didn t give bam much time . it was a full on sprint for the three and half months that we had , says inzerillo . as the clock ticked down , the crew from bam ran through countless disaster scenarios . what people forget is that the internet , as a technology , was never designed to do something like this deliver flawless video simultaneously to millions of people . inzerillo explains . i liken it to trying to live on mercury . the planet is completely inhospitable . every day all you re doing is fighting a battle for survival in a place that really does not want you . streaming video on the internet is sort of like that . on april th , a pair of fire breathing dragons unleashed their fury across the internet the game of thrones season five premiere , as well as the launch of hbo now , were flawless . today , bam cemented its status as one of the most important players at the intersection of sports , media , and technology , announcing that it will be powering the mobile , web , and television offerings from the national hockey league . it s the first time bam has been fully embraced by another major league . when you have hbo going over the top and bob iger s talking about espn going over the top , viacom s networks are being kicked off cable , we had a real gut check , says john collins , the nhl s chief operating officer . bam can help us dictate what happens to our content in a time when this media landscape is going through a lot of change . like the deal with hbo , bam will power the league s streaming services . but the deal goes even further bam will be a rights holder of nhl content they can package and sell to an online audience . it s groundbreaking to have two leagues doing a rights deal , says collins . bam recently forged a similar arrangement with the pga . the new approach moves bam beyond just a white label service provider , putting them in position to become an espn of the internet age , competing against the likes of netflix , hulu , and amazon with the one thing all those services lack live sports . there s just one catch . to make it all work , bam has to grow beyond baseball . the announcement of bam s partnership with the nhl . from left to right nhl chief operating officer john collins , nhl commissioner gary bettman , mlb commissioner rob manfred , mlb president , business , bob bowman . in late july , i met bob bowman , bam s ceo , in the company s office above chelsea market . we sat in a small conference room past a wall of trophies and a social media center blasting out baseball highlights across twitter , snapchat , facebook , and youtube . bowman has ceo caliber hair , swept up and to the right , in a dignified grey he dresses in banker casual khakis , boat shoes , and collared shirt unbuttoned at the top . on the whiteboard behind him , scrawled in black marker , was a warning investors get fed ! pigs get slaughtered . bowman ampnbspis a man with bosses and a client base that both uses and competes with mlb s technical abilities . he has to navigate between traditional broadcasters , cable companies , and fans who want their game on any screen with an internet connection . he has perfected the art of partnerships that hinge on give and take . when i ask him the significance of the quote , he says it s a reminder not to build your own business at the expense of people who pay you . investors get fed ! pigs get slaughtered ! for years , bam was a name known only to industry insiders , a sharpshooter organization called in to make sure the big game or series premiere streamed without fail . over time , it forged long term deals with clients like wwe and sony playstation s vue network . now it s moving from powering the platform to co owning the content as well . but it s increasingly clear that to really capture the opportunity in front of it , bam needs to become more independent . bam doesn t run like a startup it doesn t have equity to share with employees , causing it to lose out on talented engineers and developers that want upside beyond a salary . it also can t easily raise outside capital to compete against rising competitors like twitch or ooyala while it s still a central part of baseball s day to day operations . the idea of spinning bam out to create a new company has been floated for years , but in the last few months it has hardened into a certainty . today s announcement that ampnbspthe nhl will invest in this new venture makes it a fact . lawyers and bankers are finalizing the details , and bowman is in active discussions with other potential investors , poised to run a new company with a valuation north of billion . as everyone thinks about going over the top , about building out a global business , we are looking for a partner to help us double or triple this business , says bowman . things have been going fine , but to not move on this now , we lose the opportunity to get really , really big . when baseball s then commissioner , bud selig , created bam back in , he had relatively modest goals in mind . the unit would be in charge of creating websites for each of the teams and consolidating mlb s digital rights . by pooling resources , he would prevent the bigger teams from outpacing their smaller market rivals . and to keep the division honest and efficient , bam would operate as its own company . the teams agreed to contribute a combined million to the venture , million each over the first four years , with each taking an equal ownership stake . it was a painful lesson . from then on , bam would build its own techthe group they assembled wasn t a silicon valley dream team , more like tech s version of bad news bears a minor league beat writer , a former state treasurer , and assorted av nerds from around the league . this was the height of the dot com boom , and excitement about the internet was at an all time high . right out of the gate , bam decided to pay a fancy consulting firm a huge chunk of its annual budget to help it create the mlb . com website . unfortunately the website barely worked . bam had to scrap it and start from scratch . it was a painful lesson . from then on , bam would build its own tech . in , ichiro suzuki came over from japan to play for the seattle mariners . already an icon in his home country , he now had a full time press corps of several dozen japanese reporters covering his every move . bam decided to experiment with streaming live audio of his games , giving his fanatical followers a way to keep up in real time . the company spent several million dollars building and advertising the product . i don t think we ever got to , subscribers , says bowman with a chuckle . by the middle of , heavy expenditures on these early projects had left the company strapped for cash . but when it consolidated the league s digital rights , the mlb also gave bam control over ticketing . bam turned those rights into leverage . it made ticketmaster an offer partner with us or you don t sell baseball . the company gave bam a million advance , which it used to cover payroll as it pushed forward with its next big bet video . the first video stream looked more like a flip book . on august th of , bam produced an online broadcast of a game between the texas rangers and new york yankees . this was well before high speed internet was ubiquitous and three years before the launch of youtube . the game streamed to around , fans at a now glacial kilobits per second . the technology existed to do it , but of course , that doesn t mean it was good , says bowman . the first video stream looked more like a flip book . still , fans responded to the new offering and bam kept experimenting . two weeks later , it launched the first paid streaming video product , a pennant race package of nine games with postseason implications . later that fall , it sold a . postseason package . mlb . tv launched alongside spring training in , offering a full season package for . . in the first year , over , customers signed up . the new revenue stabilized bam s finances it only ended up taking million of funding from the team owners before it began paying them a dividend out of its profits . and the unique challenge of live streaming baseball started to shape bam into the industry powerhouse it is today . watching sports online has always had one major complication regional blackouts prevent you from streaming a game in the same territory as a television broadcaster who owns local rights . that meant bam had to figure out where a customer was and whether or not they could legally watch the stream . in fact , bam s very first post season package wasn t even broadcast live in the united states or japan . fox owned the national broadcast rights to the pennant race , so bam s first big broadcast took place in europe . from the beginning , bam had to perfect live video streaming on a global scale . before anyone else was even thinking about these issues , bam figured out compression , geofencing , and multi application delivery at scale , says rick heitzman , a venture capitalist who has worked with bam over the years . like many pioneers , they took their fair share of arrows , but have emerged as the leading digital platform . bowman puts it a little differently . we made all the same mistakes everyone else makes , he says . we just had the advantage of making them first . before anyone else was even thinking about these issues , bam figured out compression , geofencing , and multi application delivery at scale . take syncing between devices . this is a great feature to have with a service like hbo now , but with a baseball game , it s absolutely critical . the last thing you want is a fan watching on their pc , pausing to head to the bathroom , pulling the game up on a phone , and suddenly it s an inning later and the score has changed . bam learned to do this with each game , and even with the stats a fan can pull up alongside the video for a deeper dive . inzerillo joined bam ampnbspin and began work on what would become mlb . tv . he had started his career as a cameraman with the white sox , moved on to direct video operations for the league , and then ran the tech department at chicago s newly created united center . in , he left baseball to work at a startup that was developing digital television . when the dot com boom went bust , he fell back in with his old company , and brought along a wealth of knowledge about the intersection of tv and the internet . the thing about broadcast television is , today people probably think of it as stodgy old engineers with big beer bellies and a pocket protector , says inzerillo . but the truth is that there are a lot of things about the way they do it , the technology and the philosophy , that make it incredibly stable and scalable . inzerillo set out to fuse those two worlds , creating a platform with the agility of a web startup and the reliability of a broadcast network . bam s early entrance to the world of streaming video gave it a big advantage in developing technology , but it also gave the group a head start at the process of deploying infrastructure . great web streaming requires points of presence spread across the globe near population centers . for years , bam has been building out data centers and high speed fiber connections , forging intimate relationships with the companies that control the guts of the internet . that head start gives bam a massive advantage in both speed and cost . we looked at what it would take to build in house , and compared that to what bam could deliver , said george barrios , wwe s chief strategy and financial officer . in the end it made a lot more sense to let them bring their technology expertise to bear , and focus on what we do best , which is creating great content and connecting with wrestling fans . when hbo originally set out to create hbo now , the project was reportedly expected to take three years and cost million . bam turned the same project around in three and half months for less than million . we see a lot of things that are repeatable , says kenny gersh , the head of business development , who helped bam close deals with espn , sony , and the nhl . we applied the learnings from mlb . tv to wwe , and we applied the learnings from wwe to hbo . by the time the iphone rolled out in , bam was readyjust as it was early to video , bam made a smart bet on mobile starting in . that year , it built the mlb . com mobile site , which served up news and scores , and negotiated agreements with the four major us carriers to prominently feature a link to the site . a year later it launched its first mobile app , mlb . com gameday , across verizon , at ampt , and sprint . the application included a scoreboard , gameday pitch by pitch , and live gameday audio advanced features considering smartphone capabilities at the time . by the time the iphone rolled out in , bam was ready . mlb was onstage for the unveiling of the app store , the beginning of a deep relationship with apple that would see it grace the stage at the launch of the ipad and apple watch . and it s not just apple that trusts bam . behind a locked door in its new york city headquarters , the company has a gadget geek s fantasy trove the latest smartphones , tablets , and consoles , all being tested months before they are publicly released . on the iphone , roku , playstation , xbox , apple tv , our infrastructure was always the first live streaming technology on those devices , says matthew gould , bam s head of communications . now people come to us to ensure that when their hardware is released , there won t be any issues . it s easy to get lost wandering through bam s headquarters . hallways loop back on themselves and there are half floors wedged in between whole ones . bobble heads and figurines line the partitions between desks entire walls are crammed floor to ceiling with monitors where color codes flash onscreen green for live , yellow for standby , red as a warning about a problem . young men and women stand , chatting , never turning their gaze from the live feeds , a position known around the office as eye to the glass . bam has become a weird tech octopusas gould leads me on a tour , i realize what a weird tech octopus bam has become a unique mix of startup and it department . the core competency and biggest revenue stream is technology for streaming living video . but it still builds and maintains websites for most mlb teams , created and manages the system that sells the league s tickets , and constructs its mobile apps and games . hell , bam even powers instant replay for the league . on game day , an umpire comes and sits in a windowless room above chelsea market to review footage , calling whether a runner was safe at the plate or not . the latest expression of this boundless initiative is statcast , a big data approach to sports that only a major league nerd could love . high speed cameras and radar installed in every stadium capture the game in three dimensions and allow for real time tracking and tabulation of each motion a player makes on the field . fans watching an amazing replay of a diving catch can learn exactly how fast that outfielder s first step was , if he broke in the right direction , and how that compares to his historical average . a promotional video explaining the technology behind mlb s statcast system my dad and i would go to yankees games , and there would always be these arguments around bernie williams , how good an outfielder he was , explains gregg klayman , who runs product development and content strategy . my dad , right or wrong , he would always say , bernie breaks the wrong way , his first step is really slow , but he makes all these great catches , diving to the turf or bouncing off the wall . if he made the right step , it would have been easy . was he a good player or just a very gifted athlete ? . . . now i could know for sure . back then it was one of those friendly fan debates that would never get resolved . today klayman could simply call up the play on his smartphone and ask statcast for the answer . was he a good player or just a very gifted athlete ? back then we had our opinions . now i could know for sure . not every attempt at a new tech project is a success . when k , the publisher of licensed baseball games on the xbox , decided against publishing a new title for , bam stepped in and created an entire console game from scratch in a year and a half . the result earned withering reviews , perhaps no surprise given that a team of a few dozen was tasked with a job usually done by hundreds of more experienced professionals over a much longer period of time . if bam can pull off its plan to spin out as a stand alone tech company , it could step away from such projects and focus on its core capabilities . all the things that are related to baseball that aren t streaming would stay behind at mlb , says bowman . instead of the utility infielder juggling a dozen different jobs , bam tech would focus solely on the streaming business , trying to stake a major claim in the rapidly shifting media market . a few weeks ago , bowman sat down in a small studio at bam s headquarters to record a conversation with rich greenfield , an investment analyst and consigliere who works at the collision of media , technology , and television . greenfield had recently helped guide the partnership between vice and amc , and was lobbing bowman questions as an audience of bankers , venture capitalists , and potential investors tuned in . bam has been flirting with the idea of a spinoff since , when it made the rounds with investors and bankers . but its revenue at the time was under million , and streaming video was still far from mainstream . a decade later , bam is on pace to earn million , and says it s been turning a steady profit . add in a roster of high profile clients and a massive media shift from pay tv to online streaming , and suddenly it seems silly not to look beyond baseball . suddenly it seems silly not to look beyond baseballthe nhl is the first public investor in bam tech , but it s also talking with partners like hbo s parent , time warner , and espn s overlord , disney , who could help sharpen its skills at producing and distributing original content . while sports is often a leader in new forms of distribution , from vhs to dvd to streaming , the long tail here is entertainment , bowman says . and not just the standard formats . we want to be flexible enough to create new content that is specifically over the top . bowman has some wild ideas for how bam s expertise could be tapped to create new genres . every night in clubs around the country , people are telling hundreds of jokes . some of those are duds , but some are really funny . the bam team already has experience ingesting petabytes of live footage from dozens of games and quickly cutting together highlights . what if we could do that for comedy ? bam has already taken a step toward creating its own content by buying production and distribution rights for digital content from the pga and nhl . just as cable and espn provided a home for sporting events that didn t match the business model of broadcast television , bam is bundling sports to sell a la carte on the internet , creating a new opportunity , and perhaps a way forward as pay tv slowly dwindles . the media space has always been built on over time , the platforms taking more control of content . it was true on cable with espn , and in streaming with netflix . so it s natural , says greenfield . bam is bundling sports to sell a la carte on the internet , creating a new opportunitythe idea of helping to produce and perhaps even create new content is intriguing , but also risky . bam would find itself competing directly with its own clients , like espn and hbo . a big part of the company s success was its ability to work with companies and leagues traditionally viewed as competitors . media companies are not good at tech and really struggle with large scale , says greenfield . they don t trust companies like google or amazon , who want to displace them . bam is seen as friendly . if it spins out and starts making its own shows , that dynamic may change . and while it s a world class technology company , so far it has little track record in creating original content outside baseball . as consumers cut the cord on cable , bam and its clientele are navigating treacherous waters . it s more complex than ever for media companies , says bowman . you need to honor your existing partners , your existing contracts , while also figuring out new ways to reach fans who live beyond the traditional formats . so far bam has managed to bridge the gap between television and the internet . and bowman is bullish on the future . the fact that you can now deliver games on demand to billion devices around the globe , you couldn t write heaven for a sports fan better than that . photography by sean o kaneedited by dieter bohn , ampnbspmichael zelenko