 in , an italian court reduced a murderer s sentence by one year because doctors had identified a gene in the defendant s dna , called maoa , that had been linked to violent behavior . the ruling was controversial and some scientists objected to the sentence reduction . maoa findings have been generally used in murder trials , sometimes to suggest diminished capacity of the defendant to premeditate his criminal behavior , but most often to reduce a sentence , writes paul appelbaum , a psychiatrist at columbia university , in an essay published today in neuron . in the essay , appelbaum explains that genetic evidence demonstrating a defendant s predisposition for antisocial behavior or mental illness is showing up in courtrooms at an ever quickening pace . and that pace , he warns , might be outrunning the legal system s ability to interpret it . misinterpreted by judges and jurors premature introduction of genetic evidence in court carries a number of risks , said appelbaum in an email to the verge . the most obvious is that the purported associations between genetics and behavior are not real and will be disproved over time . but even the most replicated and widely accepted findings , he said , can be misinterpreted by judges and jurors . a bargaining toolin the case of the italian court , the gene that was used has indeed been associated with impulsiveness and criminal behavior among men in a number of studies . moreover , childhood maltreatment has been linked to lower maoa activity providing a great example of how a genetic predisposition can be triggered by environmental factors . most experts agree , however , that even evidence as strong as that surrounding maoa shouldn t be used to absolve someone of responsibility for their actions . the major mistake the people make is to think that if you ve identified a cause , it must mean that people are excused or mitigated , says stephen morse , a professor of law at the university of pennsylvania who has written on the subject . but that isn t how the law works . only a limited number of impairments such as failing to appreciate the wrongfulness of one s acts are considered exculpatory . so if someone is a rational agent , morse says , i don t care if they have bad genetics . it doesn t necessarily mean a lessened responsibility . jorim tielbeek , a neuroscientist and criminologist at vu medical center amsterdam who has studied the effects of genetics on antisocial behavior , agrees with morse , stating in an email to the verge that a higher genetic liability towards committing a crime doesn t necessarily mean a lessened responsibility . although scientists have made links between certain genes and antisocial behavior , tielbeek says , there is no clear predictive relationship between a single gene and a criminal act especially since hundreds of genes are involved in criminal behavior , and that each have a very small effect . yet that doesn t mean that either tielbeek and morse disagree with using genetics in the courtroom . in the future , it may inform a judge of the type of justice interventions that is most suitable for the defendant , tielbeek says . morse also thinks genetic evidence can be valuable , but he clarifies that it should only be used where the behavioral information is unclear . but what exactly might genetic information help clarify ? deborah denno , a law professor at fordham university in new york city whose work was cited in appelbaum s essay , says that genetics may be especially valuable when trying to figure out what distinguishes one person who grew up in an underprivileged neighborhood from their neighbor or even their sibling . there have been cases where a judge has said , well your brother and sister didn t commit a crime and they grew up on the same household , denno says , but genetics might explain that difference , because even brothers and sisters don t have the exact same genes . a win for those who want a legal system free of biasthat s why some legal scholars think the introduction of genetic evidence in criminal cases is a huge win for those who want a legal system free of bias . as denno puts it , it s a lot harder to argue with a defendant s traumatic family history when you have genetic evidence backing it up . genetics cuts through biases , she says , so judges are not going to be bringing in their own personal garbage into a case . judging the evidenceand despite a handful of controversial examples , the use of genetic evidence doesn t appear to be making that big of an impact on the world s legal proceedings at least not yet . one study that looked into the effect of genetics on the sentencing of psychopaths found that the average criminal case sentence is years when genetic evidence is introduced . when it isn t , most defendants get years . it s no different than anything that is already being used to reduce sentences , says kevin beaver , a criminologist at florida state university who has studied how people who are predisposed to antisocial behavior people whose parents have been arrested , for instance are more at risk for being processed through the criminal justice system than the general population . so if we believe in mitigating factors , such as peer influence or abuse by parents , then i think those biological explanations would fall directly in line with those . i don t really see it as significant . when a child s bloody t shirt carries more weightappelbaum himself has looked into the impact of genetic evidence in homicide cases . in a study involving survey participants , he found that people are disinclined to accept claims of diminished responsibility or pleas for reduced sentences based on genetic claims when that evidence is presented uncritically . you can introduce all the genetics evidence you want in court , but in a case where a child was beaten to death by their parents , what do you think will have more weight ? asks denno , the fact that a parent has a history of violence going back four generations , or the moment when the prosecution shows the child s bloody t shirt ? interestingly , some experts argue that we already use manifestations of our genetic makeup to reduce a person s prison sentence it just isn t conceptualized that way . criminal defendants have long pleaded for mercy on the basis of problematic family histories , said appelbaum , such as substance abuse or criminality that may have genetic foundations , or because of experiences like child abuse , which may impact the way genes are expressed . when observed through that lens , the introduction of genetic evidence doesn t appear all that novel . lawyers will have to wait for the evidence to pile upthat may be why experts are more worried about misuse of genetic evidence than genetic evidence itself . as genetics becomes a more frequent visitor to the courtroom . . . the risk that genetic information will be misinterpreted will be real , appelbaum writes in the essay . but regardless of the fear that this information might be badly employed , science marches onward , so the answer to this dilemma might simply be that legal professionals need to learn to wait for evidence to pile up before making use of new genetic findings . of course , determining when a study has been replicated enough won t be easy . but the waiting part where we ignore evidence that doesn t seem all that relevant is something we already know how to do . after all , morse jokes , society has known the identity of the number one predisposing risk factor for violent crime for far longer than it has known about the double helix , and that hasn t stopped anyone from ignoring it in a court of law . the number one risk factor for violent crime is the y chromosome , morse says . if we allowed maleness to be used as an excusing condition , he says , most violent criminals would be getting off . 