 if there amprsquos one thing to learn from satoru iwata amprsquos years in charge , it amprsquos that you can always count on nintendo to surprise . at first glance , ampnbspthe company s much hyped strategy announcement today was mostly devoid of revelations ampmdash yes , nintendo will develop smartphone apps that may or may not include small games no , the company won amprsquot be swayed from its conviction that its future lies in creating software for its own hardware , even when that hardware performs as badly as the wii u has done . but ceo and president iwata threw a curveball toward the end of his presentation when he announced plans to take on the challenge of expanding into a new business area . what followed was an explanation as equally inscrutable in english as it was in japanese , but it might just be the first hint of nintendo amprsquos next big thing . i think now is the time we need to extend the definition of entertainment . iwata said that nintendo s success with the ds and wii extended the definition and demographics of video games , adding , i think now is the time we need to extend the definition of entertainment . the new area will be a platform business that improves people amprsquos quality of life in enjoyable ways . and nintendo is betting that its status as a video games giant makes it the best guide in a new era of technologically enabled self improvement . the company says this quality of life qol business could extend to areas such as lifestyle and education , but it amprsquos starting with personal health . it s not a new area for nintendo ampmdash wii fit was a hugely innovative and successful product that hooked tens of millions on the concept of tracking their fitness regimens via software and hardware , years before the fitbit and fuelband found a place on the wrists and belt loops of the tech savvy . wii fit and its wii fit plus expansion have sold over million copies to date , and a new version was just released for the wii u . but iwata wants to take nintendo amprsquos focus on health to a whole new level . when we use health as the keyword , some may inevitably think about wii fit , ampnbsphe said . however , we are considering themes that we have not incorporated to games for our existing platforms . including the hardware that will enable such an idea , we will aim to establish a blue ocean . blue ocean refers to a business strategy outlined in a book by w . chan kim and ren ampeacutee mauborgne nintendo often cites the key tenet of disrupting competition with innovative , inexpensive products as central to the approach it took with the ds and wii . iwata amprsquos explanation today , however , was less blue ocean than murky lake . the company plans to create an integrated hardware software platform ampmdash the same language used to describe the company amprsquos gaming systems ampmdash that , instead of providing mobile or wearable features , will be characterized by a new area of what we like to call non wearable technology . what form this non wearable technology will take is anyone amprsquos guess . but from the overall goal outlined today , it sounds like nintendo will apply the same video game skill set demonstrated by wii fit to more serious areas of health . nintendo believes it has the magic formula to keep users coming backiwata says that the new business will provide preventative measures rather than outright medical care , and will enable people to monitor their health and offer them appropriate propositions . but nintendo believes that , like ampnbspwii fit , its unique combination of software , hardware , and a video game mentality will be the magic formula to keep users coming back . what is generally good for health requires some kind of effort to be made by the individual , says iwata . it is not uncommon to give up after a few days . this is where our strength as an entertainment company to keep our consumers engaged and entertained comes into play , assisted by the non wearable feature , which is the biggest differentiator of this new business field . the program has shades of the vitality sensorit amprsquos clear that nintendo is working on new hardware to push this health initiative , but the only thing we know is that it amprsquos not worn on the body . the entire program has shades of the ill fated vitality sensor , a wii peripheral which was announced to great fanfare at e but ampnbspnever saw the light of day . it was said to sense the user amprsquos pulse and a number of other signals being transmitted by their bodies , and will then provide information to the users about the body amprsquos inner world . iwata told investors last year that nintendo could not get it to work as we expected and it was of narrower application than we had originally thought , but qualified that statement by saying that the company would like to launch it into the market if technology advancements enable of , people to use it without any problems , not only out of people . although the company never showed off any software for the vitality sensor , the shelved project demonstrates the company amprsquos interest in biometric hardware that could theoretically have health tracking applications . technology such as so called electronic tattoos and medical tricorders are yet to hit the mainstream , but have the potential to go much further than the plethora of fitness focused devices we amprsquove seen over the past couple of years . other companies ampnbsphave also explored gaming controllers capable of picking up biometric data , like ampnbspvalve s experiments in eye and sweat analysis and the ampnbspxbox one s pulse detecting kinect that tracks blood flow beneath the skin . is nintendo planning to apply its winning software formula to medical hardware more advanced than a wii fit balance board ? fighting with brute force is not our way of doing business . whatever the company is working on , its approach is sure to be different to others in the space , which has recently seen giants like samsung and softbank attempt to muscle in . following others into the exceedingly crowded market of mobile applications or the market of wearable technology that is expected to become increasingly competitive and fighting with brute force is not our way of doing business , said iwata . but nintendo knows better than most that past success can mean little without the right execution in the present ampmdash just look at the reception of the wii u next to its predecessor . nintendo will announce more details on its qol business this year , including a clearer vision of what non wearable actually means . the service is set to be launched in the financial year beginning april , and nintendo hopes it will make a positive impact on the balance sheet by the following year . one look at the company amprsquos recent earnings tells you that it amprsquos in need of additional revenue streams . fortunately , nintendo has enough cash on hand to weather a few quarterly losses while experimenting with new projects . 