 last year , facebook s internet . org found itself at the center of india s net neutrality debate . over million people wrote to trai , the country s telecom and internet regulator , to share their thoughts on the subject during the comment period last spring . nearly nine months later , we are no closer to having official guidelines on net neutrality , and in a surprising move , the regulator last month released another paper seeking people s view on differential pricing , though trai insisted the topic didn t fall under the ambit of net neutrality . should the telecom service providers be allowed to have differential pricing for data usage for accessing different websites , applications or platforms ? read the first question in the regulator s paper . are there alternative methods technologies business models , other than differentiated tariff plans , available to achieve the objective of providing free internet access to the consumers ? the trai paper asked in another question , in an obvious reference to platforms like free basics , that offer a differentiated tariff aka free access to certain websites . we are no closer to having guidelines on net neutralityit wasn t long before the save the internet campaign kicked into gear , with the website encouraging users to share their views with the regulator and even providing a form with pre populated answers to trai s queries , as it had done before . as the most high profile free internet access platform , it was no surprise that facebook s free basics was mentioned in all discussions related to the subject , with the save the internet campaign effectively becoming a stop free basics campaign . at the end of december , the regulator appeared to give into this pressure and ordered facebook s telecom partner to stop free basics in india , pending a specific approval . you d be forgiven for not recognizing free basics , as the name at least is new . in september , facebook decided to rebrand the internet . org project , likely to counter all the bad press it was getting in india and other countries . after the change , facebook s project offering free , limited internet access to users by partnering with telcos was rechristened free basics , while internet . org became the larger project about connecting users through moonshots like internet beaming drones . the save the internet campaign kicked into gearcritics argue that mark zuckerberg is more interested in finding new markets for facebook than in connecting poor people . facebook has reportedly spent nearly million promoting free basics in india over the last few months and zuckerberg also made several high profile visits to the country in a bid to drum up support for the initiative . most of the folks who are pushing for net neutrality have access to the internet already . i see these petitions going around on net neutrality , and that s great . we need to mobilise sic on the internet to push for this stuff . but the people who are not on the internet , can t sign an online petition pushing for increased access to the internet , zuckerberg said answering a query during one of those visits , attending a q ampampa at iit delhi , one of india s premier technology institutes . facebook rebranded the internet . org projectthe facebook co founder seems incredulous at the criticism the project has faced in india , a country where roughly only percent of the country has internet access . instead of wanting to give people access to some basic internet services for free , critics of the program continue to spread false claims even if that means leaving behind a billion people , zuckerberg wrote in an op ed in one of india s leading dailies . instead of recognizing the fact that free basics is opening up the whole internet , they continue to claim falsely that this will make the internet more like a walled garden . after the regulator s move to halt free basics , facebook renewed its own campaign , inviting people via billboards , print ads , tv spots , and , of course , facebook notifications to write to trai to express their support for free internet free as in beer , in case anyone was wondering . the world s biggest social network claims over million people emailed the telecom regulator in support of free basics , though the regulator says it received . million responses on the subject in total , with submissions having closed on january th . nearly half a million of those replies came via the save the internet campaign , trai said , clearly a vote against free basics . the regulator even gave facebook a chance pdf to address the difference in numbers , though it s yet to respond . facebook renewed its campaignso with two high profile net neutrality campaigns behind us , we are no closer to knowing what the regulator will actually decide . consultation by trai are not opinion polls , we are not asking if the answer is yes or no because that does not help us , chairman of the body r . s . sharma said recently , hinting that the sheer number of responses is unlikely to sway the regulator in either direction . the regulator has started sharing some of the responses it has received no surprise that facebook supports differential pricing pdf but there s no word yet on when a decision on the subject is likely to be made . some have asked if the government of india should be running a project like free basics in a bid to connect the proverbial next billion , though recent events have shown that perhaps it s best to let the free market take its own course . in around years , india has gone from a country with practically no mobile connections to a region where over a billion people now carry a mobile phone . the growth has been down to users realizing the benefits of connectivity as prices rapidly decline . with handsets becoming more affordable and powerful , and g soon to take off across the country , indians look more than capable of logging on to the internet without any freebies or artificial incentives . zuckerberg seems incredulous at the criticism the project has faced in indiafacebook could argue that free basics is the free market at work , especially since users can upgrade to the full internet by paying any time they want . indeed , zuckerberg claimed in his op ed that half the people who use free basics to go online for the first time pay to access the full internet within days . critics point to the walled garden approach and the privacy concerns during the time people use free basics services . chris daniels , vice president of product at facebook s internet . org hosted an ama on reddit recently where he said facebook could monetize free basics using ads , which did little to allay fears about the company s long term plans for the platform . while free basics continues to grow across the world the program now runs in countries its future remains uncertain in india , a key market for facebook as it looks for ways to overcome slower growth in revenue . 