 since edward snowden leaked the first classified intelligence document in june of , over a dozen bills have been proposed to rein in government surveillance . some have taken on single issues , like requesting details about violations of privacy laws . others are omnibus proposals meant to close as many surveillance loopholes as possible . but as of yesterday , reformers are pinning their hopes on a single bill the usa freedom act , only one step away from passing the house of representatives . the usa freedom act , brought by rep . jim sensenbrenner r wi , focuses on the most notorious government surveillance program the nsa s mass collection of phone call records , which it stores for up to five years . the program was justified under an extremely loose interpretation of section of the patriot act . sensenbrenner s bill would add new language that makes it harder to justify broad data sweeps , requiring that anything the nsa requested from phone companies be not only relevant to an investigation the original standard but directly pertain to a potential foreign threat . its language is designed to close potential loopholes , rewriting rules like pen register laws in ways that would ban bulk collection and stop the agency from just picking a new legal justification . the usa freedom act was never a universal solutionthe usa freedom act was never praised as a universal solution there was simply no way it could deliver a reform of the entire nsa . but it was more comprehensive than any of the alternatives . its only real competition was the fisa transparency and modernization act , proposed by house permanent select committee on intelligence chair mike rogers r mi and fellow hardline nsa supporter dutch ruppersberger d md . the bill limited how the nsa could collect data , but it included one huge loophole the nsa didn t need to get a court order before searching phone records , it just had to justify the decision afterwards . the intelligence committee planned to mark up its bill just a day after the usa freedom act . then , in a surprise reversal , it folded . the reason was apparently a package of changes to the freedom act known as the manager s amendment designed to appease nsa supporters . the amendment stripped out a number of reforms that weren t directly related to the phone surveillance program . eff legislative analyst mark jaycox calls the amended text a bill that s typical at only addressing one issue that has the attention of congress the usa freedom act was a much more comprehensive bill , it was a much more detailed bill , and it would have provided a lot more . this new bill focuses only on the calling records . among other things , the amendment took out a section that would make it easier for companies to reveal that they d been ordered to give up data , and it explicitly allowed intelligence agencies to gather numbers within two hops of the original query , instead of restricting it only to foreign agents and their contacts . most controversially , though , it struck out a section that applied to another nsa program the collection of emails through section of the fisa amendments act . the original bill explicitly barred the practice of backdoor searches , which let nsa agents get around bans on collecting communications from americans by searching for data that had been inadvertently caught in the dragnet . in doing so , it would have placed new checks on the oft overlooked email and electronic communications program originally described under the name prism . the momentum is on the side of privacy rights and limiting government power . jaycox and others had held out hope that some of the rules might be restored during judiciary committee debate , but they were mostly disappointed . only one change was made during hours of discussion on wednesday an amendment by suzan delbene d wa that restored transparency options for companies . rep . zoe lofgren d ca , one of the most dedicated reformers , attempted to resurrect the backdoor search provisions . but the mood during debate was one of impatience , and any substantive changes threatened to break the fragile coalition . lofgren s backdoor search ban was one of her least controversial proposals . another amendment would have required probable cause and a warrant , instead of just reasonable suspicion , to get information from phone companies . for call records which courts don t even consider an actual search this would have been an unprecedented change , fundamentally altering how the government treats metadata . the response was uniformly negative . after a dozen years , we finally have a chance to rein back the government s abuse and to end bulk collection , to end dragnet surveillance , we finally have a bill that can actually pass , said rep . jarold nadler d ny . this amendment would jeopardize that , and i don t think we can afford that risk . the bill was rejected by every committee member except lofgren . i don t think we can afford that risk . the intelligence committee , meanwhile , was initially rumored to be making some unpopular changes of its own . a circulated amendment , says center for democracy and technology senior counsel harley geiger , apparently would have made it unclear what the nsa could count as a search term when requesting data , opening a significant loophole . unlike the judiciary committee , the intelligence committee held its hearing behind closed doors , part of a more general pattern of secrecy . ultimately , though , the bill that emerged was the same one the judiciary committee had amended and approved . rogers and ruppersberger praised the committee for adopting a compromise that garnered strong , bipartisan support , leaving their own proposal in limbo . geiger thinks the house will pass the bill on the week of may th just before it votes on next year s defense budget in order to head off further nsa debate . last year , rep . justin amash r mi and john conyers d mi unsuccessfully tried to amend the national defense authorization act to ban mass phone surveillance . i think that there s a realization that if bulk collection was not solved via normal legislative process , like usa freedom , then there would have been another attempt , says geiger . when the senate takes up its own version of the bill , the house might have to revisit its debate . patrick leahy d vt , who sponsored the usa freedom act in the senate , has said he will keep pushing for a stronger bill that doesn t include the amendment s changes . for now , though , it s unlikely any big changes will occur before the vote . even so , reform groups aren t complaining much . in fact , they re comparing it to other historic pieces of legislation . the bill is admittedly an imperfect compromise , says kevin bankston , policy director of the new america foundation s open technology institute . but make no mistake usa freedom , if passed , would still be the most powerful new law to regulate government s national security surveillance powers since the spying scandals of the s prompted congress to pass the original foreign intelligence surveillance act . just as importantly , it signals that congress could be ready to take up more bills . the momentum is on the side of privacy rights and limiting government power , says laura murphy of the aclu . while the legislation is not perfect , it looks like congress will have the chance to pass meaningful surveillance reforms for the first time since the patriot act was passed in . we need to focus beyond section of the calling records program . privacy advocates both inside and outside congress are trying to keep that momentum going . we need to focus beyond section of the calling records program , says jaycox . it is mostly likely at least from the documents we ve released a single percentage , maybe less than that , of the total collection that the nsa is doing . right now , reformers are focusing on banning backdoor searches , passing more protections for non us citizens , and creating oversight for executive order , a surveillance rule whose scope and applications remain mysterious . the nsa has used the order to justify some of its programs , but it exists largely outside normal oversight protections . geiger also calls attention to the electronic communications privacy act , which limits wiretaps and electronic surveillance but was written for the world of . a reform movement has been active since at least , but response to the edward snowden leaks has recently taken precedent . but there are larger issues at stake . no matter what text is passed in congress , the nsa will undoubtedly search it for loopholes , and it will probably find at least a few . even if it operates under more oversight , the secretive fisa court will still be in charge of approving court orders , and there s no sign it won t continue to act as a rubber stamp . and rep . lofgren s doomed amendment , which would have made intelligence agencies treat metadata more like data , raises one of the most central questions do decades old surveillance laws even apply in today s world ? if the fourth amendment is going to actually provide protection to modern americans , it s going to have to deal with the issue of how big data can tell someone everything there is to know about that person , said lofgren in debate , calling for the reform of ancient doctrines . for now , though , congress isn t trying to change how the government thinks of call records . it s just trying to make them a little harder for the nsa to get . 