 i met john skidmore my freshman year of college at new york university s tisch school of the arts . skidmore studied film , but also worked on more films outside of school than most people i met . his work , beginning as an intern and production assistant or pa a decade ago , has led to his current enviable role at a production company responsible for some of the most critically acclaimed comedies on television . he s credited as the producer on inside amy schumer , louie , broad city , difficult people , and other films , television shows , and comedy specials . so you re head of production for jax media , what does that mean ? that means that every show our company does , i interface with the network , do the series budget , manage the funding from the network , deal with the unions , and in sort of a macro sense deal with the crew stuff and logistics of making the shows . i ve visited your office . i originally imagined making comedy as this wacky , non stop party . but it s a real job . there are offices and calendars and spreadsheets . there s a ton of money at play . how do you strike that balance between the reality of production and producing a funny show ? we approach it by making a firm plan up front . we schedule everything meticulously . we tell the comics , hey , we think this is ambitious but doable . or this might be a lighter day or a heavier day . the more they are aware , the better off you are . the looser and funnier things can be , the more the crew enjoys working . the set needs to be fun , because a lot of these comedies don t have big budgets , and they re on a tight schedule . so i think the looser and funnier things can be , the more the crew enjoys working . there are long hours and not great pay . if you can make everyone laugh on set two times a day , it makes the job better . it s definitely better than working on a drama . who is the funniest person you ve worked with ? that is really tough . i ll give a two fold answer . louis c . k . is the greatest comedian certainly that i ve ever seen . i haven t seen a ton of comedians , but just everything i see him do is brilliant . i would say in person in real life abbi jacobson and ilana glazer , the co creators and stars of broad city are some of the funniest people i ve ever met . what s your favorite memory from working with them on broad city ? the most memorable experience we had with them was the st . marks episode , which we did as the finale of the second season . we shot on st . marks four straight nights . all overnights . all together . it s almost like a sleepover party , from sundown to sunup . we had that sort of giddy exhaustion , because no matter how much you sleep during the day , you re still not nocturnal . but they were game for everything . it felt like a unique episode for the series , just because of how it was conceived and pulled off . we had that sort of giddy exhaustionwe rarely shoot episodes in a row . we usually shoot two or three episodes at the same time and take bits and pieces from each one . that was the same episode straight through , so we really got to build the momentum of the episode . what s the craziest thing to happen on your job ? one of the craziest things we ve ever done is we created a hurricane on louie on the upper west side and in red hook . that , from a production sense , is one of the craziest things i ve ever been a part of . john skidmoredo you remember your worst day on the job ? i feel like there s one a month , or one every show . there s a day where you feel like everything goes wrong . you have to take a deep breath and get through it , because it always turns out fine . does it turn out fine because you make it fine ? it turns out fine because the whole job is problem solving . there are a thousand fires around you , and you have to take them one at a time or else you re just going to sit there and burn alive , essentially . there could be a problem with the location or some other thing , and it s like alright , one at a time . fix this problem , and it ll help fix the other problems , and you ll bring things back to reality . what s the strangest request you ve been given on a set ? we were shooting a movie , and we were at a remote mansion in long island . we were doing a wedding scene , and we needed mani pedi people . i think we had actors , but the director wanted people who could apply a mani pedi for real . so they sent me into town , and i went to a nail salon and recruited two people who didn t really speak english to come with me to a mansion and put them on camera . the whole job is problem solvingthey showed up . i didn t actually think they d show up , but they did a couple hours later and hung out with us . how did you end up in this job ? i went to film school at nyu . i started interning my sophomore year . i worked on a movie called the ampnbsphottest state with ethan hawke . the president of jax media , tony , was the production manager on that movie . so i worked with him for a few movies over the course of a couple years . once i graduated , i started working on tv with him , then i joined jax when he formed the company in or . what s your best career advice for someone wanting to get into what you do ? i still think interning , despite lawsuits to the contrary . i think it s the best exposure . as an intern you can work on several different things in the same week . shows hardly ever employ people for full weeks anymore , so you can do like two or three internships . a lot of people who intern at jax do that . it gets you exposed to a million different fields and opportunities and people . we have a concerted effort to hire from our intern base . say it s me . i m almost years old . i say , hey , i want to work in the industry . should i go back to school ? should i be a production assistant ? i think pa ing is the best . i have a strong opinion that the best experience is in the field . school is great as a base of knowledge and a place to meet people , especially undergrad . i don t know that there s much benefit to grad school for film . i mean some people come out with great films and are great filmmakers . but i feel like that ratio is way off . you re essentially , in grad school , paying someone so you can make a film . nowadays , if you really want to do that , you should just make the film . 