 how lenovo brought a dream design to life rewriting the tablet how lenovo brought a dream design to lifeby dan seifert photography by sean o kanetablets were supposed to be the future . they were supposed to get us off the desk and away from the laptop , and usher us into a touch enabled world of productivity and entertainment . a dream of computing where our devices seamlessly blend between activities and go wherever we need them to . but the tablets we know , the ipads and surfaces of the world , haven t really lived up to that dream , whether it s because doing actual work on them is harder than it should be , or because they are barely different than the pcs we ve used for years . really , what we ve always wanted is the thing that microsoft never made the courier . it was the perfect vessel for our hopes thin , light , and adaptable to whatever we needed it to do . you could touch it , you could write on it , you could fold it , just like a book . but the courier never made it out of microsoft s labs , never got past the concept stages , and never fulfilled the dream it laid out . what we imagine is often better than what we get . but now , seven years later , lenovo is introducing a new take on the tablet computer . no , lenovo didn t make a courier , but its new yoga book might inspire the same reactions . it s about the size and shape of a hardcover children s book , has two panels attached by a hinge , and can be used with your fingers or with its included pen . it even does some tricks with the pen that we ve never seen before , like letting you write with real ink and have it all digitized . lenovo didn t set out to build just another tablet with the yoga book it wanted to make something that was better for getting work done than what is already out there . but in the process , it made a computer that s both futuristic and relatable at the same time , just like the original courier concept . i wanted to use the yoga book from the first time i laid eyes on it , and if you re anything like me , you will , too . and unlike the courier , you will actually be able to buy the yoga book . lenovo s entire brand has been built around productivity , anchored by workhorses like the storied thinkpad line of business laptops . but the company acknowledges that productivity as it s been defined historically is changing . so says jeff meredith , vice president of lenovo s android chrome computing business group , who set out with the goal to think about how tablets could be more productive in the way that phones are instead of the way pcs are . we tried to flip that on its head a little bit , he says , we find many people doing more on their phones than on their pc . so the comfort level with a touch based keyboard and a more mobile mindset should not be perceived as not appropriate for productivity . if people are using phones more , meredith argues , then tablets should act more like them . i hesitate to even call the yoga book a tablet , because we really think it s something else , he says . for the longest time we just called it the book i had this idea of a book we ended up calling it the yoga book , but for the longest time we just called it the book . we really wanted to hit a form factor that folded , and when you were carrying it , it looked like a book . and not a big beefy novel , but a thin magazine almost type of form factor , he says . one of his favorite ways to describe the yoga book is to liken it to a children s book , specifically , dr . seuss the cat in the hat . we were very adamant about staying true to this concept of almost ridiculously thin and light , and that s the characteristic that we wanted to deliver , he saysit shouldn t surprise you to hear that lenovo takes a research driven approach to product development . where apple sometimes gives the impression that all of its products come from a singular genius steve jobs , then later jony ive , meredith is up front about lenovo s use of research . development on the yoga book started nearly three years ago in a brainstorm , but lenovo tested every idea it had through user research . the company learned that younger people were already using tablets for productivity , even though many tablets weren t designed expressly for that purpose . we went and looked at college campuses and about of students that we observed in a lecture hall were taking notes or interacting a lot of them were actually using a tablet , typing on the tablet , and taking notes on the tablet . that guided lenovo on how to build its own spin on a productivity tablet , and it was not to just build a laptop that also had a touchscreen . we wanted to find an angle that came from a mobile direction as opposed to being a straight pc replacement , says meredith , alluding to the pc like approaches that other tablet makers have used . he didn t say it so i will lenovo didn t want to just build another surface clone the company already makes one of those , after all . half of the yoga book is what you d expect from a modern tablet it has a . inch , p touchscreen display , megapixel camera , gb of ram , gb of storage , and a microsd card slot . some markets will get an lte option in addition to the wi fi only model . all of that is encased in a slim metal frame that could pass for any generic tablet in . about the only surprising thing about the specs is the intel atom processor , a rarity among tablets in it s a small reminder that lenovo has been working on the yoga book for a long time . the touch panel doubles as a keyboard and writing surface but it s the other half of the yoga book that makes it special and different from the many tablets already out there . where you might expect there to be a physical keyboard or even a second screen , instead lenovo opted for a specialized , touch sensitive panel . open up the yoga book , and you ll see a flat , black expanse . dimly glowing lights outline a keyboard and trackpad , or you can tap a button and it switches into a pen recognition mode , powered by wacom technology . because it s a wacom surface , you can even put a stack of paper on top of the panel and write notes with real ink that are instantly digitized . the panel is attached to the screen with a hinge comprised of different pieces and can be rotated behind the display entirely , similar to how the keyboard on lenovo s yoga laptop line works . when the panel is folded back behind the display , the yoga book is still thin and light enough to be easily used for reading , gaming , watching video , or doing other entertainment activities that are commonly associated with tablets . when closed , the whole thing is under mm thick , putting it much closer to the realm of a smartphone or tablet without a keyboard than a laptop . when you carry it around , closed , it feels much smaller than it has any right to . it isn t quite the dr . seuss book meredith talks about , but it s close enough . typing on the yoga book s halo keyboard is much closer to typing directly on a touchscreen than using a traditional keyboard . it replaces physical keys with some haptic feedback , but because it s just a touch panel , lenovo can build smartphone tricks into it . it supports autocorrect , and word suggestions , of course . and also like many smartphone virtual keyboards , the yoga book can adapt to your typing style over time and adjust the size of tap targets accordingly . it wasn t this way from the start , though . one of the original yoga book concepts featured two screens , just like the courier . but two full touchscreens made the device too heavy and compromised battery life . we certainly wanted to have the keyboard , and to achieve the thinness that we wanted in the panel , the keyboard panel , we looked at an array of different options and settled on this touch based keyboard , says meredith . truthfully , this is where we ve iterated the most on this product . lenovo spent a year and a half tuning the performance and experience of the keyboard , utilizing various teams across the world to determine how it worked with various languages and character sets . that led to different developments in features such as word suggestions , which are presented differently for asian languages than latin based ones . we did a lot of usage testing and we found that a person and younger can adapt fully to the keyboard and be typing at speeds consistent with what they type on a traditional keyboard within minutes to minutes , meredith claims . but somebody who s and up , they take a couple of hours before they re getting a consistent kind of error rate and speed . sorry , gen xers . but perhaps the older among us might like the yoga book s other feature the ability to automatically digitize notes you take on any pad of paper . the decision to find a way to work with good old paper came , again , from user research instead of divine inspiration if you look at a lot of the devices that have pen capability on them today , where you re writing on glass , says meredith , the percentage of people that actually use it is quite low . the solution lenovo came up with for note taking is as unique as the keyboard . the same panel that can act as a full keyboard and trackpad can also become a writing surface . the yoga book comes with an ink insert for its stylus and a stack of note paper that magnetically attaches to the touch panel . anything you write on the paper pad will be captured digitally , even when the screen is off . there s no scanning or taking pictures of your notes to save them digitally , and switching between writing and typing is as simple as tapping a button . it s lenovo s way of letting you have the best of both worlds a familiar ink and paper writing experience and the archival capabilities of digital notes . and if you prefer a different pad of paper , virtually anything that s less than an inch thick should work . or , forget the paper , switch the pen back to a stylus the process is fiddly , and you can take notes or draw directly on the panel . the stylus is pressure sensitive up to , levels and lenovo included apps that can record your notes , even with the screen off and flipped around the back . it all might sound like a little much , but the clean design of the hardware sort of guides your understanding of what you can do on the device . as long as the software lives up to the promise of the hardware , it could be a really good experience . but software , as always , is the hard part . originally , the yoga book was designed to work with android , but a few months into development , lenovo decided to also make a windows version . the hardware between the two versions is the same , with minor tweaks to the keyboard layout for each platform . building two versions of the yoga book muddies the mobile first message a bit , especially since windows has a more traditional desktop feel than android . it s one of the few points in the yoga book s development where it seems that a business position lenovo makes a lot of windows computers and its research showed certain markets prefer windows over android took precedence over the best product decision . either way , building a windows model didn t seem to require a lot of effort aside from customizing the keyboard layout , lenovo didn t tailor the windows version to fit the yoga book s hardware much at all , as the software pieces were largely already there . the pen s note taking features work with microsoft s onenote , and the keyboard , trackpad , and touchscreen work just as you would expect them to on any windows laptop . but android is a different beast , and lenovo did add a number of things to it in order to take advantage of the yoga book s hardware . the yoga book will be launching with android . marshmallow , which doesn t offer any sort of split screen multitasking , so lenovo rolled its own multi window feature . android is on the roadmap for next spring , and lenovo says it will deliver security updates as google provides them . the approach lenovo used to handle multitasking seems smart , though . if an app comes with both a phone and tablet layout , you can shrink its window down to the phone version and move it around the display wherever you want . meredith says that about to percent of android tablet apps work with the feature . lenovo built its own note taking app for capturing handwritten notes with the yoga book s stylus . the company also added a windows style task bar to the bottom to make it easier to switch between apps and a handful of gestures to manage the multi window features . software is where lenovo faces its biggest challenge with the yoga book , especially since it is relying on platforms made by other companies . not only does lenovo have to make sure the yoga book s software experience matches its unique hardware , it also has to get people to buy an android or windows tablet in a flattening market that s been dominated by the ipad . those are hurdles that even the most successful smartphone companies have not been able to jump with their tablets . the yoga book s pricing could help a bit . the android version will start at , while the windows model will be about more when the device hits shelves this october . that s expensive for an android tablet these days , but then nobody s made a huge effort create an innovative android tablet since google s pixel c and even then , you could argue , the effort was half hearted . the pen , paper , and keyboard of course are all included , which is different from the apple s ipad pro , which is more expensive and doesn t include any of those productivity accessories . lenovo also understands that this won t be the device for everybody , and that it s attempting to hit a particular niche . for certain , some people will say i m a heavy user of the office suite or i need adobe this won t be the device for them , says meredith . the lion s share of people that do relatively light productivity but also want something that has all of the entertainment capability , i think this ll be a good fit . software challenges aside , lenovo has managed to create a computer that doesn t feel derivative instead it seems like a genuinely new kind of thing . it looks and feels like a book in a way that no other computer or tablet device i ve tried has ever managed to pull off . the yoga book dream hinges entirely on its execution it also managed to stick to its original concept , even though its development period was significantly longer than most of the company s products . we tried our best to stay dialed into what we initially set as our objective and worked hard to get there , says meredith . it s remarkable how much the end product resembles the original prototypes and development models . this yoga book is just the first in a family of products lenovo plans to roll out , and other versions with various screen sizes will be released . the company started with the inch model because that s the most popular tablet size , but meredith says that future versions will stay true to the touch keyboard , writing capabilities , and thin and light design pioneered by the first model . i can t say whether lenovo was able to nail the software on the yoga book we ll need to actually review it before i can do that . but if the software is great and that s a big if it could mean that we have a new kind of device that nestles in between phones and traditional tablets . a device that s personal and capable , entertaining and productive , entirely new , yet familiar at the same time . it surely won t live up to the fantasies the courier inspired , but the courier was never really real . the yoga book is . produced by frank bidesign by james barehamedited by dieter bohnvideo by phil esposito , mark linsangan , and andrew marino