 at around pm et on tuesday , javascript broke . more specifically , npm , the package manager used by most javascript developers to source , test , and prepare their code for release , began failing . for thousands of developers all over the world , the most essential tool in their workflow wouldn t work . soon after , a new issue , titled npmjs . org tells me that left pad is not available page , was opened on a little known github repository azer left pad . dozens of developers quickly piled into the issue , and within minutes they d identified the issue azer had unpublished his left pad code from npm . left pad is a minor bit of code , a sparse lines . basically , it s a javascript function which takes a string of characters and adds a padding string of your choice to the left . the most essential tool in their workflow wouldn t worknpm is all about packages built on other packages , which is how left pad ended up everywhere . according to npm stats , left pad has been installed , , times in the last month mostly as part of a package called line numbers , which adds line numbers to text . in addition to many other projects , line numbers was included in the babel package , which in turn broke thousands of javascript projects relying on babel . all azer ko ulu had to do was push the first domino . and , in the words of github user laurelnaiad who has received party hats , thumbs up , smiles , thumbs down , and hearts for her comment this kind of just broke the internet . what s an npm ? in many ways , javascript has always been the wild west of the software world . just like its sibling web technologies , css and html , javascript has been subject to the whims of the browser vendors , which has trained developers to code defensively . without a single source of truth about javascript , developers traditionally rely on third party libraries to smooth over the differences between browsers . javascript libraries also fill another void for the language the lack of a standard library . traditionally , functions like left pad are provided by the language author languages supported by big companies , like microsoft s c , google s go , mozilla s rust , and apple s swift , all have big fancy standard libraries full of commonly used functions so developers don t have to write everything from scratch . javascript developers never had any easy to access repository of code to rely on . . . until npm came along . npm allows developers to easily import blobs of code into their project . like , if i want to left pad something , i can just typenpm install left padinto the command line , and now i can left pad to my heart s content . in turn , if i think i ve written a bit of javascript that other people might find useful , i can stick it up on github and publish it on npm so now other people can use it easily in their own projects . talk about babelbabel is one of the most famous npm packages of recent years . by npm installing it on your development machine , you can write es also known as as es the latest and greatest version of javascript that s only partially supported by current browsers and have it transformed into compatible , run anywhere es . babel was written by sebastian mckenzie , who was a bored high schooler in australia when he started the project . he now works for facebook . babel has been installed , times in the past month , and has also been built into the core of react native , facebook s new framework for building mobile apps with javascript , so it s safe to say babel and its incarnations are primarily responsible for the wild popularity of line numbers and left pad . according to babel s own website , babel is used basically everywhere facebook , netflix , paypal , yahoo , spotify , reddit , slack , linkedin , godaddy , squarespace . . . it s very popular . with left pad gone , babel can t be installedi m not even sure what babel uses the line numbers function for , but that s not really important . what s important is that the babel package has declared the line numbers package as a dependency , which has declared left pad as a dependency . with left pad gone , babel can t be installed . so when this little line package broke babel , and babel kind of broke everything , people noticed . the author of left padazer ko ulu is a prolific author of open source software , most of it in the vein of left pad small , single serving npm packages that provide a simple javascript function . npm gives package names to authors on a first come first served basis , and azer has a bunch of them , to be exact . just to mention a few rnd , a random number generator strip , a function which strips out html tags and random color , which generates random rgb colors and , naturally , relies on rnd . he also inconspicuously owned the name kik , for a more elaborate open source project he was building to help developers start new projects simply and easily from the command line . and that s where all this drama began . you can read azer s side of the story here . basically , the messaging app company called kik contacted azer through a lawyer kik says it was actually a patent agent , telling him to remove his kik package from npm . he refused , and the company proceeded to contact npm , which complied with the request and transferred ownership of the kik package name . while npm is an open source project , it s primarily developed and maintained by a private company npm , inc . azer writes on medium emphasis his this situation made me realize that npm is someone s private land where corporate is more powerful than the people , and i do open source because , power to the people . azer s response was to unpublish or , liberate all his modules from npm . the aftermathit was only lines , after all . the same wild west ness of open source javascript that gave azer s act of unpublishing such wide implications allowed other developers to swoop in and fix the problem in hours . you can follow the action yourself in the very github thread that first raised the issue . babel removed its dependency on line numbers and published an updated version , and npm ended up republishing the left pad code in the same slot azer was occupying . npm is also camping all of azer s other npm module names to make sure no one can upload malicious code to them . if the reddit and hacker news comments are any indication , azer s actions have a lot of people questioning current javascript best practices . the classic follow up to the silicon valley mantra of move fast and break things is slow down and fix your shit . slow down and fix your shit . ironically , kik s own software build process was impacted by the unpublishing of left pad , which kik s head of messenger , mike roberts , explained the following day in his own medium post . mike attempted to give the kik side of the story , and published the entire email chain between azer , kik , and npm . mike calls it a polite request to get the kik name on npm in order to publish an open source project kik has been working on , but the emails he published do threaten lawyers . npm has also published its own blog post on the fiasco . it stands by its decision to transfer the kik name , since its name dispute policy prioritizes predictability for users . it s also looking into ways to make it harder to unpublish a package if it will break other packages . the comments on npm s post aren t favorable , however . most developers seem to feel azer was thrown under the bus , and many of them are already talking about finding an npm alternative . throughout this saga azer , kik , and npm , inc . proclaim a deep commitment to open source and javascript . they just each have a slightly different way of showing it . 