 the order came from the sultan of brunei s nephew . it was , and prince abdul hakeem , then years old , had inherited two things access to a billion fortune , and his family s penchant for spending it . the secret six a half dozen groundbreaking ferraris were built for the prince of brunei . only one made it out of the jungle aliveby ryan zummallen photography by paul barshon the order came from the sultan of brunei s nephew . it was , and prince abdul hakeem , then years old , had inherited two things access to a billion fortune , and his family s penchant for spending it . in the s and s , the monarchs of this tiny , oil rich nation in the south china sea bankrolled a fleet of special custom vehicles , ordering the most coveted cars in the world by the half dozen or more . their notorious collection located in nondescript concrete garages , surrounded by razor wire , and patrolled by armed nepalese soldiers known as gurkhas numbered in the thousands . visitors described rows and rows of warehouses , filled to the brim with luxury cars , sometimes organized by make , model , or even color . in his online newsletter , ferrari broker michael sheehan described one floor dedicated solely to black mercedes sl s , another to red ferrari testarossas , and yet another to bright yellow bentleys and lamborghinis . one particularly star studded showroom included a ferrari gto evo , f lm , f , and three mclaren f s . several of these cars could be found nowhere else in the worldseveral of the cars in these warehouses were one of a kind , built specifically for brunei , and could be found nowhere else in the world . for his next order , prince hakeem again wanted something special a ferrari with a semi automatic transmission . at the time , the technology didn t exist on any street legal vehicle in the world . that didn t give him any pause . prince hakeem was used to getting what he wanted . according to a fortune article published in , as a teen prince hakeem had decided he wanted to learn to play american football , so the royal family paid joe montana and herschel walker to come to brunei and teach him the game . no one was allowed to tackle the prince , who scored touchdowns every time he touched the ball . on his th birthday , he received billion in cash . for a job like this , prince hakeem knew just who to turn to legendary automotive design house carozzeria pininfarina , which had already completed one off versions of ferraris , bentleys , jaguars , and other historic marques for the royal family . it s estimated that in less than a decade , pininfarina had built more than cars destined for brunei . the assignment came to paolo garella , pininfarina s prototype manager . garella s team would take the ferrari testarossa , a pillar of automotive style and performance , and crank up the adrenaline . it was a tall order , but garella had the experience , talent , and vision necessary for the job . what garella s team built would become one of the most mysterious and compelling supercars ever , one that would come to be known as the ferrari fx . born and raised in italy , garella knew by age five that he would make cars his life s work . after seeing the ferrari pinin concept the first , and still the only four door ferrari ever produced at the torino auto show , he committed to becoming an engineer and creating one of a kind designs . he quickly established an enviable career in the late s , garella spent five years working at goodyear , testing prototypes like , as luck would have it , the ferrari testarossa around its famous circuit de mireval in france . he then returned to italy , developing hybrid and electric racecars for pti albatech . in pininfarina came calling , and garella became manager of the prototype manufacturing and engineering department , working on experimental , often top secret projects . photos from the s show him with the pushbroom mustache and wide , round glasses typical of the era often , with a beaming smile . garella was when the fx project came to him , and uniquely qualified to make the prince s dream car a reality . pininfarina opted for the ferrari testarossa as the platform for the new car . with its supercar proportions and mid engine layout , it was the premiere horse in the ferrari stable . having designed the original testarossa in the early s , pininfarina was very familiar with the car . in fact , they had already been involved in a custom job based on the testarossa , called the ferrari mythos , a drool inducing prototype shown at the tokyo motor show . ferrari made it clear the mythos was not for sale . somehow , two cropped up in the brunei warehouses anyhow . the only requirement , garella says , was the semi automatic transmissionwith the platform chosen , garella and his team could turn to the task at hand . the only requirement , garella says , was the semi automatic transmission . until then , supercars like the testarossa almost exclusively featured five or six speed manuals . semi automatics came from the world of motorsports , where they began appearing in rally cars in the late s , and formula one cars in the early s . instead of relying on the driver to depress the clutch , manually engage a new gear , and then release the clutch before accelerating , the semi automatic used computers to execute shifts with input from the driver via buttons , paddles , or a lever in a fraction of the time . built for quickness and nothing else , semi automatic transmissions were far too jerky and unrefined for the road in the early s . pininfarina faced a tall order in adopting one for the fx . pininfarina turned to british racing outfit prodrive , a company that had made a name for itself with subaru in the world rally championship in the early s . prodrive was already in the process of gauging public interest in a semi automatic transmission for the street that could be fitted directly to a manual gearbox buttons on the steering wheel would shift gears while an electronic control unit worked the clutch . pininfarina saw an opportunity to collaborate , and assigned an engineer whose sole responsibility was working with prodrive to adapt their system for the fx . prodrive transmission was mated to the stock ferrari six speed manual gearbox already in the testarossa that garella had picked out . it wasn t a perfect fit . while the clutch was hydraulic , engaging different gears was pneumatic . prodrive had a system that was a little bit complex , says garella . it had a number of problems and was not really straightforward . the transmission was going to need continued work , and in fact required constant attention from mechanics to be driveable at all . but it was the best option available at the time . the rest of the fx internals came together without much issue . pininfarina moved the radiator from the back of the car to the front , to make room for the rear mounted transmission s additional electronics , and to capitalize on the increased airflow from the redesigned front end . the engine was tuned , and the exhaust was converted into a snarling straight tubi system . the catalytic converters on the . liter v were removed , pushing its horsepower northward . everything else was left stock . with the engineering complete , garella and pininfarina turned to what they do best the exterior design . the result was stunning , if polarizing . though the deeply inset headlights bring to mind camaros of the era , and quickly became dated , sculpted dual intakes bring an elegance to the aggressive slope of the front end . massive , scooping hips presaged the ferrari modena designed , of course , by pininfarina that wouldn t come out until . at the rear , the car s roofline flows down like cooling lava , smoothing out into a point . quad round taillights from the ferrari punctuate a dark mesh grille . from the rear three quarter perspective , the fx radiates aggression , and tremendous potential for speed . the transparent plastic cover over the mid mounted engine has twelve portholes one for each cylinder that simultaneously invite and distort the view inside a ferrari funhouse . a stylized fx logo on top of the engine makes it clear this is no run of the mill ferrari . it is the only such emblem on the car . pininfarina tested the design in its on site wind tunnel , and came away pleased . the car was definitely better than the testarossa , says garella . and i think it was a quite attractive design for the car at that time . then chairman sergio pininfarina personally showed the completed fx to gianni agnelli , the former head of ferrari parent company fiat , who simply said we are lucky to have such clients . pininfarina built the entire outer shell from carbon fiber , which is lighter than aluminum , stronger than steel , and was , at that time , unfathomably expensive . it was also difficult to work with , as very few companies had experience with the material . pininfarina went through three suppliers before finding the quality necessary . the pininfarina office in germany originally constructed the prototypes , but after several mishaps and botched models , the work was brought back to the in house design center in cambiano , italy . at one point , pininfarina built an entire bonnet for the fx and sent it to brunei , just to see how it reacted to the sun and humidity of the stifling south asian climate an exercise that would prove prophetic . the quality gradually improved . we worked a lot to have perfect surfaces , says garella . at the end , it was the best carbon fibre body brunei had . we are lucky to have such clients . pininfarina completed the fx in late , with the transmission being its crowning but still problematic achievement . it was unlike anything done before . pininfarina built three fxs , and continued experimenting with the prodrive transmission , adding it to a couple ferrari f s more than a year before ferrari made its f f the first production car with a semi automatic transmission , in . pininfarina even put one in another brunei project , the equally evasive jaguar xj known internally as the j . two were built one caught fire and was destroyed , the other s location is simply unknown . delivering a car to the royal family of brunei isn t as simple as rolling up in a transporter . pininfarina often loaded the cars into a massive antanov aircraft , then sent them to brunei unfinished and had crews complete the work on site . the cars needed to be perfect before the royal family saw them . occasionally , this led to panic inducing deadlines . the team once flew a custom bentley b to brunei the night of a birthday party for prince jefri , hakeem s father . condensation from the flight made the car soaking wet , and many of the electronics weren t working . the car had to be hand dried , and delivered to the palace in the nick of time . hours later , though , garella got a call that the steering wheel wouldn t line up perfectly straight . the team pulled the wheel apart and were still working when prince hakeem suddenly walked outside to present the car to his father and the entire court . garella hid behind a pillar the royal family was not pleased to find their newest vehicle in pieces . around am , brunei officials seized their passports , effectively holding them hostageanother time , converting a ferrari gto to right hand drive had somehow caused the turn signal indicator to stop automatically returning . the team began repairing the problem at pm and as time went on , their hosts grew impatient . around am , brunei officials seized their passports , effectively holding them hostage . garella and the team stayed up to finish the work , and reclaimed their passports around am . i think still that this was the longest night of my life , he says . yes it was stressful but also fantastic . i love it , for an engineer to have the possibility to do a project with an almost unlimited budget is a lifetime dream and i was there . to garella s relief , there weren t any such difficulties with the fx . in early , garella and a select few associates made the , mile trek to brunei to deliver the three custom ferraris during the height of the royal family s car buying frenzy , he made this trip every other month . the cars came off the plane ready to be presented , and prince hakeem was very pleased with his new toys . satisfied with the progress of the build months prior , hakeem had ordered three more fxs this time , based on the newly released f m , a lighter , faster platform that would come with an extra horsepower , a lightweight crankshaft , and titanium connecting rods . not only that , but the family decided to send the new cars to oxfordshire , england based williams f , one of the most successful teams in formula one history , in order to better tune and refine the complicated transmission . five of garella s fxs were painted the same familiar ferrari red the other , fx no . , was painted a deep sapphire blue . it s the only fx that actually made it to williams , and the only fx that escaped the decaying garages of brunei . once it had possession of the car , williams used a team from their f arm to build the new and improved transmission system in fx no . . they replaced the prodrive components , taking special care to remove all prodrive branding . williams plugged in the semi automatic unit they had been using in formula one since , and ran immense amounts of wiring through the car . they also replaced the buttons on the steering wheel with paddles . the paddles in the fx appear primitive by today s standards they are made of metal , with red on the left for down shifts , and green on the right for up . but it was shaping up to be a marked improvement over the first fx . the transmission was still being tuned when the asian markets crashed . in the summer of , the free fall of the thai baht sparked a domino effect that spread across the asian markets , and quickly set off a global financial meltdown . buoyed by its vast oil reserves , brunei emerged relatively unscathed . the following year , however , a company called amedeo development corporation owned and operated by prince hakeem s father , jefri collapsed , leaving behind billion in debt . prince jefri s brother , the sultan , ordered a review of the country s financials vanity fair once reported that accountants were assigned to the case and found jefri had raided some billion of brunei s oil funds as his personal piggy bank , using amedeo to fund extravagant public and personal projects . jefri s exploits during this fantastic spending spree have since become the stuff of legend . his family of four wives and at least children lived lavishly across london , paris , los angeles , and elsewhere . he commissioned life sized bronze sculptures of couples having sex , just to offend his more conservative brother mohamed . he owned a foot yacht named tits , and called the lifeboats nipple and nipple . court documents would reveal that jefri ultimately spent some million with pininfarina alone . some estimates pegged the total number of cars in his priceless collection at more than , others , closer to , . other heads of state and wealthy people have had impressive collections of bespoke cars , but i am pretty sure the royal family of brunei is unparalleled in this regard , says ed kim , vice president of industry analysis for auto pacific . certainly nothing like what they were doing back then is happening now . though jefri was the chief financier of the collection , his brother the sultan , who once held the title of richest man alive , certainly has his own excessive and frightening habits he owns and regularly pilots a boeing with a gold and crystal interior , and participated with jefri in a sex harem that included dozens of women . some of these women were models and actresses that later claimed they were lured into joining , and sued the brothers . it would be na ve to suggest the sultan was unaware of his family s obscene spending . garella personally witnessed private concerts by the likes of the gipsy kings and sting on palace grounds . michael jackson once performed in brunei for a fee of million , in a stadium built specifically for the event . williams made a phone call . american businessman dick marconi picked upstill , the sultan has held his throne for nearly years , and successfully distanced himself from the global scorn that forced jefri to flee the country . the sultan removed jefri from his positions as brunei s minister of finance , and head of the brunei investment agency bia , that housed the oil funds that jefri had likely been using to keep amedeo afloat . in , prince jefri turned over his assets . meanwhile , the prince s groundbreaking ferrari sat in a british workshop , suddenly with no owner . williams made a phone call . american businessman dick marconi picked up . about . million and years later , i m staring at my reflection in the indigo carbon fiber weave of ferrari fx no . in tustin , california . this is mr . marconi s baby , says marconi museum operations director todd ottosen , more than once , as he carefully lowers the entire back section of the fx . before closing it , he makes a show of effortlessly lifting the carbon fiber engine bay up and down , with two fingers . pretty cool , huh ? you can t even do that with the f . the marconi museum is located inside an unassuming warehouse in a southern california business park and houses one of the most eclectic , star studded car collections you could conjure up . ferraris from every era are scattered about , along with icons like the delorean dmc and lamborghini countach , and ultra rare finds like the cizeta v t and aston martin db ar zagato . several retired indy and formula one racecars are parked on the floor others , like the mclaren mp that ayrton senna drove during his championship season , hang vertically from the walls like mile per hour drapes . the museum is the passion project gone wild of dick marconi , a co founder of herbalife , who has used his fortune to bring automotive brilliance to the public . admission is free there s a suggested donation that benefits the museum s childrens foundation . this is where ferrari fx no . has spent the majority of its life , occupying a space between the ar and another pininfarina creation for the royal family a forest green convertible based on the ferrari four seater , called the venice like the fx , there are several of these still in brunei , possibly dozens if you count the custom sedan and wagon versions . though it may be a relatively pedestrian existence for the fx , one of the most compelling automotive mysteries in a world full of them , the car s allure is still strong . rumor has it marconi has repeatedly turned down offers to sell the car for no less than million . automotive journalist winston goodfellow is one of the few people to have driven the fx outside of marconi museum mechanics , when he reviewed the car for an issue of forza magazine in . in his article , goodfellow raved that the low weight and advanced technology in the fx made it a thrill to drive while this ferrari pulls with more alacrity than any tr , what makes the fx truly extraordinary when run hard through the gears is the way the engine works in concert with the transmission it delivers an excitement that the heavier , production trs or any or can t touch . one thing i will say , that does still linger , is it remains one of the coolest things i ve driven . fifteen years after that drive , the experience of the williams transmission is still clear in his mind . one thing i will say , that does still linger , is it remains one of the coolest things i ve driven , he remembers . goodfellow s impressions may provide the clearest perspective to the car s potential , and that of the williams semi automatic system , that we ll ever have . you could feel it going through the motions of what it did , even though it was all paddles . that gave it this perfect blend of coming digital couple with beautiful analog sensations . it had a unique taste that was most appealing , particularly that howling exhaust . some of the cars at the marconi museum get out more than others . the fx , for example , made a couple of appearances in local car shows during the s , but has otherwise been a homebody . on a routine test drive about two years ago , the fx limped back to the museum spewing white smoke , and hasn t run since . in total , fx no . has approximately , miles on the odometer . if they still function a big if it s likely that the five other fxs have rarely or more likely , never been driven at all . few have seen it fewer still have seen what it s capable of . vincent marconi , a year old mechanic , who also happens to be dick s grandson , has seen the fx s guts spewed out all over the floor . last year he and larry englehart , owner of ferrari technology in nearby orange , began the long journey of making sense of the transmission , and getting the car running again . it s still a work in process , and it s a slow process , says vincent . it s a combination of f and space technology , and there are no schematics . vincent describes a system truly ahead of its time . the gearbox is the stock six speed from the f m , with small modifications to the gears and differential . the attached prodrive semi automatic system features fascinating technologies , like an early version of automatic rev matching to prevent power loss between shifts . prodrive appears to have never brought its innovative transmission to market , unable to smooth out the wrinkles . even now , it will likely take a williams technician visiting the car again to get the computer systems ready to run . vincent marconi and englehart plan to get back around to finishing the project one day , but the museum has lots of cars that need attention and the fx isn t very high on the priority list . still , the payoff is enticing . it works bitching once everything is rocking and rolling , says vincent . lt ! function var l function new pym . parent ferrari photo gallery graphic , m snippet thin gtgarella , now , resembles his younger self , though the glasses are thinner and the mustache is grayer . he remains a force in innovative design and construction . he spent years at pininfarina , the final seven as head of special projects . in recent years , he s been the invisible hand behind two of the most celebrated one off designs of the past decade . the first is the pininfarina new stratos , a modern interpretation of the famous , wedge shaped lancia stratos . the other is the ferrari p by pininfarina , commissioned by the filmmaker jim glickenhaus . it s built on a ferrari enzo but completely redesigned to pay homage to the legendary ferrari p . garella would also become project manager for the company s associated racing program , designing the p competizione , which was built on a ferrari f scuderia and homologated to race in the nurburgring hours . in , it placed th overall and won its class . last year , the team debuted and raced the scg , a new variation that shattered the lap record at the ring and fielded two entries in the hour race . all of the glickenhaus racing cars are street legal , and compete with new york license plates . another one off project is underway , but that s all garella can say . in an email , glickenhaus described garella as being not fazed by problems and willing to work until they are solved . still , the fx holds a special place on his long list of accomplishments . garella often visits the us to attend events like the pebble beach concours d elegance in monterey , and in , he looked up the marconi museum and made the trip down the coast to tustin . dick marconi was waiting for him , and the two posed for pictures with the fx a legend created by one and saved by the other . the car wasn t running then , but its futuristic carbon fiber was still there as were its eye popping design , and its embattled but ambitious transmission . its advancements in design , construction , and technology make the fx a sort of automotive missing link . the fx was definitely ahead of its time for having a semi automatic gearbox , says kim . the sultan and his brother really were r ampampd for many high end automakers . they were building custom bespoke cars that not only had unique bodies and interiors , but sometimes exotic technologies . and the money was limitless . garella maintains that the true masterpiece of the fx is its body . not for the design , but for the materials . today , carbon fiber technology is commonplace in supercars , and even many sports cars . bmw now uses carbon fiber reinforced plastic cfrp for both the frame and the body of their i , as well as multiple parts of the new series luxury sedan . the fx helped set the stage for a new movement in mass production as automakers aim for weight savings to improve performance and fuel economy . and the money was limitless . for me personally , and i think also for pininfarina , it was the project in which we learned most about carbon fiber and the composite process , he says . i think for sure that was the project where we brought back the maximum know how at that point . never intended for public consumption , the fx led to the adoption of many new ideas that are common practice in the cars that drive our streets every day . for now , it waits in the museum for an overhaul that may never come , in exile from those that commissioned it the product of a man who poured years into making it a reality and would use it to influence his trend setting creations in the future . when he visited the marconi museum , the sight of the fx was a welcome one for garella . prince hakeem wanted to have all the cars with semi auto transmission , says garella . he thought that this was the future . he was right . design by james barehamproduct by frank biedited by michael zelenko and chris ziegler lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gt