 nearly a decade ago , soundhound founder keyvan mohajer took an idea to a group of investors . he wanted to make a system that let people talk to computers casually , as if speaking to another human . that was not a new idea of course s a space odyssey had a talkative computer as one of its main characters . but mohajer believed such a thing was no longer science fiction and could become commonplace . the only problem ? it might take years to build it . this is what soundhound was originally supposed to doinvestors were enamored with the idea , but not mohajer s timeline . they said , ten years is a long time , can you show me something that will happen in three years ? he recalls . with that , midomi was born , a service that would let you hum the tune of a song to identify it . two years later , in , he launched soundhound , which did the same thing for music overheard on the radio or in the background of a tv show . now , nearly a decade after that pitch to investors , mohajer s original vision is here in the form of hound , a voice search app that can handle incredibly complex questions and spit out answers with uncanny speed . right now , you have to ask those questions inside the hound app , but the company hopes to get the technology everywhere even your toaster . that may never happen , but the company s demonstration of hound which was fairly scripted in our case is astonishing enough to make me believe it s a possibility . mohajer started with a zinger . what is the population of capital of the country in which space needle is located ? he asked briskly . it s an oddly worded question , but intentionally so , meant to show how well it can extract and process what s being said . ask it on any other service even wolfram alpha , and you ll get the digital equivalent of a head scratch . but here , a robotic voice instantly replied , the population of washington , dc is , . there were two washingtons there , and it got the right one . in another test , he asked , how many days are there between the day after tomorrow and three days before the second thursday of november in ? the app nailed it again . hound feels a lot like google s voice searchhound the app functions and feels almost exactly like google s voice search , but seems much faster at identifying words and delivering answers . in our demo , which contained several dozen scripted questions but also some impromptu ones , the words coming out of mohajer s mouth popped up on screen nearly as fast as he was saying them , and hound would pipe back with an answer faster than seemed possible . mohajer says the speed comes from soundhound combining two technologies that are typically separated on competing services . hound is doing both voice recognition and natural voice understanding in a single engine , whereas rival services break them up into separate steps , first transcribing your question , then extrapolating what you were asking about . that said , our test also took place over wi fi , and in a perfectly quiet room , making it impossible to tell whether hound maintains these speeds in the real world . this is a personal assistant without a personalityunlike siri or cortana , hound doesn t have a personality . instead , it s a sass free robotic voice . one other area where it s different is the number of sources it s pulling from . from the outset , hound will have about domains , or services it s tying into through apis things like currency converters , news sites , flight status information , and navigation . mohajer says the plan is to ramp that up into the millions . siri launched with domains , and three years later it s at about new domains , so it takes a long time , he says . for example , with hound s deal with expedia , you can ask hound to find you a hotel in seattle that costs less than a night , that has free wi fi , parking , and a continental breakfast . it s the same information you could get on expedia s site , of course , but here , there s no need to click on a bunch of filters . there are other simple tools it s linked up to as well , things like a mortgage calculator from a real estate site mohajer would not disclose and a speech based game of blackjack where you can place bets with your voice . for everything that doesn t get picked and assigned to one of hound s sources , the app defaults to microsoft s bing . that means web results , including videos and images , are all shown in an integrated browser . sometimes that s just fine , but in similar tools like siri and cortana , web results are a sign the system couldn t keep up with what you re asking of it . mohajer contends that by kicking people to web results , nobody ends up feeling disappointed , though i d argue that if it happens enough you ll just stop using the app entirely and forget about it . i wasn t quite able to push the boundaries of hound beyond our demo , something users will get a chance to do once the service launches today . this has been designed to replace google , but it can t just yetthat brings up one of the weaknesses of hound in its current form it s not available as a replacement to other voice assistants . developers will be able to integrate it into their own apps and hardware creations through a development platform called houndify , something mohajer believes will be widely adopted . our vision is that everything can be enabled to have this interface , from millions of phones to billions of other types of devices like consumer electronics and cars , mohajer says . we can t be the company to build this for every company we need to enable them to do this for themselves . but until that happens , most will know hound for its app , which will be available only as an invitation only beta on android to start , followed by ios where it will exist as a stand alone app . that s a lot like how siri was a third party app before apple bought it , and how google still is on ios . it also means that you need to have a very specific reason to use hound over those built in options on both platforms . you still have to go out of your way to use thisit s worth noting that hound is arriving at a time when google and apple are stepping up efforts to add context to the things people are looking at on their phones , often using voice interfaces , which could almost entirely remove the usefulness of hound for simple searches . last week , google unveiled now on tap as part of its upcoming android m release , a feature that brings its now service inside of every app and gives the company an incredible amount of context for why you re looking for something . it hopes it will be good enough that you never even need to leave an app to pull up something you might search for . apple is also rumored to be working on a feature called proactive that attempts to put relevant apps and information in front of users without them having to search for it in the first place . that hurdle of having to find and launch hound could change if app developers build the voice search into their apps , or if soundhound and its technology get snapped up by one of these larger players . in the meantime , mohajer believes that hound s performance and experience will be enough for people to go that extra step of launching it before they ask , what they ve been doing with the company s audio recognition apps for years . just because it s easier to get to something is not enough for me to choose it . i don t use siri for food , i use yelp , even though siri uses yelp data , because they have a better experience . i use google maps on ios instead of apple maps , even though apple maps is more integrated , he says . i think if you deliver something that is substantially better , people will use it . 