 cobalt mined by child laborers in the democratic republic of the congo may be entering the supply chains of major tech companies like apple , samsung , and microsoft , as well as auto manufacturers like volkswagen and daimler ag , according to an investigation from amnesty international and afrewatch , a drc based non government organization . the ampnbspreport , released today , lays out how cobalt mined by children as young as seven is sold to a drc based subsidiary of huayou cobalt , a chinese company . the subsidiary , congo dongfang mining international cdm , processes cobalt ore and sells it to companies in china and south korea , where it is used to manufacture lithium ion batteries for use in smartphones and electric cars . amnesty contacted multinational companies listed as customers of the battery makers , based on investor documents and public records . most said they were unaware of any links to the companies cited in the report , while others , like apple and microsoft , said they were evaluating their supply chains . amnesty says that none of the companies provided enough information to independently verify the origin of their cobalt supply . the investigation is based on interviews with people who work or have worked in informal , artisanal cobalt mines in the drc , including children between the ages of and . amnesty and afrewatch obtained photographic and video evidence of the hazardous conditions in which many of the miners work , often without basic protective gear or safety guidelines . the children interviewed for the report said they work up to hours a day to earn between and , and typically work above ground , gathering and washing rocks from defunct industrial sites or nearby lakes and rivers . it wouldn t take a great deal to help these children s lives . they carry heavy loads , face physical abuse , and are regularly exposed to dangerous chemicals and dust , the report says , risking long term lung disease and in some cases , death . prolonged exposure to cobalt dust has been linked to hard metal lung disease , which is potentially fatal , and many artisanal mines are poorly constructed and ventilated . at least artisanal miners died in the drc between september and december , according to information gathered from a un operated radio station , though the report notes that the true figure is likely much higher since many accidents are not reported . it s a real tragedy , and we think that the companies that are profiting from the cobalt , which ends up in our smartphones , should be part of the solution , says mark dummett , business and human rights researcher at amnesty . it wouldn t take a great deal to help these children s lives . the drc accounts for at least percent of the world s cobalt supply . the country s mining industry used to be dominated by a state run company , but it collapsed with the rest of the congolese economy during the s . since then , the government has encouraged artisanal miners to dig for cobalt in areas deemed unsuitable for industrial mining , and it has passed regulations on environmental and safety practices . but amnesty argues that the government has not authorized enough zones for artisanal mining , forcing many to strike out in unregulated areas , and has done little to enforce its rules . the report also documents cases where government workers extorted money from artisanal mine workers by making them pay for access to unauthorized areas . amnesty international and afrewatch according to estimates from unicef , there were about , children working in mines across the drc s southern region in , and the us department of labor has listed congolese cobalt as a good produced by child labor since . a drc government study , cited by amnesty , estimated that there are between , and , artisanal miners in the country s southern region , most of whom are self employed . nearly percent of the congolese population lives in poverty , according to the world bank , and the country ranks next to last on the un s human development index . ongoing conflict in the country has been fueled in part by its vast supply of natural resources . a us law that went into effect last year under the dodd frank act requires public companies to ampnbspdisclose whether their supply chains involve so called conflict minerals tin , tungsten , tantalum , and gold which have been linked to violence in the drc . dummett says similar regulations are needed for cobalt , which has not been linked to any armed groups in the country , though some question the effectiveness of the dodd frank approach . a report from assent compliance , a canadian it firm , found that percent of the , companies that filed conflict minerals reports couldn t say for certain whether their products are conflict free . others fear that the high costs associated with the regulations could entice businesses to leave the drc altogether , which would only exacerbate the country s poverty . some say required disclosures could actually hurt the drc whether or not this could have any impact is questionable given the rather mitigated impact of dodd frank on the ground , says christoph vogel , a researcher at zurich university and senior fellow at nyu s congo research group , who was not involved in the amnesty investigation . rather than improving human rights conditions and livelihoods , the law s practical implementation has so far contributed to increasing poverty and economic exclusion while the previous criminal networks largely continue to operate . in written responses provided to amnesty , apple and microsoft said they could not verify whether the cobalt in their products originates from the drc , or whether the cobalt is processed by cdm or huayou . samsung sdi , which supplies batteries for samsung and apple , said it is impossible to determine whether its cobalt is sourced from the drc , and that both cdm and huayou are not in its supply chain . it acknowledged having a relationship with l ampampf material , a south korean battery maker that was also implicated in the report , though it claimed that its materials were sourced in japan . volkswagen , daimler , and huawei denied doing any business cdm or huayou . volkswagen acknowledged a relationship with tianjin lishen , a chinese battery maker implicated in the report , while daimler could not confirm whether cobalt in its parts originates in the region due to the high complexity of automotive supply chains . we are currently evaluating dozens of different materials , including cobalt , in order to identify labor and environmental risks as well as opportunities for apple to bring about effective , scalable and sustainable change , apple said in its statement . as we gain a better understanding of the challenges associated with cobalt we believe our work in the african great lakes region and ampnbspindonesia will serve as important guides for creating lasting solutions . companies have a responsibility to assure that these human rights abuses aren t taking place . companies still face major challenges in tracing their supply chain , says lawrence heim , managing director at elm sustainability partners , a consultancy that advises businesses on conflict minerals . the consultancy has no business relationships with the companies cited in the amnesty report . confidentiality agreements make it difficult for components makers to verify the origin of raw materials , heim says , and minerals gathered from artisanal mines are often lumped together for processing without any formal tracing . he also takes issue with amnesty s accusatory tone toward car makers and tech companies , saying it s unfair to criticize their cobalt supply chain policies when they re still working to adhere to disclosure rules on conflict minerals . in their report , amnesty and afrewatch call on the drc government to expand its list of authorized artisanal mining zones , and to enforce safety regulations at all sites . it also urged multinational companies to conduct due diligence on their cobalt supply chains , and to publicly disclose their policies . in this day and age , it s not that complicated to work out whether human rights abuses are involved in the sourcing of products on the other side of the world , dummett says . the world s getting smaller and companies have a responsibility to assure that these human rights abuses aren t taking place . ben radley , a researcher at the international institute of social studies in the hague , says any plan to eliminate child labor must address the economic factors that underpin it . you can t stop children working if it is their only means to an education or they have no other alternative to sustain themselves and their families , radley said in an email , adding if we are serious about stopping child labor in the mines , the incentives for them to do so must be there . otherwise , they will soon return . 