 less than two months after acquiring acompli , microsoft is releasing an outlook for ios app today . microsoft s new app is simply a rebrand of acompli s existing app , but the company is promising new features in the future . read our original report below on how acompli , and ultimately outlook for iphone , came to be . for all the advances the smartphone has brought us , our email is still largely chained to the desktop . stock email apps have never had half the features of their desktop counterparts , and they re all but useless when it comes to scheduling meetings or finding your files . they were built under the assumption that you would rarely want to do more than check your messages and send the occasional reply while on the go , saving the real work for when you were in front of a larger screen and physical keyboard . and in the early days , that assumption was right . but since the dawn of the app store , developers have been trying to break email free of the desktop . last year the stylish mailbox arrived in the app store , drawing cheers for the way it made inboxes easy to process even on a smaller screen . swipe gestures made it fun to archive messages by the dozens , and a lightning fast infrastructure made sending messages feel as fast as texting . nearly , people signed up to use the app before it was even available . a month after launch , mailbox was acquired by dropbox , and its team has continued to build features aimed at making the unending burden of email more bearable . making the unending burden of email more bearablebut over the past month , a new buzz has emerged from some of the same early adopters who first fell for mailbox . they re saying that acompli , a new free email app launching today on iphone , represents the next step in unchaining email from the desktop . it s a professional grade email solution with a host of features that should appeal to office workers microsoft exchange support on day one , one tap integration with your calendar , and a dead simple way of accessing recently emailed files and people . in short it s the outlook for iphone that microsoft hasn t yet built . javier soltero didn t start off wanting to do email . a former chief technology officer at vmware , he quit at the end of to become an entrepreneur in residence at redpoint ventures . like many developers , he hoped to create an app his users would return to every day . satish dharmaraj , a partner at redpoint , encouraged him to think about email . soltero says he was skeptical at first another email app ? but the more he researched it , the more discontent he found with mobile email particularly from people whose offices use exchange servers . when it comes to alternative email clients for their mobile devices , exchange users have been underserved . silicon valley , where many email apps are built , tends to view exchange users with derision , soltero says . you still can t add an exchange account on mailbox , for example . people here do not fathom the possibility of anyone using exchange , he says . next thing you know you ll be wearing sweatpants and a fanny pack ! but we know , because we looked at the data , that there are close to million exchange inboxes out here . and curiously enough , it continues to grow at a percent clip . exchange is planet earth s preferred email delivery system . and that s perfectly fine ! acompli also supports google accounts . with stock apps limited largely to sending and receiving messages , soltero saw a business opportunity . acompli helps you avoid desktop email in two ways , both of which get their own tab at the bottom of the inbox . first , an integrated calendar lets you scan upcoming appointments and set meetings without ever leaving your email app . the calendar also appears in the message compose window , and tapping it will pull up two options you can either send your availability , highlighting times with a couple taps , or create a calendar invitation for a specific time . all of it can be done in seconds , with your thumb , while you re eating a salad . acompli s second move away from the desktop lies in its approach to files . a significant number of the files we need for work are already sitting on our email servers , but good luck finding them with a stock email app . acompli puts your recent files in a tab , letting you scroll through them quickly and attach them to messages with one tap . it takes a similar approach to your contacts instead of making you look them up in a separate app , it has a people tab that keeps a rolling list of your recent contacts . in effect , it s a dynamically generated list of your most important contacts , and when it works it s great . unfortunately , it considers marketing emails from e commerce sites and social media to be contacts , and includes them in the people tab , making it less useful . setting up meetings with a couple of tapstaken together , acompli s design encourages you to start thinking of your iphone as a workstation in its own right . there s something highly satisfying about responding to an emailed request for a meeting with a couple of taps . no more switching between several apps and exchanging multiple emails to find a time that works now you can do it in a single place . and anyone who emails lots of files will likely appreciate having them available at their fingertips . after a month testing acompli , i m still not sure it s the email app for me . i do three things with mobile email , and three things only check for crises , fire off quick replies , and aggressively archive anything that doesn t need a response . mailbox s big buttons and ridiculous speed make it ideal for my needs . but there are almost as many ways to do email as there are people receiving it , and my hunch is that a good chunk of them will see acompli as the email app they ve been waiting for . for those who use complex labeling schemes and filters , mobile email is still a long way from replicating the best desktop experiences . but it s finally starting to catch up . 