 like so many ambitious young hardware startups these days , lockitron used crowdfunding to sell people a product before they built it . the company promised users a keyless door lock that paired with bluetooth , wi fi , and nfc , allowing customers to unlock it remotely or with a simple proximity sensor . lockitron ran its own crowdfunding campaign and managed to collect more than . million in pre orders for around , units it aimed to start shipping in march of . the success of that campaign and press attention on the company drove another , pre orders through its website . fast forward to today and lockitron has shipped just over , units , less than percent of the orders it had taken over the past two odd years . and while this early version of the device does work , it can be a struggle to set up , has fallen short on battery life , and is missing prominent features . more than a few customers found themselves locked out after the product malfunctioned . our crowdfunded backers became the unfortunate guinea pigs , says co founder cameron robertson . in a survey sent out to customers , a question asked them to describe lockitron in three words . beta , potential , unreliable , read one response . our crowdfunded backers became the unfortunate guinea pigs . in august of last year the company realized it needed to start from scratch , and today lockitron is announcing the results . it has a new manufacturing partner and a completely redesigned product , called bolt . we made mistakes , we learned a lot , and now we are ready to deliver something that fulfills our ambition , says robertson . the new unit is set to start shipping this march for , roughly one third the cost of the original lockitron . lockitron s struggles are symptomatic of challenges many young diy hardware companies face . crowdfunding , which seemed like the new face of innovation a couple years ago , has been humbled by the complex realities of mass production . the first big hurdle for the company , after the rush of receiving so many orders , was figuring out how to get them all built . we didn t know the first thing about china , about how to find a good partner someone with domain expertise building something like a lock with discreet mechanical components , most of which were custom made , says robertson . we didn t know the first thing about china . the factory they settled on delivered working units , but couldn t keep pace with the promises the company had made around shipping . we got caught in a low volume production trap , says robertson . we had over , units on backorder , and they were producing a few hundred each week . lockitron had come out of the prestigious y combinator startup program , but that certainly didn t guarantee success they were able to build something that worked well for a demo and could endure testing in their lab , but they didn t have the capital to really field test something with the mechanical complexity of a lock . the complexities of testing were magnified by the fact that the product was expected to work in partnership with whatever lock customers already had on their door . the lockitron co founders with their original hand built prototype . lockitron ran its own crowdfunding campaign , but unlike kickstarter , they couldn t charge people for orders until they shipped . we had . million in orders but none of that capital to work with , so we were super resource constrained , says robertson . the company used amazon to take orders , but amazon s policy is not to charge until an item ships . kickstarter also uses amazon , but gets the money earlier by framing its transactions as donations , not pre orders . hardware products from established companies often get years of testing in the wild , using multiple prototypes , before finally being offered for sale . most of what we showed off in the video worked , but under ideal circumstances , says robertson . we tested against a fairly big lock library , but nothing like the diversity of old , discontinued , and well worn locks out in the real world . in the real world people have a crappy router . the same ideal conditions applied to things like battery testing . in the real world people have a crappy router several hundred feet away with a few thick walls in between , says robertson . the lockitron would struggle to stay connected , and that ended up being a big drain on battery . it was the summer of when the company started changing course . it found a new manufacturing partner , one that specialized in locks . and it created a new device that replaced customers existing locks entirely , instead of sitting on top , ensuring if it worked in testing , it would work on your door . lockitron actually ran a survey of customers who had received the first unit . the overwhelming advice was to trim features and ship something that just worked . they re interested in trying out and helping new companies . of the , people who ordered a lockitron , about , have canceled their orders so far . robertson says that the company has managed to help them keep the faith by being transparent about its struggles and communicating regularly about its progress . early on we started updating backers every two weeks like clockwork , and we re past updates now . we send them out via email to all backers as well as post them to our blog , says robertson . they re early adopters , and they re interested in trying out and helping new companies that are working to create new categories of products . lockitron isn t taking any chances with over promising this time . we are telling customers , if you pre ordered , you can be first in line for the bolt . but be aware that the first batch will be a sort of pilot , and that after a few months with them in the field , we will produce a version two that addresses any big issues . customers who backed the lockitron may have waited a while , but robertson says they are getting a more robust , functional , and affordable unit . it s unfair to ask somebody to wait two to three years , he said . but hopefully we re going to deliver them something of lasting value . verge video archives handup is like kickstarter for the homeless detours , season 