 antoine routon came to square enix montreal to work on the next big hitman game . he was one of the first employees at the studio , which was founded in with the intention of building big budget blockbusters but that all changed after less than a year . during that time , parent company square enix assessed its studios in europe and north america , and realized that none were focused on the booming market of mobile gaming . leadership decided that the young montreal studio would refocus on smaller games for smaller screens . i remember the day the news was announced , a lot of people s faces were really disappointed , says routon . while many people left , preferring instead to take new jobs working on blockbusters , others , like routon , saw the news as a challenge . those who remained split into small teams and spent two weeks prototyping ideas that they would then pitch to higher ups . there were only two restrictions on those ideas they had to be mobile , and they had to be hitman . routon , a programmer by trade , partnered with designer daniel lutz who had a wild idea to turn the stealth assassination series into a turn based board game . the pair spent those two weeks tinkering with yarn , paper , and plastic pieces from existing board games , before settling on the earliest version of what would become the surprise hit hitman go . the studio then followed that up with a similarly successful game based on tomb raider , and today sees the launch of another turned based adventure , this time set in the cyberpunk future of deus ex . with the go series , square enix montreal has carved out its own niche , creating something unique in the game development space . studios often fall into one of two camps on the one side you have the massive , , person teams that create blockbuster games , and on the other there are the tiny indie studios that build creatively ambitious games with few resources . square enix montreal straddles the line between those two extremes . it has the resources of a big company , but the size and some of the creative freedom of an indie . it s a studio that can make weird new games but attach them to hugely popular franchises . the only reason why we can act this way is because we re small , says routon . our way of working wouldn t work if we were massive . this dichotomy is clear in the studio itself . walking into square enix montreal is much like any large studio at first white walls , similar looking desks , and cardboard cutouts of famous video game characters aside from the fact that it s mostly empty . square enix montreal was originally built to accommodate a team of a few hundred people , but is currently home to around , who cluster together on one side of the office alongside a massive window with a fantastic view of mount royal . hitman go was really a turning point for me personally , and the studio . square enix montreal is also different from most big studios often called aaa studios in industry speak in that everyone , no matter their specialty , is forced to contribute in multiple ways . programmers help with design , and designers pitch ideas for art . it s a lot like an indie studio in that way , also far removed from the aaa space , which typically places developers into very specific roles . before coming to square enix montreal , routon wasn t just a programmer , he was an animation programmer . it was so specific , he says . and then i had to learn to do everything we can t have experts anymore . we can t have people who are experts in something and work in silos . because we re so small we need people who have one or two areas of expertise , and wide breadths of interests and skills . along with this surge of collaboration , or de siloing , a bonding effect filled the void of the departures . i think for the people that stayed , it brought us closer , says routon . there was a sense that this is what we want to do , and it s exciting . hitman go was really a turning point for me personally , and the studio . the game s success was followed by lara croft go in , which similarly took the core basics of a popular franchise in this case , lara s acrobatics and exploration skills and transformed them into a slick , turn based puzzle game that worked perfectly on a phone or tablet . both games racked up awards and modest sales , and hitman go was even ported to devices like the playstation and oculus rift . whereas many companies release rushed , free to play mobile tie ins to coincide with the release of big console games , square enix was doing something very different , dedicating an entire studio to making more crafted experiences designed to evoke the same kind of feelings as their console counterparts , but on a smaller scale . while the go games racked up the accolades , and helped establish square enix montreal as a mobile studio worth watching , it was actually another game that kept the development house going financially . hitman go wasn t the only prototype to come out of that two week game jam it was soon followed by the release of hitman sniper , a much more traditional kind of mobile game . nobody talks about sniper , says square enix montreal brand manager genevi ve st onge . but the truth is that it s the game that s pulling in the most revenue . it s driving us to keep making games , essentially . like routon , dominic allaire has been at the studio since its earliest days , and was excited about the prospect of switching from console to mobile . for me as a producer , i was excited about the challenge of being out of my comfort zone , he says . allaire is the producer on sniper , a game which changed a great deal from inception to release . what was originally envisioned as massive , premium game the kind of ipad experience that would set you back or so it was later adapted into a free to play experience , before the team settled on something in between . it s a game with beautiful d graphics , an experience that s constantly being updated with new features and content , much like a free game . whereas hitman go reimagined the franchise in a new context , sniper takes a very specific part taking out marks through the scope of a sniper rifle and fleshes it out into a competitive multiplayer game . the two hitman games came out of the same studio , but were extremely different . on one side , you had the critically acclaimed go , which was a carefully crafted game designed to last for a finite amount of time . sniper , on the other hand , was a lucrative , ongoing experience with a structure that tried to keep players engaged indefinitely . on one side you had the indie way of thinking , on the other the aaa way . and there was friction . there was a clear culture clash , says st onge . not negative , but just different approaches . this duality in culture made it more difficult to determine who we are and what our values are . there was a clear culture clash . deus ex go is an attempt to resolve those differences and make a more unified studio and hopefully create a better game in the process . half of the deus ex go team comes from the sniper side , while the other half is made up of people who worked on the go series . one of our objectives was to mix and match those teams , says allaire . the goal is to make a game with the tight , hand crafted feel of the go series , but with the ongoing updates of sniper . in addition to its main campaign , deus ex go will also feature new puzzles released every weekday for the foreseeable future . designer tienne giroux likens it to the new york times crossword puzzle . every day a new puzzle unlocks , he says , and friday is the really hard one . the relatively short length of the go games has been an ongoing complaint from players , and it s something the team wanted to fix with deus ex go . the game will also eventually feature a level editor so players can build and share their own puzzles . making new levels for lara croft go was super interesting , but it took months to create levels , says giroux . for deus ex go we built the system in a way that it wouldn t be so time consuming to make them . that includes a new editor that is able to generate puzzles without the need for an artist , which was one of the more time consuming aspects of the previous games . square enix montreal is a unique studio , but in a lot of ways it s also in keeping with square s desire to have individual studios focus on the one specific thing they re good at , whatever that may be . most recently , the company released i am setsuna , a classic style japanese rpg from a similarly small team dubbed tokyo rpg factory , built with the express purpose of building those kinds of old school experiences . outside of deus ex go , square enix montreal isn t saying what it s working on right now . but the studio has made a few recent hires that hint at desire to keep the indie like feeling it has carefully cultivated . those pick ups include teddy dief , an artist and designer best known for his work on the crowdfunded hit hyper light drifter , and renaud b dard , the sole programmer on seminal puzzle platformer fez , who most recently worked at below developer capy games in toronto . both were tempted to join by the idea of combining the creative freedom of an indie studio with the structure and resources of a big publisher . there was a lot of confidence in what we can achieve . i wasn t looking to take a job after we did hyper light drifter , says dief . i was just going to do the next thing , and float around , and find some new collaborators . he previously worked at both microsoft studios and disney , but spent the past four years as a full time indie . there were some adjustments coming to square enix montreal . dief says he spent his first few weeks at square enix montreal rearranging furniture to improve the creative energy , and he s particularly worried about his first canadian winter . but he notes that it hasn t been a major change creatively . i have not encountered anything in the two months i ve been here that has forced my hand to make a decision i didn t want to make . in that sense , i have felt very free , he says . the team here that created the go games created a niche for themselves , and there s just no reason to disrupt that . there s a reason to grow it , and explore new places with it , and see where it goes next . b dard echoes those thoughts , saying there was a lot of confidence in what we can achieve . so we do have a lot of creative freedom to just come up with something cool . for those early employees who decided to stick with square enix montreal through a relatively turbulent time of change , those statements are a form of validation . while sales and awards are great , the admiration of their peers is perhaps even more important , and having notable indies like dief and b dard not only want to join the studio , but feel at home once they re there , is a great example of that . whatever comes next , it s clear that much like the board game like take on hitman that set everything in motion it likely won t be what you expect . nothing that s worth making is obvious , says routon . read next deus ex s cyberpunk future makes for a brilliant puzzle game