 cars have a long history with augmented and virtual reality . designers rely on immersive systems , from cave rooms to augmented reality headsets , to visualize their work . drivers have been using heads up displays for decades , even if they re projected onto a windshield and not a pair of glasses . bringing microsoft s hololens headset to the auto industry , though , feels much bigger . unlike more specialized augmented reality tools , it s something that microsoft eventually hopes ordinary people will buy and use . and the quality of its images is nearly unprecedented you can almost suspend disbelief and imagine the objects it projects are real . that s what makes the company s latest partnership so potentially exciting and , at the same time , so frustrating . for about six months , says volvo global marketing vice president thomas andersson , microsoft and volvo have been working on a way to incorporate what they call mixed reality into the process of choosing a car . the result , first seen today , is a virtual showroom straight out of science fiction . located at microsoft s headquarters in redmond , it s a series of podiums and a fenced , raised platform clearly meant to support some shiny automotive prototype . the catch , of course , is that they re all empty . instead , a car dealer and potential buyer don hololens headsets , both of them seeing and interacting with the same holographic cars . the main stage holds a life size projection of volvo s unreleased s sedan , which buyers can see with different rims and paint jobs by using microsoft s air tap gesture . another demo strips away the outside of the car to reveal its engine and undercarriage , and another projects a short animation showing off some of the car s more unusual features , like a system that uses data from other cars to alert drivers about ice patches . people aren t reading car manuals anymore , and there s so much they miss . volvo has already experimented with virtual reality last year , it released a google cardboard app that simulated driving its xc suv . now , it sees complementary applications for hololens . people aren t reading car manuals or user manuals much anymore , and there s so much they miss , volvo senior marketing vp bj rn annwall tells me . the demos are a human , interactive , and undeniably novel replacement . a miniature holographic s , for example , shows off its many sensors by lighting them up as viewers move around its sides and back . like everything else in hololens , these models are astonishingly solid i was faintly aware of real world walls and floors , but only the way i might notice the screen behind a high powered projector . microsoft dislikes the term augmented reality , which immediately evokes visions of awkward smartphone apps and the lackluster google glass . as hololens senior director scott erickson says , augmented reality blocks your view with an overlay , while hololens can spatially map and respond to your surroundings . this is what lets its holographic car stay on that stage as you walk around it , without using special physical markers or external cameras . i noticed a little drift as i moved around the room , but not enough to be distracting . but as with many hololens demos , objects are coherent only at a very specific distance and angle . the very thing you want to do with the showroom model walk up close and get a sense of its scale chops it into pieces or makes it disappear altogether . the headset s lenses are easy to adjust , they re just incredibly unforgiving . i couldn t quite find a fit that didn t have me craning my neck to see a whole object , even if it was a volvo logo the size of a dinner plate . maintaining the showroom s illusion requires unflagging concentration . microsoft has taken a lot of criticism including ampnbspa fair amount from me for hololens constricted field of view , but it s a problem that seems theoretically solvable , even if ampnbspthe company has suggested we won t see dramatic improvement in the near future . likewise , developers can deal with the issue gracefully by showing small , self contained objects i m particularly fond of an architectural modeling tool co created by mapping company trimble . but microsoft has been consistently reluctant to talk about working within its prototype s limitations , or to acknowledge that those limits exist at all . it s possible to work within hololens limits , but microsoft seems reluctant to acknowledge themvolvo s miniatures are ingenious , but it s hard to say whether hololens , rather than a virtual reality headset , is the best option to look at a full sized car . microsoft and volvo both make compelling arguments it s wireless and doesn t block out the real world , rendering single objects is much less resource intensive than creating a whole environment , and it can be deployed anywhere , not just spaces with tracking systems . but that doesn t change the fact that it fails to deliver something that you can seamlessly walk up to and explore , which is the one thing that really matters . it s actually easier for me to feel the scale and physicality of a complete object in a fake world than to examine parts of one in the real world . hololens today feels like virtual reality headsets did two years ago raw material that designers are trying to hammer into submission instead of testing for strengths and weaknesses . many vr developers now tend to be unflinchingly honest about things that don t work , taking pride in describing the way they ve adapted their games to minimize nausea or handle extremely simple controls . with hololens development kits becoming more widely available next year , we should start getting more experiments , fewer secrets , and more frank discussion of the device s potential . for now , volvo hopes to publicly unveil some kind of hololens experience next year , although the exact date and the details of what we ll see remain unclear . we wouldn t be in this with microsoft right now if we didn t believe in it , says andersson . it s a matter of time and maturity , of course , but i think we really want to put this in front of customers in . 