 when apple ampnbspunveiled the seventh iteration of the iphone yesterday , it made sure to play up the camera . after all , the company has a ampnbspsmall army working on the iphone s ability to take photos . the device s camera is also often touted as one of its most cherished features , keeping apple s smartphone ahead of the competition . yet in recent years , ampnbspcompetition from samsung and others has caught up to apple s imaging lead . the newest apple devices , the iphone and iphone plus , are naturally more capable in the photo department than their predecessors . but apple is stepping up the game with what it s calling a machine learning enhanced image signal processor isp . marketing chief phil schiller says this ai powered isp performs as many as billion operations in just milliseconds . this takes some unpacking and demystifying , and we should start with the ampnbspimage apple used to promote the iphone event . the invite said see you on th , accompanied by an artful arrangement of colorful dots that were blurred out using a popular camera technique . the effect there has a name bokeh . the term comes from the japanese word boke , which means to blur or haze , or more specifically boke aji . as you might guess , that second phrase means the quality of said blur , and it was ampnbsppopularized by photo technique magazine editor mike johnston in , who suggested english speakers use the short version and pronounce it , boh kay . it s a fancy photographer term used to analyze and weigh the artistic properties of blurring out the background of images and , to a greater extent , sources of light behind the subject of a photo . it s how lights at night can turn into fuzzy , grainy orbs , as seen on apple s event invite . smartphones have been very bad at producing bokehthis effect is best achieved by using a shallow depth of field . a standard dslr camera can do this easily by way of a wide aperture , which increases the amount of light the lens allows in when you re snapping a shot . you also typically need a lens capable of producing a wide aperture , expressed in lower f stops . it s something that is very easy to achieve on a professional camera , as well with many mirrorless and lower cost point and shoots these days . to achieve the effect with a smartphone is more difficult . in the past , you could do so with a ton of tinkering , some generous light , and very careful focusing with the tap of your finger . still , because you don t have control over the size of the opening of the lens on your phone , it s hard to blur out the background on a mobile shot . this is where ai comes in . now , we re not discussing your standard voice ai like siri or cortana , or the kind of natural language software employed by google to autocomplete a search result or scan your email messages . this is a computer vision ai that aims to understand the contents of photos . this variety can be used for sophisticated tasks , like when ampnbspfacebook auto tags your friends faces or when ampnbspgoogle teaches an algorithm to identify cats on the internet . a more simple , but still challenging , problem is to determine what the subject of a photo is , and where that subject begins blending in with the background . this is very difficult for machines . software only understands a photo as a series of numeric values pertaining to changes in color . algorithms have no concept of the subject , foreground , or background of an image . it cannot delineate between a dog or a cat or a cloud in the sky . so ai researchers ampnbspuse machine learning to train these programs . by feeding it thousands upon thousands of examples , a software program can begin to understand and make sense of the contents of a photo . it can start to determine where the sky breaks with the treeline , and when two distinct objects happen to overlap , like an owner and their dog . these programs are often referred to as neural nets , because they process these examples in ways similar to the human brain , but with more emphasis on probability . so give software enough photos of cats , for instance , and the machine will begin determining with high accuracy whether a photo contains a cat like image . facebook is using this style of machine learning to help turn the contents of a photo ampnbspinto a spoken description for blind users . google does it within its google photos app , where you can search for mountains or beach and find photos without ever having tagged it or ascribed it a location . using machine learning , tech companies can train software by feeding it examplesfor apple , it sounds a little more basic and a lot more practical . the new iphone s camera and the dual camera lenses on the iphone plus are powered by software that aims to understand the contents of an image . once it identifies people and objects and backgrounds , the phone can automatically perform a number of tasks . those include automatically setting exposure , focus , and white balance . notably , ampnbspapple purchased a startup last year called perceptio that focused on doing this kind of advanced image recognition at higher speeds , without relying on huge stores of data . a more advanced feature , for the iphone plus specifically , allows it to blur it out the background in real time with a new portrait setting . this works because both lenses work together to capture nine layers of depth and create a so called depth map , a process described by a ampnbspnumber of patents apple was granted in the last year . with portrait mode , you can get crisp and tight dslr style images with the kind of bokeh once reserved for only pro grade shots . this is all aided by the device s new f . aperture setting , which lets in way more light and helps amplify the shallow depth of field . it s a neat trick , for sure , but it also helps apple bolster its argument that the iphone is the best smartphone camera on the market . regardless of whether that claim holds up , schiller made the point that the camera may probably be the best camera they ve consumers ever owned , simply because the ubiquity of smartphones trumps how many dslr cameras are out there . so schiller may be throwing out overly grand statements here , as per usual , but it is a distinct possibility the iphone could help a lot of smartphone owners take better pictures than ever . in true apple fashion , you won t need to do too much yourself . you ll select your mode , frame the shot , and let the phone do the heavy lifting . this time around , smarter software behind the scenes will pull more of the weight . apple s iphone event in minutes