 choosing a doctor can be a real pain . besides looking at a physician s credentials where they went to school , for instance or checking for online reviews that may not be truthful , there aren t many resources that can help someone decide if doctor a is more experienced or runs a better practice than doctor b . that s the problem that amino , a new website launching today , wants to solve . by analyzing data from . billion unique health insurance claims , the company thinks it can help people figure out if a doctor is experienced enough to treat a given condition , or even if they re any good . no reviews , just insurance datait s an interesting idea , but the data that amino works with health insurance claims may make some people uncomfortable . and because the startup s search results come in the form of numbers and bar graphs , instead of patient reviews , amino might have to work hard to convince its audience that the information it s presenting them with is actually useful . because amino won t just have to compete with companies like zocdoc and healthgrades it s also going to have to teach consumers a whole new way of evaluating their physicians , too . when a user searches amino s database , they re asked all the questions one might expect to answer when searching for a doctor online . users must name the kind of doctor they want to see , their health insurance company , their age , and their gender . but instead of showing patient reviews , amino draws on health insurance claims to give users an idea of how experienced doctors in a geographic area might be . a search for celiac disease in manhattan will return the names of doctors who treat patients with that condition most often a proxy for experience that amino says correlates with favorable outcomes . and a search for mammogram will do the same , but with the added bonus of letting users know how long it might take to get a biopsy following abnormal results . we don t have permission to name the sources at this time . it s their experiences with nearly , physicians in the us , says david vivero , ceo of amino and founder of rentjuice , a company later acquired by zillow . the company points out that it has health insurance claims from million americans on file . the data is anonymous , but it allows us to see where those folks have gotten care . thanks to partnerships with insurance companies , employers , health it companies , and large health care providers , amino has gathered data from . billion unique health insurance claims . the company isn t sharing who their partners are at the moment , but that could change , says iz conroy , communications manager for amino . all of the data is permitted to be used in amino s products and services , but unfortunately we don t have permission to name the sources at this time , she told the verge in an email . so , when people search amino s website , they re searching through billions of health records records that may or may not include their own . that s the information that amino wants its users to think about when they evaluate a physician and book appointments through the site , free of charge . the launch of a company like amino isn t surprising , says jay wolfson , a public health researcher at the university of south florida . it s the next logical step from what products such as webmd and healthgrades offer and that s something people have been talking about for some time , he says . i think this is a direction that we have all been wanting to go in . but it s not enough for amino to say that they ve gathered and modeled all this data , because the databases from which amino gleans its information are unclear , wolfson says and that could be a problem . right now , amino has a lot to prove . testing aminoi had the opportunity to try a demo version of the service , and it worked reasonably well . when i searched for migraines , the website showed me where a woman around my age in manhattan might be able to find an experienced neurologist . but other queries didn t work as expected . room for improvementa search for a female general practitioner who treats year old women with my health insurance , for example , turned up two doctors in my area neither of whom were my actual doctor . but when i used the term family practitioner with the same criteria , different doctors popped up , including my own . people who know that a general practitioner is distinct from a family practitioner will have no problem navigating amino s site , but for everyone else , that could be an obstacle . competing website zocdoc , on the other hand , has already figured out that lumping certain doctors into the primary care physician category can prevent this distinction from muddling search results . given my experience with the site , i d say that it s easiest to use if a patient already has a diagnosis , or if she knows exactly what type of specialist she needs to see . for those people , amino really could bring some clarity to their health care decisions . but attracting that audience might prove challenging , if only because a lot of people who find themselves in that situation opt to see the specialists that their primary care physicians recommend . amino could add clarity , but attracting an audience might be hardit s also unclear how users will respond to a website that focuses so heavily on numbers , while providing little interpretation . should a user favor a doctor who has treated people for a given condition in the past four years when other doctors in the area have seen five ? and how important is it that only percent of patients that a doctor sees have a sprained ankle ? a data driven approach might be refreshing to some , but the lack of patient reviews which , unlike health insurance claims , can be an indicator of bedside manner might turn others away . vivero doesn t seem too worried about how people will react to the graphs presented on amino . people want an unbiased set of information to help them feel good about their decision , he says . if we can give people more and more facts , we think that they can at least make a decision confidently on their own as opposed to making a decision which maybe wouldn t align with their values if they had all the data in front of them . people want an unbiased set of information . wolfson agrees amino could appeal to a lot of people , he says . the baby boom generation after world war ii has been very consumer oriented and the generation following us is far more tech savvy , and we are used to consulting computers to query everything from the price of gasoline to the options for hotels and airline tickets , he says . so i think some people would be interested in this . unfortunately , until amino releases more information about the data it s using , evaluating the quality of its service will be hard . data scientists introduce judgments into their analysis all the time , simply by opting to use one data source over another , says jennifer miller , a medical ethicist at new york university . so by making deals with one health insurance company , but not another , amino might be missing some important piece of information that can t be identified right now . so , what we need to do is see if amino s corporate judgments align with the way in which patients understand quality services , she says . people might understand what a quality apartment looks like in a service like zillow , but defining quality in health care is much more complex . increasing transparency might helpwhen asked about this , vivero answers that the data that powers amino isn t static . the company plans to add other data sources in the near future sources that will help amino get the clearest picture possible of a doctor s practice . that s probably a good thing , but if people don t know what those additional sources are , that won t mean much . then there s the question of security . the de identification process happens before the data hits amino s servers , and the startup s partners prohibit the company from re identifying the data , vivero says but analyzing private health information belonging to million americans is still a big responsibility . that means that amino will have to find ways to reassure the public that the company s data won t be re identified somehow , and that the startup s security protocols are top notch . i think the incentives for re identifying people in a database can be low , miller says , but you know that could change in the future . amino raised . million in its latest round of fundingright now , users can search amino s website free of charge , and the site doesn t feature any ads . vivero explains that this is meant to show that people can t use money to influence or limit the results that appear on amino . the company raised . million in its latest round of funding , which will help keep amino running this way for a while , vivero says . our belief is that we ll figure out a business model around our consumer products over time . and in the meantime , amino plans to make money by selling part of its analysis to private companies , he says . today s launch is just the beginning for amino , vivero says . we ll be doing lots and lots and lots of different products built off of the data set , because as you can see , you could build all sorts of products that focus on different decisions that people make . the company also plans to increase the amount of information included in its search results , which could add value to an already interesting product . of course , that increases the pressure on amino to show that all that data really can lead to better care . 