 in the last four months , new albums and singles from adele , coldplay , future , drake , beyonc , rihanna , and kanye west haven t been available on spotify upon their release . this trend will likely continue with upcoming albums from drake and beyonc avoiding the most popular streaming service when they drop . spotify is still the top streaming service around , but the company has done little to address the lack of new music from a large collection of major artists when their albums are released . the projects eventually show up all of the aforementioned artists outside of adele , beyonc , and kanye west brought their projects over to spotify a week after they were released but that first week hype and those streams can never be recaptured . the big question for spotify will this absence start to hurt its user growth in an increasingly competitive market ? why doesn t spotify have the new kanye album ? michael marzzacco marswaggo february , it s not a new phenomenon this trend has dates back to when adele s was kept off spotify because the service wouldn t accommodate her request for the project to be available exclusively to paying subscribers . in , beyonc passed on putting her eponymous album on the platform , and coldplay followed up in , keeping ghost stories off spotify and all other streaming services for four months . arguably the biggest blow came when taylor swift pulled her entire catalog off the service . will the absence of exclusives start to hurt spotify s user growth ? the single biggest complaint from artists about spotify has been its free tier , which is ad supported and pays out a much lower per stream rate than its premium service . artists feel like they re giving away their music too cheaply . financially , million paid user streams on apple music is more valuable to an artist than million streams from spotify made up of both free and paid users . and the company has so far been unwilling to change its stance that any album put on the service must be available to all users , although there are reports that spotify is softening its stance on the issue . spotify won t sell out the majority of its user base , but if it was willing to pay artists for exclusives like apple and tidal , could it win these big names ? potentially , yes . spotify once had its own exclusives it had led zeppelin s catalog exclusively for two years beginning in , before the deal expired but the number of major artists avoiding spotify as a launch partner for their new projects is steadily growing , and the last notable exclusive spotify had was a prince single last summer . spotify spotify prince dropped a single just for spotify fans ! gtpic . twitter . com snlldvmsex prince eg prince eg july , artists would likely be happy to have both the income from an exclusive , a key revenue stream in an age of declining album sales , and also be on the world s most popular streaming service . spotify paying artists for the rights to exclusive albums or to windowed releases the industry term for a temporary exclusive release like drake did with summer sixteen on apple music could help close the payment gap between premium only albums and albums on both tiers , alleviating the main issues keeping major artists off the platform during their release weeks , while not betraying its philosophical beliefs . it won t help smaller artists , but you can t win everything . right now , however , spotify is betting on the loyalty of its users and a robust feature set that outpaces just about every other streaming service around . it has strong features like discover weekly and spotify running , and new additions like video content from major networks that it believes can keep users engaged in the service , despite the disruptions a missed album release may cause . and landing exclusives is not cheap . spotify is betting on the loyalty of its usersdrake reportedly got paid around million in his deal with apple music , and rihanna , kanye , beyonc , and coldplay each got percent equity stakes from tidal when they signed on to be owners in the service . spotify did raise million last june , but even if it was willing to pay , it would likely have to engage in a bidding war with apple , tidal , and perhaps in the near future amazon and google . if spotify starts targeting artists for exclusive deals , the fees to lock artists up will inevitably rise , and that s a fight spotify can t win against companies like apple , which has hundreds of billions in the bank . luckily for spotify , the influx of exclusive deals hasn t seemed to hurt its growth at all it s reportedly nearing million paid subscribers which would mean that the rate at which it s adding new customers , and more importantly paying customers , is actually increasing . for its part , spotify doesn t see these exclusives as an issue , and told the verge it has no plans to pay for exclusives . we re not really in the business of paying for exclusives , because we think they re bad for artists and they re bad for fans , jonathan prince , spotify s head of communications told me . artists want as many fans as possible to hear their music , and fans want to be able to hear whatever they re excited about or interested in exclusives get in the way of that for both sides . of course , we understand that short promotional exclusives are common and we don t have an absolute policy against them , but we definitely think the best practice for everybody is wide release . he isn t wrong , exclusives can and do cause issues for both artists and fans . drake ampnbspmissed out on his first number one record because his video for hotline bling was exclusive to apple music , and they don t share music videos streaming numbers with billboard or nielsen music . but exclusives are also a reality of the music industry in , and avoiding them altogether could have long term ramifications . what happens when people burn through free trials that apple and tidal are currently offering to new users ? we re not really in the business of paying for exclusives . right now if you want to hear kanye west s new album the life of pablo , you can just sign up for a trial on tidal and listen to it for free . but what happens if beyonc releases her album on tidal in a few months and that trial has expired ? or when drake releases views from the on apple music , and your trial has already expired when you used it the last time he released an album ? spotify may also be banking on user burnout around exclusives . does it make more sense to just stick with your favorite service , even if means waiting a week , instead of bouncing back and forth between different exclusives , or paying for more than one streaming service at a time ? of course the inverse is also true . will users pay for spotify and a second service , or will they just stick with whichever service offers up their favorite artists content first ? that s the question that should keep spotify up at night will its users keep paying for a service that requires them to hunt for new music from the world s biggest artists during the first week of a release ? not having exclusive content can go from an inconvenience to a serious problem very quickly if spotify s competitors start to lock down superstars to their platforms for the foreseeable future . so what do you think ? should spotify go after exclusive releases to please its users and potentially end up in a bidding contest with apple music it likely can t win ? or should it stand pat , and lean on its excellent feature set while users wait an extra week for projects from the world s biggest artists ? poll does spotify need exclusive content from major artists ? yes , i need new music as soon as it amp s available no , i amp m happy to wait on the music and stay with spotify wait , people pay for music ? ampnbsp votes results