 last may , a member of alberta s rat patrol paid a visit to a farm on the outskirts of sibbald , a small town near the saskatchewan border . he found holes bored into the foundation of a grain silo and feces littering the trash pit telltale signs of a rat infestation , probably strong . he scattered aquamarine pellets of poison , then returned with seven pest control officers , including phil merrill , head of the province s rat patrol . using a crane , they hoisted the granary off its foundation , watching for anything scurrying out , one officer standing ready with a shotgun . all the rats were dead . the patrol stomped on the burrows , then burned the silo for good measure . it was a bit of a disappointment , merrill said . a few years earlier , they d gunned down rats at a single farm . enemy at the grateson the front lines of humanity s high tech , global war on ratsby josh dzieza last may , a member of alberta s rat patrol paid a visit to a farm on the outskirts of sibbald , a small town near the saskatchewan border . he found holes bored into the foundation of a grain silo and feces littering the trash pit telltale signs of a rat infestation , probably strong . he scattered aquamarine pellets of poison , then returned with seven pest control officers , including phil merrill , head of the province s rat patrol . using a crane , they hoisted the granary off its foundation , watching for anything scurrying out , one officer standing ready with a shotgun . all the rats were dead . the patrol stomped on the burrows , then burned the silo for good measure . it was a bit of a disappointment , merrill said . a few years earlier , they d gunned down rats at a single farm . merrill was swigging chocolate milk and recounting stories of past infestations as we drove toward the control zone , a sparsely populated buffer between alberta , the largest inhabited rat free region on earth , and the rest of the infested planet . there was the rat in an air canada cockpit chased down the tarmac , killed and the infestation at the dump poisoned , monitored with night vision cameras to be sure . keeping the province rat free requires constant vigilance , and every spring and fall , merrill and his team patrol the zone . all members of the genus rattus are banned from the province , but alberta is especially alert for one species the brown rat , also known as the wharf rat , sewer rat , and norway rat . that last one is a bit of a misnomer the species traces its origins to northern china and reached europe only in the th century , where it scurried aboard ships and made landfall in north america around the time of the american ampnbsprevolution . fast , strong , and highly adaptable , it s now present just about anywhere humans live or visit . a structure in alberta suspected of rat infestation and subsequently burned down . image courtesy of phil merrillalberta had the good luck of being one of the last places rats invaded , and in , the government decided to keep them out rather than try to control them once they gained a foothold . the first and most important step was to teach albertans some of whom had never seen rats before to fear and hate them . preserved rat corpses were exhibited at schools and fairs , and the government printed world war ii style posters depicting a province besieged by rodent hordes . the message was clear if the rats were to be kept out , all citizens had to do their part fortifying their farms , reporting incursions , and if need be , taking up arms . preserved rat corpses were exhibited at schools and fairsthe campaign has been largely successful , and half a century on , albertans remain vigilant . merrill s rat patrol has a hotline , rats , where people can report possible sightings . the hotline gets hundreds of calls a year , mostly false alarms misidentified muskrats or pocket gophers . when albertans do spot a rat , they often act quickly , beating it to death with bats or shovels before calling it in . they even report their neighbors for keeping pet rats , or fancy rats , as exterminators call them . rats are rats , and alberta s government gives them no quarter . sometimes the owners have their rats flown out of the province , but generally , merrill said , we take care of them . alberta s landscape makes eradication feasible . it s sparsely populated , and its sprawling farms and small towns provide few structures where rats can shelter from the harsh winters . the , square mile province is protected by the rocky mountains in the west , frigid forests to the north , and badlands to the south . accordingly , the government concentrates its efforts on a mile long strip on the eastern border with saskatchewan . you can t ignore the rat ! , a poster commissioned by the government of alberta . source provincial archives of alberta . as the nine members of the patrol travel through the control zone , they check every building that might harbor a rat . they examine foundations for signs of gnawing , ask farmers if they ve seen anything suspicious , and hand out buckets of poison pellets . merrill , an energetic and affable year old who s worked pest control since , says that the key to catching a rat is to think like a rat you want a granary , preferably an old wooden one you want bales of barley or something with a bit of protein to snack on and you want water . each time merrill clears a site , he marks it on a gps map with a skull and crossbones . we pulled up to a farmhouse , and merrill knocked on the door . rat patrol here , come to see if you re harboring any rats , he called out . a gangly , weathered man in his s invited merrill in , pulled out a chair , and the two swapped local rat gossip . they discussed a dilapidated grain house just over the border in saskatchewan . as a rule , rats stick close to home , rarely traveling more than a few hundred feet from their nest , but when things get too crowded , some venture out , running through the surrounding fields most die , but a few find a new building and start to breed . merrill reckoned there were hundreds of rats in the grain house , and the colony was sending rats out in a mile radius . with the cooperation of the other province s pest control officer , he wanted to poison it , maybe raze it completely . we ve got to fight them over there so we don t have to fight them over here , he told me . the control zone is a buffer for alberta , but now merrill wanted a buffer for the buffer . how far can his rat campaign go , i asked him . forever , he said . i know alberta can do it . saskatchewan has seen the vision and is two thirds rat free already . montana has very few rats they could be rat free . vancouver , new york , port cities would be more difficult , but eventually i think we can win there , too . i think the world we re winning . we re going to win . rats are coming ! c . s , a poster commissioned by the government of alberta . source provincial archives of albertafor thousands of years , people have devised all manner of traps to crush , poison , smother , and electrocute rats . we bred terriers to kill them , then used ferrets to flush them out of their holes . bounties were offered , and parties were organized to club , shoot , and stab them . people tried feeding them wet plaster , hoping it d harden and kill them it didn t . we tied tiny bells to them , hoping they d scare other rats away it didn t . people sniped them from trees and gassed them in ships . in the s , the new york daily news declared all out war on rats and armed teens with poison , teeners will spearhead assault on rats , read the declaration . war is on ! though thousands are killed , the relief is only temporary , and other thousands soon replace the slain . so far , the war has been as futile as it s been bloody . rats thrive in the new ecosystems humans have made they lurk in city infrastructure , eating our waste they infiltrate farms , eating stores of food and they hitchhike on global trade , devouring birds , turtles , and anything else they come across . far from beating them back , we ve helped rats spread to every continent except antarctica . the rat s future looks bright . trade is accelerating , and cities are expanding as their infrastructure decays . but in a few places , people are bringing new tactics and technology to the war on rats . scientists , city planners , exterminators , engineers , pilots , and ordinary citizens are all enlisted in these new campaigns , which offer hope of finally pushing back the rat , at least for a while . if there s a constant in the history of rat control , it s the sense that there must be a better way . an early th century department of agriculture report is florid in its despair for centuries the animal has been banned , and human ingenuity has been taxed to the utmost to suppress it , wrote david e . lantz . everywhere the history of the contest is the same . though thousands are killed , the relief is only temporary , and other thousands soon replace the slain . therefore , if conducted along the old lines , the war promises to be never ending . chemicals developed in the middle of the th century raised hopes that perhaps technology could vanquish the rat . but rats are cautious neophobic , is the technical term . they re so wary of new things in their environment that experienced exterminators leave traps unset for days , letting rats become accustomed to eating from them . modern anticoagulant poison is designed to be slow acting , bursting the rodent s capillaries days after ingestion , so that other rats won t associate the bait with death . the problem is that rats breed too quickly for poison to make much difference . the norway rat has a three week gestation period and can produce five litters a year , each with four to eight offspring . in as few as three months , those rats can produce litters of their own . in theory , a single pair is capable of giving rise to thousands of progeny in under a year . last week , the story of a british tortoise that lost its front leg after rats gnawed them off circulated widely . so , we kill them as fast as we can . we kill rats because they eat our food and defecate in whatever they don t eat . they once caused famines , though in modern agriculture they ve been reduced to a nuisance the fda publishes limits of acceptable rodent filth per gram . we kill rats because they re reservoirs of disease , including plague , which wiped out percent of europe s population in the th century and for which we ve never forgiven them . they swarm with other diseases as well a recent study of rats caught in new york city found pathogens proven to cause salmonella , e . coli , hantavirus , and leptospira , as well as previously unknown viruses . we kill rats because they destroy the things we build they gnaw on wires , starting fires , and gas lines , causing explosions . their burrows collapse streets and sidewalks . today , some of the most aggressive rat control projects are carried out by ecologists , trying to kill rats before rats kill native fauna . every era hates rats in its own way . we hate rats because they thrive in the places we try to forget sewers , empty lots , derelict buildings , mountainous landfills . rats live in man s parallel universe , surviving on the effluvia of human society , writes robert sullivan in his book rats . when they scurry onto the subway platform or pop out of our toilets an urban legend that s all too true it s like a furry little return of the repressed . they re ambassadors of entropy , appearing in huge numbers during floods , wars , economic decline , or other periods of disorder . all of that is captured in a pervasive feeling rats are gross . extermination efforts in south georgia . photography by tony martinin late march , on a glacier riven sliver of land , miles off the coast of antarctica , a ampnbspteam of conservationists completed the largest rat eradication ever attempted . over the course of four years , and at a cost of million , they used helicopters to bombard south georgia island with almost tons of poison bait . it s the most ambitious attempt yet to turn back the rats , and the mission s measure for success is unforgiving if a single rat is left alive , they ve failed . when rats arrived , ecological niches became smorgasbordswhen project leader dr . tony martin first visited south georgia years ago , the impact of the rats was stark . neighboring rat free islands were brimming with birds and lush with plants fertilized by their droppings . south georgia itself , however , was barren as a desert . i thought at that time if i could ever get rid of the rats i d die a happy man , martin said , at home in cambridge after a long journey from the south atlantic . before humans set foot on its shores , south georgia was a refuge for penguins , albatrosses , and other seabirds . but then came the sealers , and they brought the rats , which devoured the birds eating eggs , chicks , and even fully grown birds , martin said , grabbing their necks and devouring their brains while still alive . it s estimated that percent of the island s seabirds have been wiped out by rats . south georgia s story has played out on islands around the world . a disproportionate amount of the world s biodiversity lives on islands , where species often evolved in isolation from mammalian predators . but when rats arrived , these ecological niches became smorgasbords . burrowing , ground nesting , and flightless birds were eaten quickly . baby tortoises were gnawed to death . rats are responsible for about half of all bird and reptile extinctions on islands , according to gregg howald of the group island conservation . i have enormous regard for rats , martin said . i get no pleasure out of killing them . but the way i look at it , and i recognize this is a very imperialistic view , is that something is going to die here whether we do something or not , and the choice therefore is not whether to kill or not , it s whether we kill rats , which were introduced by man , or allow the rats your forebears put in place to eradicate the native population . because i have the power , the resources , to kill rats , and hereby save species from going extinct , i choose to use that power . reloading the helicopter poison bucket . photography by roland gockelaerial rat eradication was pioneered in the s in new zealand , where , as elizabeth kolbert wrote last year , defending native birds has become an issue of nationalism . they are , after all , kiwis . conservationists loaded poison into modified fertilizer buckets and used them to disperse bait evenly over entire islands . some birds would succumb to the poison , but it was worth it researchers found that if they killed every last rat , native bird populations quickly rebounded beyond pre eradication levels . gps changed the game , according to keith springer , a new zealand conservation officer who worked on the south georgia mission . it let them overlay islands with a close knit grid that helicopter pilots could trace , ensuring that no spot is missed . other groups copied the strategy . in , ecuador began clearing the galapagos islands of rats , which threatened to wipe out the islands tortoises . the eradication program was a success last year , for the first time in over a century , tortoises were born in the wild on ampnbsppinzon island and survived . in the aleutians , the us fish and wildlife service killed every rat on rat island , where a shipwreck had deposited them in the s . puffins and cormorants quickly returned , and the island was renamed hawadax . at miles long , south georgia is the most ambitious island eradication effort attempted yet . the team divided the island into three sections , each separated by a glacier , and used helicopters to fly along the gps grid they d drawn , flinging poison nuggets from a bucket feet above the ground . it s been several years since the first two sections were poisoned , and the team has seen no sign of rat survivors . on march rd , after weeks of storm delays , martin watched a helicopter fly out to strafe the island with the final load of poison bait . it s strange , he said . i ve thought about this moment for the last six years it consumed my life . i imagined we d be exultant when the last load went out , but we were completely flat . we just stood there thinking , now what ? species specific poisons could be dropped by drones day and nighthe s hoping for more eradication projects , bigger projects . he d like his team to travel the world , a kind of baiting flying circus , he said . when i spoke with him , he was optimistic , having just ampnbspread a paper in the journal biological conservation imagining what the next generation of rodent eradication might look like . the paper outlines an arsenal of possible technologies . there are automatic traps like the spitfire , which sprays sticky poison onto rats when they pass through a tube , killing them when they lick it off , and the a , which uses a co fired piston to smash their skulls . species specific poisons could be dropped by drones day and night . maybe the most ambitious method involves the release of transgenic rats , engineered so that their progeny would be entirely male . if their offspring were capable of spreading the transgene , it could theoretically drive rats to near extirpation without the use of poison . their incredible fecundity would finally be thwarted , and after several generations , a horde of bachelor rats would fight amongst themselves , dwindle , and disappear . i recently met up with rodent expert bobby corrigan in lower manhattan . it was one of the year s first warm evenings , and the faint , sweet whiff of putrefying garbage filled the air . corrigan stood in the middle of the street , watching rats dart out of a storm drain and into trash bags piled on the curb . you can read a city , corrigan said , pointing to dark streaks leading out of the grate . they were marks left by grease from the rats fur , soaked and rubbed onto cement from commutes back and forth along the same routes for months or years . exterminators call them rat runways , and you can see them on the walls and curbs throughout the city . the faint , sweet whiff of putrefying garbage filled the airlast week , new york announced an ambitious new strategy in its war against the city s intractable rat population . the health department is hiring people , effectively doubling the staff who deals with rats . they ll survey neighborhoods to find rat reservoirs , the hidden places where rats have been able to grow to huge numbers , causing problems in neighborhoods no matter what residents or exterminators do . it s not just looking for signs of rats it s following rats and figuring out where they re going , said dan kass , deputy commissioner for environmental health . inspectors will seal up cracks in sidewalks and foundations . exterminators will collapse burrows and poison intensively for months . sewers will be flushed regularly , and health educators will work with neighborhoods to design better trash management programs , possibly including things like vacuum sealed trash compactors . population biologists will monitor progress in the area , moving on only when there s been a sustained decline in rats . in the program s pilot , areas near the targeted reservoirs saw an percent drop in rat sightings , according to the department . corrigan helped design new york city s pilot rat program he s a sort of global adviser to cities trying to cope with rats . when he s cited , which is often , it s with the epithet renowned rodentologist , ampnbspand he has the fastidious intensity of someone who spends a lot of time studying animals that thrive on sloppiness . he s been called to battle rodents in warsaw , sao paolo , tokyo , and states , but new york , he says , is ratropolis . bobby corrigan inspecting new york city rat burrows . norway rats came to new york in the th century and quickly swarmed the city s docks , stables , slaughterhouses , and refuse strewn streets . as the city s population grew , so did the rats . here they have vast temperature regulated burrows in the sewers and subways , while the city s aging housing stock furnishes them with basements , walls , and facades to nest in . the parks supply them with plenty of soil to burrow in and a steady supply of pizza crusts and chicken bones . new york city is ratropolis because it s trashopolis , corrigan said . the city produces million tons of garbage each year , and much of it sits out in bags on curbs or in alleyways each night , conveniently close to the catchment basins where rats dwell . and that s just the trash that gets properly thrown away , not tossed on the sidewalk . i call it food shrapnel , corrigan said , gesturing to the litter underneath benches in the park . who s going to set off the next grenade ? new york city is ratropolis because it s trashopolis . corrigan clipped his flashlights to his belt , slipped on a fluorescent orange vest , and put on a green hardhat . we proceeded down worth street , stopping occasionally so he could hop up and down in flowerbeds to cave in some burrows , trying to scare out the rats . this burrow is probably too big , he said after his foot plunged through the soil up to his ankle . it s probably decades old , and they just heard me and retreated to the north quarter . the burrows were everywhere , running under seemingly solid sidewalks , streets , and parks . you can see statues in parks that are starting to list because of all the burrows under them , corrigan said . they re disassembling the city . corrigan doesn t hate rats quite the opposite . i absolutely respect them , like them , admire them , he said . he calls them one of the most finely designed mammals nature ever created . they re fast , able to run feet per second , he said , running down a list of the rat s strengths . they can swim and climb and squeeze through holes as small as a quarter . their jaws are strong , exerting up to , pounds per square inch , and the enamel on their teeth is harder than iron . they re clever , diabolically clever , corrigan said . they breed quickly and can cram into tiny spaces . if you want to kill the rats in this park , you d have to kill percent or you d be exactly where you started a year later , he said . and like us , they re omnivorous , adaptable , generalists . this is an absolutely incredible animal , corrigan told me . he s seen rats in remote corners of central park , burrowing to eat earthworms , living like moles rats stalking pigeons , dragging them into their burrows rats raiding the jamaica bay wildlife refuge , eating terrapin eggs . a colleague of his reported seeing rats swimming in the hudson , eating floating garbage and fish . the problem is they want our space as much as we do , corrigan said . they dash along subway platforms and ride in train cars . unsatisfied with leftovers , they venture into restaurants . they moved into the brand new conde nast offices , even before the editors arrived . sometimes a rat exploring a sewer follows a smaller tunnel up and out and into the toilet bowl of terrified apartment residents . new york s program received , complaints about rats last year , up from , the year before . that represents about percent of the complaints directed to the department of health and mental hygiene . no one knows how many rats live in new york . the one rat per person statistic , often cited , is bogus . a grad student recently attempted a calculation based off complaints and came up with million , but even that s a total ballpark . rats moved into the brand new conde nast offices even before the editors arrivedthe sun had set by the time we reached chinatown s columbus park , a hotspot cited by kass in his announcement of the reservoir program . at the park s entrance , someone had jammed a shard of concrete into a rat burrow , a sign of human frustration , corrigan said . six or seven rats gathered around a styrofoam container , taking turns sticking their snouts into a hole and tossing it around , trying to get at whatever leftovers were inside . tired of waiting , a smaller rat dashed across the sidewalk , scaled the fence , and leapt into an open garbage can . the rats of new york city are too entrenched to be eradicated the density of the city makes a thorough patrol like alberta s unfeasible , and their proximity to us makes the sort of poison campaign used in south georgia impossible it would kill them , but it could kill us , too , and more would arrive to take their place . instead , corrigan said , we have to manage their population by targeting the source of their sustenance , and often that means changing human behavior . that s a major part of the reservoir strategy taking community leaders around to look at hotspots , working with them to rat proof buildings , cutting down on littering , and improving waste management services . it s a massive civic undertaking , both at the neighborhood and policy levels . poison should be the last thing you go for , corrigan said . rats are a symptom of larger issues . the rats aren t going away , corrigan said , as we watched them standing on their burrows , watching us . we re going to share the city . phil merrill inspecting a grain silo in alberta . photography by josh dziezaas with all great pests , we like to joke that rats will outlast us . after all , they survived nuclear tests on the marshall islands . if anything , they re even better positioned to thrive in today s slower , environmental apocalyptic scenarios . in a world where ecosystems are being upended , cities are growing , infrastructure is aging , and waste is increasing , the rat has all the traits necessary for success . in the darwinian sense , the rat is just as fit for the world we ve built as we are . today s rat campaigns are attempts to rein in the rare species that excels under our new rules . with enough effort , money , and technology , we may be able to control their numbers . but the thing about rats is that we always win the battles , but they tend to win the war . undoing the work of a couple stowaway rats takes millions of dollars and months of helicopter bombardment , but it would be for naught if one pregnant rat hops off a visiting yacht . in cities , just keeping them to manageable numbers takes the work of public officials , exterminators , trash collectors , and scientists , as well as the attention of every citizen . and in alberta , holding them at bay takes province wide vigilance and regular border patrols . we always win the battles , but rats tend to win the warafter making the rounds in the control zone , merrill drove over the border to saskatchewan . we drove past the burnt out hole where an infested granary used to be , over close cropped hills of wheat and barley , and toward a decrepit grain storage facility that sits in the bottom of a muddy valley . this is where they re coming from , he said as we approached . jeepers creepers , look at those holes . the base of the building was riddled with burrows and surrounded by drifts of rat feces some of it bright blue , a sign of a past poisoning attempt , clearly futile . merrill became dismayed as he surveyed the scene , climbing up to peek in a window , kneeling to look at the foundation . he decided the building had to come down . otherwise the rats will keep coming , and eventually some will get through the zone . afterward , at the regional pest control headquarters , he checked his email and found some photos of dead rodents caught near edmonton . he d gotten the call earlier but figured someone had misidentified a gopher . they hadn t . they were rats . over the phone , he told the edmonton pest control officer where to get poison and traps . conferring with other officers , he talked about sending someone to investigate how the rats got in . never a dull moment , he said , ruefully , testing the trigger on a shiny co powered trap . maps of the zone lined the walls of the office . a taxidermied rat sat on the shelf , baring its teeth . photography by andrew whiteedited by michael zelenko