 when the first trailer for star wars episode i the phantom menace came out in , the only way to see it was to buy a ticket for meet joe black , the waterboy , or the siege . which , of course , many fans did cheering while the trailer rolled and filing out immediately afterward . a few recorded the two minute snippet and uploaded it to fan sites . the quality was awful , and the clip could take hours to download , but interest was so intense that sites crashed under the pressure . lucasfilm put their own high quality version online the next day . they had to increase their bandwidth capacity to handle the load . when it came time to release the second trailer four months later , lucasfilm partnered with apple , releasing it exclusively with quicktime software . steve jobs called the launch a coup quicktime was downloaded more than , times that day and the biggest ever download event at the time , with . million downloads over the next three weeks . the phantom menace trailer was a sign of things to comethe phantom menace trailer was a sign of things to come . since then , the release of a franchise blockbuster has only become more of an online event . studios , under increasing pressure to post big opening weekend sales and in possession of ads people actually want to watch , have set about flooding platforms like youtube and facebook with all manner of trailers multiple primary trailers , trailers to introduce characters , to highlight subplots , to target specific demographics or countries . the force awakens has run trailers , teasers , and tv spots so far . modern trailers shouldn t just introduce and excite for franchise films especially , they should link films together , hint at new directions , and provide fodder for fan debate and speculation , amplifying anticipation for free . the trailer editing industry is growing to meet increasing demand , going from a dozen or so trailer houses years ago to over a hundred today . they compete against each other , with several shops submitting multiple trailers for the studio s selection . increasingly , they cut trailers for trailers . when wired wrote about the anatomy of a trailer campaign in , wolverine s vine tweaser was an anomaly . now matryoshka like campaigns are a standard way of turning a trailer launch into an event capable of cutting through online noise . for terminator genysis , an animated teaser teased a second teaser teasing the first trailer . it s a phenomenon that some editors find bewildering . we re now making advertising for advertising , a teaser for the actual teaser , which is an advertisement for a movie , said shawn yashar of trailer shop transit . there s definitely more content out there than ever before . but it makes sense , because the trailer has become its own sort of content , introducing characters and plot points and tying franchise installments together . the installments , meanwhile , are becoming more like trailers themselves , with allusions and teases sprinkled throughout . black panther , teased in ultron and with a movie of his own on the way , made his first appearance in the captain america civil war trailer , with fans going frame by frame in an attempt to figure out who s on whose side . the first full trailer for dawn of justice gives bruce wayne s view of the final battle in man of steel , setting up a conflict with superman that gets resolved in the second trailer , when wonder woman unites both against doomsday . this is all about building anticipation , says keith johnston , professor of film and television at the university of east anglia and head of the watching the trailer research project . it s no longer anticipation for the finished product , it s anticipation for something that will build your anticipation . watch our video essay , the star wars history of trailers for most of the trailer s century long history , editors were limited in the material they could draw on . starting a few months before filming finished , they d go over whatever footage was available and splice it together until it conveyed the basics of the setting , characters , and plot , filling in the gaps with title cards and voiceover . this process resulted in a lot of trailers that seem odd by today s standards . the trailer for a new hope , for example , spends most of its time on a minor dogfight set to a curiously plodding score , while an echoey voiceover manages to make a big , sprawling space saga of rebellion and romance sound kind of dour . on the other hand , sometimes you ended up with a trailer like the one for alien , which is more powerful for never showing anything . trailer editors now start working far earlier . the first force awakens trailer went online less than a month after filming wrapped , with finished shots of kylo ren s lightsaber , the bb droid , the millennium falcon , x wings , and rey s speeder . sometimes the process begins two years or more before a film is released with nothing but a script , with trailer editors picking out scenes or dialogue they want fast tracked . we literally study fandoms of franchises every day , all day . independence day , with its iconic white house explosion , is widely cited as the first time studios configured production schedules around the trailer campaign , but that s common practice today . almost years later , the white house explosion also seems quaintly direct the goal of a trailer now isn t just to be spectacular , but to pick scenes that will prompt debate . for franchise films , it s a game of allusion and references to a larger corpus of fan lore . we literally study fandoms of franchises every day , all day , says d nae kingsley , head of integrated strategy at the agency trailer park . there are people on the team who are studying every single kind of forum and fan site , tracking patterns and conversations about what elements are important to people , what things are going to be particularly important to address or to play up in the next piece , to make sure that the fans are being activated and that the fans are also feeling satisfied with the content that we put out . while working on the first trailer for suicide squad , a sort of supervillain dirty dozen , warner bros . was extremely careful about which characters were included and how . studios , anticipating scrutiny , are cautious not just about what they include but what they don t , and editors often must go over trailers frame by frame to avoid unintentional memes that could take their message in the wrong direction . though batman is just a small part of suicide squad , his half second appearance in the trailer stoked speculation . we were very careful about how we presented the joker , as directed by warner bros . and dc , and how we showed batman was very carefully executed , trailer park s matt brubaker said . it was very deliberate , but it drove a lot of interest . disney is doing all of its force awakens trailers in house and declined to comment , but it s safe to assume that similar calculations went into the trailers . almost every scene has managed to drive this kind of interest , making headline news on virtually every media outlet , all while revealing practically nothing about the movie . the trailers reveal no more plot than the most basic light versus dark themes and give only the most elliptical character introductions who are you ? i m no one . images are pulled from the same few scenes quartz has a comprehensive breakdown . yet the brief appearance of the crossguard lightsaber and bb droid in the first teaser prompted intense fan discussion , which turned into news stories , which turned into toy sales far in advance of the movie s launch . finn s stormtrooper uniform , kylo ren s mask , darth vader s melted helmet , and the crackle of luke s lightsaber after the final title card have all been the subject of fevered debate . the appearance of han , leia , and chewbacca have inspired ecstatic celebration . even luke s absence has been fodder for speculation , with fans wondering whether he s the hooded figure with the robotic hand glimpsed in the teaser and whether he s turned evil . j . j . abrams has said the mystery is no accident . this is a style of trailer design that s only possible when people are watching on platforms like youtube , when they can pause and replay and submit trailers to zapruder level analysis . trailers have to withstand greater scrutiny now , but the overwhelming pressure is to stand out . audiences are savvier , and trailers are competing not just with each other but with everything else on the social web . the general trend is to make the trailer look as much like entertainment and as little like an ad as possible . they usually follow the three act structure , with a crescendo of tantalizing snippets in lieu of resolution for the final act . baritone pitchmen like don lafontaine have been replaced with character dialogue , sometimes spliced together into thematic sounding voiceover from unrelated line readings . audiences have grown up with the trailer , says nick temple of the agency wild card . especially younger people , we ve all evolved together and as soon as you hear voiceover you think , i m being sold to . the microscope always being held to our head is the internet . stylistic trends move faster now , changing in a matter of months or years rather than decades . several editors brought up the inception whoom sound also described as braaamp saying that it was cool for a few years before becoming a clich . ominous covers of classic songs are popular , several said think the choral rendition of radiohead s creep in the social network , or more recently , sia s california dreamin in the trailer for the summer disaster movie san andreas . evelyn watters , who runs the golden trailer awards with her sister , points out that covers are nice because they hit two demographics fans of the original and of the cover artist . but now even that s getting old , says brubaker , who used a cover of the bee gees i started a joke for suicide squad . i think the microscope always being held to our head is the internet . the demand for trailers seems to be limitless , and why shouldn t it be ? they re short , highly produced videos increasingly optimized for engagement , the tldr of a multimillion dollar movie . according to a report by google , people watched million hours of movie trailers on youtube just on mobile devices in the first six months of this year , an percent increase over the same period the year before . but in a trajectory that mirrors digital media at large , from destination sites like apple trailers to youtube s search and embedding to social networks , facebook is making a play for the trailer market . in the week leading up to the launch of the first furious trailer last year , the film s facebook fan page posted a short teaser clip every day , culminating in a cross platform unveiling an hour long special on e ! owned by nbcuniversal , along with posting to the facebook pages for furious , vin diesel , michelle rodriguez , dwayne johnson , tyrese gibson , and the memorial page for paul walker . according to facebook , the trailer got million views in the first hours . facebook is following a similar strategy with star wars . the first shot of finn wielding luke s lightsaber went up on instagram , and this thanksgiving , a kylo ren focused television spot made its online premiere as a facebook exclusive . lt ! function d , s , id var js , fjs d . getelementsbytagname s if d . getelementbyid id return js d . createelement s js . id id js . src connect . facebook . net en us sdk . js xfbml ampversion v . fjs . parentnode . insertbefore js , fjs document , script , facebook jssdk gtwhile facebook offers a gigantic audience of people who might not seek the trailer out , youtube offers studios data as well as distribution . its entertainment division can tell studios not only what demographics watched its trailer , helping them target further versions , but what scenes fans paused and rewound . services like rentrak monitor other forms of social media , like twitter , for what elements of the trailer people are discussing and how they feel about it . studios monitor the conversation to see what direction to take in subsequent trailers , but they also try to shape and amplify it . jon handschin , co founder of moviepilot , a fast growing site he describes as a medium for movie fans , says that studios have begun giving fans of a franchise embargoed access to trailers so that they have their reactions ready , something studios have been increasingly reluctant to do for films themselves . from a studio perspective , you want to control both , right ? said handschin . you ve got the signal , your marketing signal , the trailer . but you would also love to amplify the echo to the signal , by the fans , and to amplify both of these messages , the signal and the echo . embargoed trailer reviews might seem absurd , but they makes sense in a world in a world where the trailer has become the content , the snack that tides fans over during the diminishing gap between franchise installments . and though the occasional trailer for an original property will take off online , it really is a franchise phenomenon . in order to build anticipation , trailers need to be anticipated themselves . resolution isn t the goalthere s a reason trailers have proliferated online in tandem with the growth of franchises . it s far harder for a trailer for an original film to become an event in the same way . it has no preexisting fan base , no larger mythology to hint at , and it s stuck doing a lot of the traditional explanatory work of introducing characters , setting , and plot . i think that a lot of these things might not quite apply when talking about independent or lower budget movies , where it can be harder for them to have same kind of impact online , says catherine johnson , a professor of culture , film , and media at the university of nottingham and co author of promotional screen industries . the internet can be this great boon for trailers and marketing films , but it can also be an extremely difficult place for a film to stand out if it s not a known property or tied to an existing franchise . for independent movies , johnson says , the cinema is still a brilliant place to market their films , because they have a captive audience . but the online trailer drip feed works extremely well for franchises , which use them to tie together increasingly trailer like features . age of ultron was less a stand alone film than a three hour trailer for the future of marvel . resolution isn t the goal . it should be exciting , tantalizing , not unsatisfying but not so satisfying that you won t want to come back for the sequel , the show , or click on the trailer when it goes online . 