 now that donald trump is officially the president of the united states , he is in complete control of america s nuclear arsenal . should he decide to start a nuclear war , there are no legal safeguards to stop him . instead , a much less tangible web of norms , taboos , and fears has reined in us presidents since world war ii . but as north korea escalates its nuclear weapons tests , russia promises to strengthen its nuclear forces , and the new president of the united states has openly tweeted that the us must strengthen and expand its nuclear capability , experts worry that this fragile web could start to tear . let s be very clear the president alone controls the nukestrump s position on nukes has been murky , at best . in the last few weeks , he jumped from advocating for an arms race , to implying that the us and russia might work together to reduce nuclear proliferation . in fact , during his campaign , he called nuclear proliferation the biggest problem in the world . but then he also said that japan and south korea might want to get nukes of their own . he wouldn t take nuking isis , or even europe , off the table . but he s also characterized himself as highly , highly , highly , highly unlikely to ever use nuclear weapons . this calculated ambiguity isn t unusual for america s presidents . presidents bill clinton and george w . bush left nuclear first strikes on the table , too . but for a us president to talk so openly and frequently about using nuclear force is a clear break with history , says frank sauer , an international security researcher at the bundeswehr university munich and author of the book atomic anxiety deterrence , taboo and the non use of u . s . nuclear weapons . and it could be potently destabilizing in a world where nations nuclear doctrines are shaped more by posture than by policy . the united states must greatly strengthen and expand its nuclear capability until such time as the world comes to its senses regarding nukes donald j . trump realdonaldtrump december , despite a few close calls , nuclear warheads haven t been used in armed conflict for more than years . but there s controversy over the reason why . robert mcnamara , the us secretary of defense during the cuban missile crisis , put it down to pure luck . but nina tannenwald , director of international relations at brown university , argues that a taboo gradually emerged from the nuclear devastation of hiroshima and nagasaki . this taboo created the shared expectation that using nuclear weapons again would be deeply , morally wrong . international relations professor and author of the tradition of non use of nuclear weapons , t . v . paul disagrees , arguing that it s not a taboo but a tradition that s driven by social and political pressures . and underlying both of these explanations is humankind s deep seated fear of going extinct , sauer says . while mutually assured destruction the notion that any country launching nukes would likely also be destroyed by nukes gets the most ink in terms of deterrence , these cultural and psychological deterrents play powerful roles . u . s . army the plume of smoke from the fires that tore through hiroshima after the us dropped the atomic bomb . let s be very clear the president alone controls the nukes . there aren t more checks and balances because our nuclear chain of command was built to speedily deliver mutually assured destruction . in fact , the only real check on the president s nuclear authority is the election , writes nuclear history professor alex wellerstein in a recent blog post . d on t elect people you don t trust with the unilateral authority to use nuclear weapons . that s because if the us is attacked , time is precious early warning teams only have three minutes to determine whether warnings of a missile attack are real . if it looks legitimate enough to take to the president , the president then has less than minutes to open the nuclear briefcase or football , review his tactical options , and authorize a nuclear strike . or at least , minutes is how long the white house has if a submarine deployed in the western atlantic were to fire on dc if russia were to launch a nuke from within its borders , there s maybe additional minutes to react . if the president hesitates , a nuke could hit the white house before the us has a chance to launch a counterstrike . still , many experts agree that mutually assured destruction can t fully explain why no one is using their nukes . after all , the us didn t use nuclear weapons against iraq in the gulf war , even though iraq didn t have any nuclear weapons to retaliate with . national archives identifier ampnbsp this woman received radiation burns in the same pattern as the darker patches on her kimono . international law isn t a great deterrent , either . true , the united nations charter does ban military force except in self defense , and using nukes could possibly constitute a war crime . the nuclear non proliferation treaty of implicitly bans the five so called nuclear weapon states the us , the uk , russia , france , and china from attacking a non nuclear party to the treaty . but even so , in , the un s judicial branch ruled that it s not illegal to use nukes to ward off an existential threat . it s just not really legal , either . other nations do a better job at checking their leaders nuclear strength . china and india both pledged to not use nuclear weapons in a first strike . india changed their policy in to let them retaliate with nukes against a chemical or biological weapons attack . russia walked back their own no first use policy in the s , and the us doesn t have one . mutually assured destruction can t fully explain why no one is using their nukesthat s where the nuclear taboo comes in . it lumps nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons into a category of weapons of mass destruction that are unusable precisely because they re so powerful and hard to control , says tannenwald , author of the nuclear taboo the united states and the non use of nuclear weapons since . the taboo stems from the wreckage of the atomic bombs the us dropped on japan during world war ii . we still don t know how many people were killed by the first blasts , probably between , and , in total . the death toll continued to rise over the next five years to nearly , people , with many dying of cancers from the radioactive fallout . taken by ralph alfaro , a crewmember on the uss oklahoma via defense . gov a us sailor took this photo of hiroshima after the bomb . during his recent visit to japan , president obama called hiroshima the start of our own moral awakening . that moral awakening has kept nations like the us from using nukes even as they stockpiled them , tannenwald argues . the taboo casts nuclear weapons as untouchable , stigmatized tools that only a barbarian would use shaping public opinion as well as world leaders personal conviction . after the bombing of nagasaki , president harry truman reportedly called off any more nuclear attacks , saying , the thought of wiping out another , people was too horrible . taboo is too strong a word to describe how we feel about using nuclear weapons , argues t . v . paul . taboos prohibit things like cannibalism , he says . cannibalism is so unthinkable that most people would never even consider it , let alone plan for how and when they d do it . but the us government does have a plan to launch its nuclear weapons . that makes it more of a tradition , paul says , possibly along the lines of avoiding mass killings of civilians during war . and traditions are easier to break , even though doing so would damage the country s international reputation . as soon as you think nuclear weapon , you re thinking armageddon . regardless of whether it s mutually assured destruction , taboo , or tradition each of these deterrents stems from the same underlying anxiety about using nuclear weapons , sauer argues . in terms of fiction , we ve destroyed ourselves with nuclear war times over , he says . we re sort of obsessed with this . try it in your head as soon as you think nuclear weapon , you re thinking armageddon . the prospect of mad harnesses and amplifies that anxiety . but the taboo is a way to avoid the anxiety , sauer says like , i don t even want to touch these things . still , cultural norms and individual psychology are flimsy barriers to using world destroying weapons , writes victor gilinsky , a physicist and former head of the us nuclear regulatory commission . and they could grow weaker as memories of nuclear blasts fade . it was a much more tangible thing years ago , says gilinsky , who recalls diving under his desk during bomb drills at school . when you say you ll explode a bomb here , explode a bomb there it s not a game of checkers . and anything that depends so much one person s judgement is also vulnerable to that person s ego . at some level , gilinsky argues , anyone who s worked on or with nuclear weapons wants to see the effort pay off . when the atomic bomb exploded on hiroshima , the los alamos scientists cheered , gilinsky recounted in a speech . not because of the fatalities , but because their work was a success . you ve got these people who are constantly training , he told the verge . they want it to be important . and for it to be important , the possibility of nuclear war has to be important . that ego doesn t just show up as professional pride , either , gilinsky writes in a recent article . a cult of toughness at the top levels of the us government could also tip the balance towards using nuclear weapons when it s necessary in order to save face . this kind of saber rattling could drive more nations to arm themselvesthis doesn t mean that president donald trump will suddenly launch a nuclear warhead and unleash nuclear armageddon . after all , a us president is unlikely to violate a long standing taboo that the us so clearly benefits from , wellerstein told the verge . densely populated cities , easy to locate military targets , and vulnerable infrastructure makes the us an especially exposed nuclear target if nukes suddenly became acceptable weapons to use . but the thing about trump s tough nuclear talk is that even if he s bluffing , this kind of saber rattling could drive more nations to arm themselves with nuclear weapons . even in germany , people were unsettled when trump talked about withdrawing military support from nato countries . the editor of the conservative german newspaper frankfurter allgemeine zeitung wrote an op ed speculating that germany should build its own nuclear arsenal . if the president wants to ensure a stable and secure europe and asia , he ll need to dial back the off the cuff nuclear remarks . the traditions , the taboos , the deterrences . . . are all about constantly reiterating and saying we re not doing that , this is wrong , this is right , sauer says . if you undercut all of this , in a couple of not very carefully thought through moves , you ll do quite a lot of damage that will take awhile to repair . updated january , updated to reflect president donald trump s inauguration , and to include his most recent statements about nuclear weapons . updated december , updated to include president elect donald trump s and russian president vladimir putin s recent statements about nuclear weapons . first published december , . 