 starting tomorrow , millions of americans will begin crowding around the television each night to watch the winter olympics in sochi , russia . but if they amprsquore tuned in during prime time on nbc , very little of what they see will be happening live . sochi is nine hours ahead of eastern standard time , so as it has done in the past , nbc is relying on the tape delay to piece together each day amprsquos highlights into a package for its evening audience . select events will air live across nbc amprsquos other networks , but the internet remains your only real choice for comprehensive live coverage ampmdash and nbc is perfectly happy with that . the time difference doesn amprsquot allow for us to be live in prime time , said mark lazarus , nbc sports group s chairman , during a recent conference call discussing nbc amprsquos plans . we will package and curate it in a way that makes it a place that huge gatherings of family and friends want to gather and get together in front of their tv . coverage kicks off february th ampmdash one day before friday amprsquos opening ceremony . a massive time difference makes live prime time coverage impracticalexpanding on nbc amprsquos time shifting strategy james bell , the olympics executive producer , said , i think you amprsquore coming down to the stories of the athletes . editing for prime time makes it easier for nbc to preproduce segments tailored for each event , planning them like a more traditional show rather than a live sporting event . no surprise , the network intends to focus on the lives of the athletes that have spent decades training in hopes of landing a gold medal and a place in history . i amprsquom hopeful that we amprsquore able to connect our audience with more of those great stories because we know they amprsquore out there , bell said . will nbcfail trend once again ? but taking time to frame those stories has earned nbc plenty of criticism . some viewers may not care about seeing olympic contests play out on live tv . for them , a summary of the day s highlights is a perfect fit . but the fans that want live coverage are often extremely vocal about it . nbc is by no means the first network to employ the tape delay , but it amprsquos taken some of the harshest feedback for it . resentment grew louder than ever in london , when ampnbsp nbcfail became a trending twitter topic throughout the games . still , the network has grown used to this criticism over time it amprsquos covered the olympics far more than the competition . sochi marks nbc amprsquos th time broadcasting the olympics ampmdash a new record . and nbc is determined to maintain that connection with tv audiences . ultimately it amprsquos willing to accept the flack , since evidence shows the tape delay may not be hurting the network at all . it certainly didn amprsquot two years ago , when . million people tuned into the london summer olympics and earned nbc record viewership . but none of that stopped a chorus of complaints about tape delay . the element of surprise was dead and gone . avoiding results each day in hopes of witnessing them for the first time at night was an impossible challenge , with constant spoilers on facebook and twitter only compounding frustration . perhaps the worst example came when a promo for nbc amprsquos own today show ampnbspspoiled missy franklin amprsquos first gold medal win ampmdash literally seconds before her race was set to air on tv . live coverage was expanding , though nbc blanketed channels including usa , cnbc , and msnbc with broadcasts throughout the day ampmdash but marquee events were still held for nbc prime time . vivian schiller , still nbc news amprsquo chief digital officer at the time , called attention to the time shifting backlash by retweeting and then deleting the retweet ampnbspcnn amprsquos jonathan wald , who said the medal for most olympic whining goes to everyone complaining about what happens every four years , tape delay . bell also joined in to defend the company amprsquos decisions . he made a fair argument the internet offered nbc a way to satisfy diehards . during the london games , ampnbspeach and every olympic contest could be streamed live on the web . an existing cable subscription was required for most live video , however , and authentication issues quickly led to another set of problems . the network plans to run that play once more in sochi and yes , you amprsquoll need to have those cable credentials handy . it amprsquos even blatantly ripped off the nfl amprsquos red zone channel this time around . the gold zone ampmdash which will stream over nbcolympics . com and the nbc sports live extra app ampmdash will provide live look ins at the most popular action every day from am to pm et . it amprsquos serving the fan that doesn amprsquot necessarily know where to go , said rick cordella , senior vp of digital media at nbc sports group . it amprsquos saying , amplsquothis is important now , take a look at what amprsquos happening . amprsquo the olympics give nbc s sports network a pushexecutives also hope the olympics can help prop up the nbc sports cable network . nbc will air every figure skating event on the network live as the action unfolds , another step to satisfy fans amprsquo appetite for instant access . nbc doesn amprsquot seem worried that all of this streaming and cable coverage will impact ratings for its flagship network . that amprsquos not how things panned out last time , anyway . what we found in london was that the people who were live streaming olympic content during the day on a pc or laptop or a tablet were actually more likely to watch more olympic television than people who weren amprsquot live streaming or engaged in some other kind of contact with the olympics , bell said . more content than ever before was made available to fans , and nbc still pulled in record viewership during prime time . not only did it not cannibalize , it actually helped us grow our audience on television and this will be the first time we amprsquore doing it at the winter games and we amprsquore hopeful for a similar result . nbc has other reasons to shoot for high ratings . jimmy fallon is preparing to assume the chair at the tonight show , and bell didn amprsquot hide his desire to help fallon get off to a strong start . we want to be able to , frankly , to be a big part of launching our new late night shows with jimmy fallon and seth myers , he said . cord cutters will be left out in the cold for these winter games ampmdash just as they were in london . but everyone else will likely have some way to catch any event they amprsquore interested in . it just may not always be from the comfort of their living room couch . update this article has been updated to include the author of the july th , tweet that criticized tape delay complaints . it was originally posted by cnn executive producer jonathan wald . vivian schiller retweeted his message and added a but later deleted her retweet . 