 psychonauts is back . ten years after the original was released , the cult classic game is making its return in the form of both a crowdfunded sequel and a virtual reality spinoff for sony s upcoming playstation vr headset . the first game was never a massive hit , with modest sales after release , but it proved to be something of a late bloomer between and it sold just under , copies , and that number jumped to . million over the following five years . it s the kind of game where it really depends on word of mouth , because it s hard to explain to people what s special about it , double fine s tim schafer says of the game s resurgence . it just takes a while for that kind of information to get out there . released in , psychonauts was the first game from double fine , a new studio formed by schafer , who was best known for classic adventure games like monkey island and grim fandango . psychonauts was something different instead of a point and click game for pc , it was an action adventure designed for consoles . but it still maintained the trademark humor and charm that schafer s games were known for . psychonauts told the story of raz , a young boy who runs away from the circus to join a summer camp for kids with psychic powers , who can enter the phantasmagorical worlds inside other people s minds . each level took place in a dream world inside a character s own head , leading to a spectacularly diverse and strange set of locations to explore one moment you re venturing through a twisted take on suburbia , the next a hellish butcher shop . think of it like inside out , but a lot weirder . the sequel , which is still in the pre production phase , continues raz s story as he ventures into the titular headquarters of a group of psychic super agents . not only is schafer returning , but the original voice cast is also on board , as are other key parts of the team , including writer erik wolpaw who went on to work for valve on the portal series and artist scott campbell . in order to create the sequel , double fine is once again turning to crowdfunding . the studio created kickstarter s first blockbuster game with broken age , a classic style point and click adventure that raised a then record . million . but for psychonauts , the studio is turning to a new platform fig , a crowdfunding service that turns backers into investors , earning them a share of any profits it might make . after less than a week the game has already raised more than . million , far outpacing broken age . i think people are going to want to know how we plan to make money from this game . profit sharing was something schafer had always wanted to try , he says , but it wasn t until the jobs act made it legal , and fig launched , that it became possible . ever since we started crowdfunding , i really believed in the mission of kickstarter and supporting the arts and enabling creative people to do their work , he says . but you start to hit a ceiling where , if you re getting a certain amount of money , it starts to get hard . because you re really asking for a lot of money , and it brings up this awkward question of , you re investing so much money , what happens if this thing turns out to be huge ? what if it s a big hit and you get rich ? where does that leave the backers ? for a developer as prominent as schafer , crowdfunding forces a new level of transparency you can t just take the money and run , he says and double fine embraced that for broken age with a documentary series that provided an unparalleled look at what goes on behind the scenes of game development . it s something the studio is doing once again for psychonauts in fact , player productions has already started filming in these early stages . but the added wrinkle of backers also being investors means that the studio has to be even more open this time . with rewards based crowdfunding , we only really had to show them creatively what we re doing , says schafer . now that we have investors , we re going to be transparent about talking about our business plan , too . i think people are going to want to know how we plan to make money from this game . before they weren t interested in that they wanted the game to be successful , but they weren t asking questions about profitability , and now they will be . psychonauts isn t the only game in the franchise on the way . at playstation experience this past weekend , double fine also revealed its first vr game , called psychonauts in the rhombus of ruin . it s a stand alone spinoff and , according to schafer , it was a perfect fit for the studio for a few reasons . for one thing , double fine seems to love to experiment with new technologies , having already released several games for microsoft s kinect motion control camera . vr also makes a lot of sense for a game about letting players explore bizarre new places . the team is kind of bonded to it for life . our main thing is making crazy worlds and dropping the player into unique environments , and i think vr does that really effortlessly , schafer explains . we were looking at what we could do with vr and thinking about psychonauts a lot , and it just seemed like instead of doing some abstract experience , can we do this narrative thing we ve been honing for years . that s what we do as a company . over the years since psychonauts first launched , schafer has kept a google doc filled with ideas . whenever he meets someone new , someone with a strange obsession or fear , he jots it down just in case it would make a good level for the game . i d write it down even though we weren t technically working on it , he says . double fine has released a lot of games since , but there s something about that debut release that made it stick with the studio . when you work really hard on a game , says schafer , the team is kind of bonded to it for life . and as long as his ever growing document of ideas doesn t run out , this probably won t be the last we see of the series , either . it s the age of psychonauts , says schafer . soon all games will be psychonauts . 