 compared with finding a therapist in a big city , signing up for text message therapy was a breeze . all i had to do was open an app on my phone , pick a username , and type my first message . predictably , the first thing i wrote my new therapist was a question hi . how does this work ? do i just tell you about myself ? the app is an ios only release called talkspace . launched in march , it aims to connect users to their very own licensed therapist , and then have the two communicate via instant message . we aren t going to ask you a ton of questions , says talkspace co founder oren frank , an assertive , good natured israeli who used to be the global chief creative officer at marketing agency mrm worldwide . we want to get you to talk to the therapist as quickly as possible . that s why the company doesn t ask potential users to fill out lengthy questionnaires about their mental health history before giving them access to a private therapy room a whatsapp like encrypted platform that only a user and their therapist can enter . it s crazy that some people don t have access to therapy today . it s crazy that some people don t have access to therapy today , says frank , who founded the company with his wife , roni frank , in . our vision together was to turn a product that caters to the percent into something that is available to everyone . that vision started as web based platform called talktala , but the company has since changed its name to talkspace and gone mobile . their app offers unlimited text therapy to adults , with various price tiers subscribers pay for a week , for a month , or just over for a year of unlimited , around the clock therapy . some users suffer from self harm cutting so they can write to our therapist and say , i have an urge to cut myself now , what should i do ? , says roni frank , a former computer scientist turned therapist . there s nothing else out there like that . she thinks the immediacy that s built into the app is beneficial for people in crisis . but as online therapy startups like talkspace grow in popularity and credibility other companies include etherapi and etherapy nexus , and talkspace recently raised . million in funding some mental health professionals are voicing concerns about the lack of research supporting e therapy s effectiveness , and the legal implications for users who choose to partake . lack of supporting research what we know is that truly meaningful therapeutic relationships need to have lots of depth and lots of breadth with regards to sustained engagement over time , says frederic reamer , a professor of social work at rhode island college . according to reamer , an app like talkspace could be useful as a gateway to further in person therapy . but as far as a meaningful therapeutic alliance goes , that s something that text messaging in and of itself is unlikely to afford . talkspace currently counts a few thousand subscribers , percent of whom reside in the us . of those users , percent are women between the ages of and . most tend to subscribe for three to five months at a time , oren frank says , and many interact with their therapists three to four times a day . but talkspace shouldn t be a form of therapy on its own , says madalina sucala , a clinical psychologist at the icahn school of medicine at mount sinai who has researched how clinicians feel about e therapy . it s a platform where therapists can meet and talk with their clients , she says . and that kind of platform can make dispensing effective therapy difficult . developing a relationship with your patients in online therapies can be a problem because you can t see emotional cues , she says , and sometimes you can t convey empathy . you can t see emotional cues . reamer agrees , and thinks potential users should consider what it means to interact with a therapist who can t see you . if you say something and it just moves me profoundly and i start crying , you don t see the crying , the grimace , the visual cues that are present in a traditional clinical relationship , he says , so there are limitations not to mention the possible tech failures , like a dead battery , that could arise at an inopportune therapeutic moment . a talkspace therapist i spoke to not the one i interacted with online disagrees . it s is a great concept and it s the way of the future , says christy paul , who also trains many of the company s new recruits each therapist undergoes a month of training with subsequent follow ups . in fact , she thinks users experience the additional benefit of using the app like a diary . in addition to very serious crises , pretty much every issue we can work through with our users online , she says , and we get a lot of positive user feedback . setting boundaries with clientsthe app also offers therapists the convenience of online correspondence , paul says , and the chance to work with diverse populations they might not encounter in their home city . but there can be a downside to making yourself available around the clock . part of the training that i do with the clinicians is making sure that they do have boundaries , paul says . it s also for the users sake , because being so dependent on somebody isn t healthy . my own talkspace therapist set boundaries right away . she explained during the free trial that i could write her whenever i felt the need , and that she would try to answer within minutes , if only to acknowledge my message . she also cautioned that she would mostly be available in the evenings , because she works a full time job during the day . but i do try to check my messages throughout the day for people who might be in crisis , she wrote . roni and oren frank , talkspace . com oren and roni frank told me that every therapist operates differently , and that each approach is largely the product of previous training some are psychologists and others are social workers and individual schedules . but the idea behind the app remains the same no matter which therapist you end up with the therapy room is always open , and you always have a direct , private , and anonymous line to your therapist . anonymity can be a useful therapy tooland that anonymity is an extremely useful therapy tool , oren frank says . face to face meetings can be difficult , because you feel judged and the stigma is high . by keeping users anonymous , talkspace hopes to alleviate the stigma that currently prevents percent of people who need mental health care , but don t receive treatment , from finding a therapist . it might also mean that users open up more quickly . something about writing , oren frank says , allows people to be more forthcoming . the impact of text therapy has largely been ignored by researchers , and existing studies mostly treated it as a supplement to face to face therapy , not a stand alone intervention . but , according to a small study , the value of text therapy is similar to face to face therapy and can even be more positive than previous face to face evaluations . researchers posited that this was because clients experienced lower postsession arousal meaning they were calmer following the online sessions versus those conducted in person . they did , however , describe that hypothesis as very tentative and suggested that text therapy might not be suitable for people who suffer from more serious mental health issues . lawyers could get a hold of entire therapy transcriptsbut reamer , who often acts as an expert witness in legal proceedings , takes the discomfort surrounding text therapy one step further . he thinks that people involved in court cases , such as custody battles , should stay away from the app . if their partner knows that they have major psychological issues , their lawyer would try to get a hold of their therapeutic records , he says , adding that lawyers involved in a medical malpractice suit might also try to get a user s records to prove they were depressed before a medical event occurred . if you received three months of counseling via text messaging , i can guarantee that those records will be asked for . and those records will be a lot more extensive than the notes a clinician takes in person . so far , talkspace hasn t encountered lawyers seeking records , oren frank says . but if it did , the company would likely have to comply with the law just like any other therapist would . that , the co founder says , might mean turning over six month s of a user s therapy transcript . digital environments have their issues , oren frank says , so we tried to find a balance . that balance consists of allowing users to access their last six months and deleting the rest . talkspace . com the approach might not be perfect , but talkspace does offer a number of advantages it s cheaper than most therapy appointments , and it offers the kind of anonymity many of us crave . the diary style log also has a certain appeal . but the app s greatest selling point might be its convenience . finding time for a minute appointment once a week is often a struggle but with talkspace , users can communicate on the go , roni frank says . when something goes awry , their therapist can help them in that moment to reduce their anxiety and the damage it can cause . the app s greatest selling point might be its conveniencethat factor is key in enticing a generation raised on text messages and emails , says susan ringwood , chief executive at beat , a uk organization that supports people affected by eating disorders . i think it s really important that we maximize this technology , ringwood says , noting that percent of the people who contact beat now do so online . some people are worried it s not personal enough , but plenty of young people aren t getting help at all , so at least this is something that will engage them . my own experience with talkspace was mixed . i had initially planned to subscribe for a full week , but after four days of light , asynchronous texting with my therapist , i thought of ending my experiment . other than the fact that my therapist used far less punctuation than i would have liked ending questions with actual question marks is strongly recommended in my book , she did come off as approachable and empathetic , and answered most of my messages within the hour . still , i hesitated . something about the permanence of typing private thoughts in a scrollable chatroom made me uneasy , and communicating intimate details of my life to someone whose facial expressions i couldn t read offered little comfort . text therapy might very well be a fix for many , but it clearly wasn t going to work for me . a human with a pen in one hand and and a notepad in the other seemed like a much safer and more effective option provided that her office is located within minutes of work , her sessions are reasonably priced , and she s available between pm and pm every other tuesday . 