 sitting in an aria hotel penthouse suite with views of the las vegas strip and the vast mojave desert beyond , george hotz was ready to bury the hatchet with the elon musk . i m an elon musk fan , he said . he jerked me around , i jerked him around , we re even . in a splashy bloomberg business feature published late last year , hotz was less conciliatory . otherwise known as geohot , the programmer first earned worldwide fame by cracking the iphone and the playstation as a teen . now , he is the ceo and founder of comma . ai , a company that aims to get self driving cars on the road by the end of the year . in the bloomberg profile , he called mobileye the outfit behind the driver assist tech at tesla and a number of other major car manufacturers absurd and a company that s behind the times . the piece recounts how musk allegedly promised hotz a lucrative contract if he delivered a superior product , but kept moving the goal line until the deal fell apart . no matter , hotz said . within a few months , he claimed he would post youtube videos of his car trouncing tesla s autopilot system over the golden gate bridge and on la s i , near musk s home . after the article s publication , tesla downplayed hotz s accomplishment in a tersely worded correction we think it is extremely unlikely that a single person or even a small company that lacks extensive engineering validation capability will be able to produce an autonomous driving system that can be deployed to production vehicles , it read . it may work as a limited demo on a known stretch of road tesla had such a system two years ago but then requires enormous resources to debug over millions of miles of widely differing roads . it was late may when i travelled to las vegas to meet hotz and take a ride in comma . ai s highly modified acura ilx . it was also more than a few months since hotz had promised to deliver proof of his victory over tesla . i asked him where the videos were . hotz laughed . it became less relevant , he said . both systems have become quite good . it could still happen . ampnbspsitting on the couch in his tech nerd turned ceo uniform an untucked button down shirt , sports jacket , and tattered baggy jeans hotz went on what i started to realize over the last couple of months is that tesla s not our competition our competition is almost nonexistent . tesla s never going to sell aftermarket self driving systems for honda civics . that s what we re doing . unlike tesla , hotz says , comma . ai is committed to building a product for the general public or as he likes to put it , deliver ghost riding for the masses . for less than , hotz promises to sell a kit that will let customers transform dumb cars into smart , self driving ones . installation will be a cinch , he says no more difficult or time intensive than building a piece of ikea furniture . though he s vague about which cars the final product will work on if your car has electronic stability control and electronic power steering , there s a chance we could make it work it won t work on your chevy he s confident it ll ship by the end of the year . what makes comma . ai s autonomous driving system unique is that instead of prioritizing a series of hard rules for the car to obey always take turn x at speed y hotz takes a grassroots approach to teaching vehicles the rules of the road the system tracks driver habits , aggregates them , and then instructs the car to emulate them . if most drivers slow down at a particular rate , comma . ai cars will too if most drivers would cut into a corner at this speed , comma . ai will do the same . instead of sitting in a room with a bunch of engineers , talking about how driving works and what we think is a good driver , we actually look , get data from good drivers and even bad drivers so we know what not to do , put that into our machine learning algorithms and get a driving agent , says hotz . all of which makes gathering massive troves of data so important to developing the company s technology by the end of , comma . ai hopes to have gathered billion miles of information . unlike google or tesla , comma . ai doesn t have a fleet on the road collecting data , so the company is trying something different on the day of my visit , hotz announced the chffr pronounced chauffeur app , which runs on a phone mounted to your dash , tracks your driving habits , and feeds them back into the company s database . the app and its accompanying site will launch this month , available on the nexus p , galaxy s , and galaxy s phones with a wider rollout planned down the line . the more miles you log , the more comma points you earn . those at the top of the publicly published leaderboard , hotz says , will be rewarded . comma points are really incredible and if you earn comma points you ll feel really great . i promise great things will come to the people at the top of the comma point leaderboard , hotz told me with a grin . my guess ? high scorers will be rewarded with the company s self driving kits when they launch . all good drivers are good in the same way , but all bad drivers are bad in different ways . comma . ai s approach certainly has its upsides . it creates a natural player on the road , giving the impression of a human driver rather than an automated pilot . it will also be dynamically adaptable instead of spending millions of dollars to map every road , with enough driver data a comma . ai vehicle will naturally pick up local driving habits . for instance , the company had done most of its car training in the bay area , where lanes are demarcated by white lines . but the roads around las vegas used botts dots . that posed a problem , but one which the car would , after a certain time of driver observation , adapt to . in places where roads aren t demarcated at all , hotz says , the car will learn from driver data to , for instance , follow the traffic ahead . but crowdsourcing driver ed also poses questions . by aggregating and copying driver habits , comma . ai is partially assuming that the average driver is a good driver , or at least a model to be imitated . as someone who has driven on a public road more than once , i d be hesitant to make that assumption nhtsa estimates that percent of car accidents are caused by human error . one of the promises of self driving cars , after all , is to create safer roads , not re create robot replicas of our faulty selves . hotz believes that the bad driver outliers will fade out in the mix . all good drivers are good in the same way , but all bad drivers are bad in different ways , he says , paraphrasing tolstoy . the committee driver will be excellent . so , how does the system perform in the real world ? from the aria suite , we descended to find comma . ai s acura in the resort s parking structure . aside from a handful of external sensors and a big black comma emblazoned on the hood , the acura was inconspicuous . inside , it was a different story . minus a joystick , the interior looked much like it did in the bloomberg profile large swaths of the dashboard paneling had been removed a warren of cables snaked out from the gutted glove compartment . a massive . inch screen tesla s is only inches , hotz is keen to point out shows the car s view of the road ahead but also offers all the amenities of a laptop computer complete with corresponding keyboard . the entire final product , hotz told me , will be the size of a breadbox . at the time of my visit the car was rigged with forward facing radar , fastened to the bumper by generous amounts of tape , and a wide angle camera located just behind the rear view mirror . the production system would also be linked to a gps unit , although it wasn t for our demo . we navigated the two blocks from the aria to interstate , the main thoroughfare from las vegas to los angeles . three lanes in either direction , it s a long , straight , and predictable expanse of road a perfect testing ground for comma . ai s system . we counted down from five and hotz poked a button on the flatscreen monitor . with a loud ding hotz appropriated the buckle your seatbelt ding from commercial planes , autonomous driving was engaged . similar to basic cruise control , hotz set his desired speed . next , he took his hands and feet off the wheel and pedals , and we were off . comma . ai s system doesn t read signs and isn t aware of local speed limits . with seemingly little difficulty , the acura stayed in its lane it slowed down in response to cars ahead , and sped back up when it felt safe . hotz , meanwhile , made a show of the autonomous abilities , pivoting in his seat to talk to the cameraman in the back seat and gesturing effusively to make a point . at one point , he pulled up netflix on the monitor and we watched the pilot of unbreakable kimmy schmidt hotz was unfamiliar with the show , but seemed genuinely amused by its premise , cruising down the freeway at miles an hour . maybe the most remarkable aspect of driving on the open highway was just how mundane it felt aside from a couple dicey moments , i felt safe . lulled into conversation , we missed our exit and drove off into the desert much farther than either hotz or i had intended . that s not to say the system was by any means perfect , and hotz was keen to remind me that it is still in beta . we let the car attempt ampnbspon and off ramps and it took both too quickly , cutting into the turn so sharply that hotz had to retake control . the system likes to follow the car ahead , and on one occasion hotz had to intervene before the ilx took us off the highway to follow an unwitting driver on their commute . and there are other challenges and shortfalls , too in the limited city driving i witnessed , the system felt less sure of itself . hotz says that though the car does a good job of recognizing speed variation in vehicles ahead , it can have a hard time recognizing a car at a standstill . that is , to put it mildly , a problem . and there are some capabilities that the system just doesn t have it can t automatically switch lanes , or read stop signs and red lights . hotz dismisses these features as cheap gimmicks , though he s open to incorporating them into the final product . without a gps unit , it doesn t know where it is , and can t actually direct you to a destination . but considering the company has been around for all of months , comma . ai has built a fairly impressive system a sort of advanced cruise control that i found myself longing for days later when i had to drive a couple hundred dull miles by myself . and comma . ai has already attracted significant interest in april , venture capital firm andreessen horowitz offered a modest but notable . million investment . perhaps spurring a z to action , cruise automation , another self driving startup that sought to produce add on kits , had just sold to gm for a reported billion . if comma . ai can deliver on its , kit , it might be a significant player as the industry matures . all of which made me wonder whether , somewhere in the back of his mind , hotz was still gunning for musk . as we drove back to the aria , i asked hotz about a recent profile of his company in forbes . the story featured a photograph from his office of an elon musk dartboard , two darts lodged in musk s forehead . now that they ve reached a detente , i asked hotz if he d taken the board down . there are better targets out there , he smiled , his hands off the wheel . but it s still a nice decoration . letting your tesla drive itself is a bad idea