 legal threats and disgruntled clients inside the uber for private jets tim martz made his fortune in broadcast radio , but even as a wealthy man , the price of chartering a private jet always stung a bit . so when martz joined jetsmarter in february , the service seemed like a steal . in return for a , annual membership fee , plus a , initiation charge , he could use the company s mobile app to reserve flights on a private jet as often as he wanted . you got the whole plane to yourself , which is great , recalls martz . he flew a half dozen times in his first six months , taking trips from his denver home to los angeles , las vegas , and various vacation paradises . i m paying this amount of money and getting , flights for free , that s a good deal . over the last two years , jetsmarter has earned a reputation as a fast growing startup with a luxury product and investors to match . in december , shawn jay z carter and the saudi royal family led a million round of funding that valued the company at . billion , putting it in the coveted unicorn club . kim kardashian declared she was obsessed with the service , and rapper rick ross worked the company into his lyrics . jetsmarter added big names like tom ridge , a former director of homeland security , to its board . florida governor rick scott was on hand to dedicate its new office in downtown fort lauderdale . kim kardashian declared she was obsessed with the service , and rapper rick ross worked the company into his lyrics our aim is to make flying private accessible to the masses , said ceo sergey petrossov in an interview with haute living . or at least that portion of the masses for whom business class was not enough but owning a gulfstream was out of reach . the company s marketing materials held out the promise that the moderately wealthy could mingle with celebrities and titans of industry . among the handful of people flying with you this month alone flyers have included jaime foxx , mega model emily ratajkowski who flew from ny la , super model irina shayk , si model chanel iman , athletes , moguls and more , read one pitch to potential members . network with other members and make friendships that matter . the media took to calling it the uber for private jets . but while the company was accumulating the trappings of success , members began experiencing increasing turbulence . starting in , the benefits and costs associated with the membership began to change rapidly . perks like free helicopter rides to the airport were removed from the membership offering . meals , which had been free , started to cost hundreds of dollars , and travel around the holidays cost extra , too . members lost the ability to reserve the entire plane without paying more . martz decided not to renew as my wife says , well if i have to share the plane , it s not really private , is it ? in a whatsapp group created by members to converse , customers complained about the cutbacks . we know we get great value and we also know that the company has to grow , but to continually change the deliverables during our paid membership is unfair , wrote one member who is still with the service . bottom line you can t change what i paid for , period , wrote another member . if i pay again and renew , i m not guaranteed for what i paid ? that s wild . many speculated that the tweaks to the service were symptoms of larger struggles at the business . ride it while you can . when it implodes we all got our money s worth , wrote one member . i m starting to feel like i m involved in an elaborate private jet ponzi scheme , where instead of money , i receive flights , wrote another . in other circumstances , jetsmarter s well heeled clientele might be quick to complain publicly about perceived shortcomings . but the jetsmarter membership agreement includes a non disparagement clause that allows jetsmarter to terminate anyone who makes negative or disparaging comments about the company or its employees . the verge spoke with more than two dozen current and former customers and reviewed chat logs of conversations between another two dozen members . some members claimed that their memberships were not renewed because they complained publicly about the service , and many others said they were afraid to voice their honest opinion , even in private chat rooms . effortless effervescence . abunin a post shared by jetsmarter jetsmarter on mar , at am pdtone member contacted the verge with a story about a legal battle that broke out when jetsmarter tried to raise their membership fees . they were pushing us around . it felt like i was dealing with the mafia , the member said . the member was initially on the record , but reached out a day later to say they had changed their mind . i don t wanna mess with jetsmarter , they have a big reach . the company s reputation took a hit last month , when its president , edward barsky , was arrested on charges of embezzlement . jetsmarter says the case stems from a previous job and is unrelated to its business . the non disparagement clause isn t the only example of aggressive image control from the company . earlier this month , jetsmarter pitched the verge on a demonstration of their service , with the condition that if a positive report wasn t published within five business days , the reporter would be charged , . over the phone , jetsmarter ceo petrossov and ronn torossian , the company s chief business officer , acknowledged that the service was rapidly evolving . it s a fast growing technology company that makes changes , said torossian . there are some people , primarily those who joined two years ago , who might not be a fit for the company today . the challenge , said petrossov , is how do we pair luxury exclusivity with the sharing economy ? there are growing pains and it s not right for everybody , i agree . torossian , a famously rough and tumble pr executive whose reputation as the bad boy of buzz previously earned him regular coverage on gawker and elsewhere , was dismissive of the complaints . these are wealthy people , this isn t some mass market gym you re paying a month for , said torossian . millionaires and wealthy people can t bring food on the plane or pay for food on the plane ? it s a little bit insane . the private airline industry presents a tempting target for entrepreneurs and investors . it s a really beguiling market , because there is just so much waste , says bill gurley , a veteran tech investor who backed uber and sits on its board . for a startup , that is a huge opportunity . many private jets fly just to hours a year , while commercial airlines can fly well over , . and according to clive jackson , the ceo and founder of global charter startup victor , a significant percentage of private jets in the air are flying empty . a plane chartered from new york to miami , for example , will often need to head back to base or relocate for its next pickup . this trip known in the industry as the empty leg , deadhead , or repo still requires an expensive amount of fuel , crew , and maintenance . many in the world of private aviation are fixated by how best to utilize these empty legs , says jackson . the dream is to build a marketplace to match empty legs with consumer demand . jetsmarter launched in , and in its early days its business was built around these empty legs . jetsmarter got paid by its members , its members got a deal on a flight , and the charter operator had a passenger to defray the cost of its deadhead . but while empty legs were a bargain , they had limited appeal . you needed a very specific kind of customer , one who would decide on short notice to drop everything and jet off to a destination without knowing exactly how they would get back . what s more , jetsmarter had little control over the plane s itinerary . if the jet s owner decided to delay their flight for an extra day of golf , then jetsmarter s members would also be delayed . if he s gonna make money as a business , it s not going to be by monetizing empty legs , says bradley stewart , ceo of xojet , which sells this type of flight to jetsmarter . so beginning in , the company started adding some reliable inventory of its own . jetsmarter created a shuttle service between hot spots like new york , los angeles , and miami , on which members could book seats for free . members can also pay to create a shuttle at the date and time of their choosing . they get a seat on a luxury jet , on their schedule , but at a fraction of the cost of renting the whole plane or buying an ownership stake . the only catch is they have to share once a member creates a shuttle , the remainder of the seats are offered free to other members . big shout out jetsmarter who made my life so much easier this wk . love this app , the only way book private jets . pic . twitter . com wwb sf ssj fergie fergie may , a lot of jetsmarter members loved the new offering . steven budker , an entrepreneur running a medical device company , says he flies over times a year , and estimates he s paying about a trip , a great price for a seat on a fancy jet . he also gets to skip the hassle of jostling among a crowd of strangers working their way through security , baggage claim , and boarding . budker liked the service so much he purchased additional memberships as gifts for his father , daughter , even the designer helping to remodel his house . the company says the average member spends , a year on the service , and claims it has , members , figures that add up to million in annual revenue . adding shuttle service , however , dramatically changed the company s cost structure . unlike empty legs , jetsmarter had to rent these planes at a price not very different from an ordinary customer chartering a private jet . while it could secure empty legs for as little as an hour , the cost to rent scheduled charter service on a jet runs between , and , an hour . jetsmarter says it now runs over shuttle flights a week . if the average flight was two and half hours and cost , an hour , jetsmarter s shuttle program would cost million a year . the company claims that it has been able to secure jets at a price dramatically lower than its competitors . we ve really cracked the code as to how to optimize usage , build up demand quickly , and aggregate supply very cost efficiently , says petrossov . but jetsmarter s own suppliers seem to contradict that claim . jet linx , a fleet operator that charters planes to jetsmarter , is a big fan of the company . i think it s fantastic , said ceo jamie walker . we re bullish to see them continue to improve and gain more marketshare . but for shuttle rentals , walker says , they pay us just like a jet card client calling us and booking the flight . xojet told the same story . he pays full rate for shuttle , said the ceo , though he added that xojet would work with jetsmarter on the margin , maybe percent . none of the suppliers contacted by the verge suggested they were offering jetsmarter regular , deeply discounted fares on shuttle flights . and all agreed that very few of their empty legs , if any , could be used for shuttle service . the rising costs of running the service were reflected in the membership pricing . though the company continues to offer an empty legs only membership for , , between and , the cost of an all inclusive annual membership went from , to , . the company also introduced an upper tier with extra benefits for , per year . jetsmarter projected the lifestyle of a country club , but their shifting price and perk structure moved with the speed of a silicon valley startup . there are plenty of successful tech companies that haven t achieved profitability uber has achieved a tremendous valuation despite its huge losses , and snapchat just went public with a balance sheet that sports more red ink each quarter . they re the digital online airplane version of uber . a lot of these high growth , concept business backed by venture capital are certainly burning cash , said xojet s stewart . there is no doubt jetsmarter is one of them . the question is do they get to profitability within six months , months , months , months ? if so , they re off to the races . if not , who knows what happens . they are trying to get to some light at the end of the tunnel in terms of profitability , but it s not going to happen . jetsmarter s competitors paint a darker picture . they say that its claims on cost are ludicrous , that the company must be sustaining heavy losses , and is staying aloft through a combination of new members and venture capital . the recent cutbacks and changes to the service , they argue , are an effort to control costs . they are trying to get to some light at the end of the tunnel in terms of profitability , but it s not going to happen , argues peter maestrales , the founder of airstream jets , a private charter company . on his company blog , maestrales published a pair of articles arguing that jetsmarter was a ponzi scheme . in response , jetsmarter threatened him with a defamation lawsuit , claiming it would file in three days if he didn t take the post down . three weeks later , the company still hadn t filed suit . instead , maestrales says petrossov called him repeatedly , begging him to take down the blog post , and offering up the potential of a business partnership . he is not the only person the company has attempted to silence through its legal department . a former jetsmarter member , who asked the verge not to use his name , signed up for the service in the fall of . he travels frequently for business , and felt it was a great deal . but from the very start , he was bothered by the ever changing terms . i m one of those guys , if i spend the money for a membership , i don t like the bait and switch . as he considered whether or not to renew his membership , he joined a private chat room where jetsmarter members exchanged travel tips and coordinated around shared charter bookings . i was bitching . some members private messaged me saying they feel the same way , he said with a laugh . one of my buddies said , be careful in that chat room . i didn t know what he was talking about . one of my buddies said , be careful in that chat room . i didn t know what he was talking about . when the member tried to renew his membership a few days later , he was denied . the company offered him no explanation for this decision . a second member shared a similar experience about losing their membership after complaining publicly . jetsmarter declined to share any details on the record about the decision to reject members . other cases demonstrated the challenges of balancing the entitlement of jetsmarter s clients , and their sometimes boorish behavior , with effectively running a shared consumer service . two members say they were unjustly kicked off for complaining about the company , though they committed offenses that would ve drawn censure anywhere . one source says he was booted for a critical instagram post made by his brother on a flight they took together , though the company s termination letter says that the post was racially tinged and invaded the privacy of other passengers . another member initially said he was kicked out for complaining about the service , but later acknowledged that someone at the company told him the reason for his cancellation was lewd comments he d made on a flight . they are using the excuse that my problem is i was talking too loud about fucking some girls , he complained bitterly . it s a private jet . i can say whatever i want . jetsmarter declined to comment to the verge on revoking his membership . in a whatsapp group chat , one person offered counsel to members , and a warning . if you don t like them , don t renew with them . . . by the way , if management would see what you guys write here you would not be renewed . fyi . people in the group half joked that they would be reported as the top complainers . several members said that they believed jetsmarter employees , masquerading as customers , were reporting on users , forcing customers to abandon the chat rooms and create new ones . one of the most vocal defenders of the company in the group chat had an area code from south florida , where jetsmarter is based . as one person in the group put it in an interview , many worried that someone was just going to take notes and turn you in . in interviews , members specifically cited the non disparagement clause as a source of concern . one former customer told the verge that if he hadn t already declined to renew his membership , essentially , i wouldn t have this conversation with you . one member believed the clause might not be legal , but decided not to bring it up with jetsmarter , as he worried he wouldn t be renewed if the company thought he was a troublemaker . in a separate chat thread , a current member who has renewed the service and purchased memberships for friends wrote , i ve been a silent contributor to the group out of fear of similar action . i ve not been terminated but i ve been pissed about them removing features under the guise of we can change the memberships as they re not guaranteed . the second they see members saying bad things they cancel your membership and don t give you your money back . others said they were waiting until their membership expired to voice an honest opinion . unfortunately i can t go on the record because it seems like , the second they see members saying bad things they cancel your membership and don t give you your money back , wrote one current member in a text to the verge . but the second my membership is over i plan on writing a scathing review so people don t have to get conned by these people . jetsmarter s aggressive image maintenance seems to be working , at least according to the members who expressed fear about voicing complaints . but the non disparagement clause may be unenforceable . late last year , the us passed the consumer review fairness act , which prohibits companies from writing gag clauses into contracts or terms of service that prohibit negative reviews . the act , says eric goldman , a law professor at santa clara university school of law , was clearly meant to pick up quote unquote non disparagement clauses . the law , parts of which went into effect this month , would seem to cover jetsmarter s non disparagement terms . that clause in jetsmarter s member agreement almost certainly runs afoul of the consumer review fairness act , he says . the ftc and state attorneys general will be vested with enforcement power under the act , although it s yet to be seen how often they bring legal action . jetsmarter told the verge that any member who says they were thrown out for speaking ill of the company isn t telling the truth and they were rejected for valid reasons , though the company declined to provide details . but petrossov was blunt about policing the jetsmarter community and removing anyone who caused issues with other customers . i ll be frank with you , there are certain people who don t mesh with our community . and we take a very strict stance toward the type of people we bring in , said petrossov . you re in a tube , you re in a small airplane and we are trying to create a group of people that are like minded , that are respectful to each other . it s very difficult . this has not been an easy thing to do . you know you are in love when you can t fall asleep because reality is finally better than your dreams . dr . sueuss c karakus a post shared by jetsmarter jetsmarter on feb , at am pst jetsmarter is trying to pull off a delicate balancing act . it offers its members privacy , while offering up the prospect of mingling with the wealthy and famous as an enticement to new members . the company s executives talk constantly about bringing the benefits of private air travel to a new class of people . it would not be an understatement to say we have changed many people s lives , says torossian . but when members complain , the response from the company has been to blame the entitlement of the rich . what you re talking about is somebody won t pay a few hundreds dollars to take a helicopter , to get on a private plane ? asked torossian . it sounds to me like very wealthy people , most of whom are very happy with the company , who might feel like the company should be subsidizing everything they do . petrossov agreed . it s kind of trivial , you have wealthy people complaining about private jets . it s a bit crazy in the whole scheme of things . it is painful to us when certain members really think they are not getting enough value . he argued every tweak to the service had only improved the offering . we ve given people , times more than what they were buying into back then . still , he conceded , jetsmarter had a role to play as well . at the end of the day a lot of this is about managing expectations . it s kind of trivial , you have wealthy people complaining about private jets . a current member agreed with that assessment what they are projecting , it s luxury , it s like nothing you ve experienced before , private jet travel but much cheaper . anyone who has some common sense realizes it s not really all those things . the problem , he felt , was that members were promised the moon before they signed up . nothing will ever cost you anything , we won t nickel and dime you , luxury white glove service . the value of the flights was good , but he felt the actual experience was a letdown . with great expectations come great disappointments . for now , this member was on the fence about renewing . it used to be easy to get a flight on a week s notice . now , i have to book a month out , which isn t great with my travel patterns . so the value kind of diminishes . he felt jetsmarter had transformed from a romantic adventure to an unpredictable headache . they are going through the same thing the airlines went through , except in two years instead of . additional reporting by nikki erlick and stephan kozub