 basically , night vale just walked . at a hotel in chicago s suburbs , a room full of people have been waiting over an hour to see the creators of beloved surrealist podcast welcome to night vale . when an organizer says they left after not getting paid , a cry of disbelief runs through the audience . she tries to bring the crowd together in a collective sigh of frustration . give me back my money ! one man shouts . and another piece of dashcon falls apart . originally called tumbl con , the fan convention was supposed to bring the tumblr community together , even after it changed its name to make clear that it had no affiliation with the site . with the help of volunteers from a range of fandoms , it rented out a convention center and set up three days of panels , including appearances by the likes of the night vale cast and actor doug jones also known as the eyeless monster in pan s labyrinth . by the time it ended , though , it was accused of being everything from an outright scam to an example of how well meaning fans can let a project spin disastrously out of control and land in a half deflated ball pit . attending dashcon was never going to be cheap a saturday badge cost , as much as a pass for the massive san diego comic con but the organizers estimated that this would cover the cost of starting an all new convention . on friday night , this obvious plan went horribly wrong . at pm , the organizers claimed that because of a sudden change of plans with hotel staff , they had to raise , within an hour or shut down the convention . amazingly , they managed to raise funds in half that time one person later said they donated on the spot . dashcon staff said they could work out reimbursements , but the money problems were just beginning . she spent the night on the night vale team s airbnb sofaafter the night vale panel was called off , guest webcomic artist noelle stevenson discovered secondhand that she would be paying her own hotel bill , after having to moderate her own panel . she ended up sleeping on a sofa in the night vale cast s airbnb rental . sherlock holmes podcasters the baker street babes pulled out of the show for the same reason . one vendor reported packing up because of low sales . organizers tried to compensate people who had paid to see the night vale reading , but they did so with raffle tickets , a chance at attending a concert that night , and an extra hour with the ball pit in the concessions room . three days later , that tiny , lonely ball pit lives on as the most enduring legacy of dashcon . unsurprisingly , tumblr was filled with questions , suspicion , and vitriol . some people wondered why the hotel would change its terms in the middle of a convention . tumblr author hythe , who has spent the past few days intensively reporting on dashcon , said that attendance looked far lower than the organizers had projected . critics cast suspicion on a partnership with charity random acts , which later said it had only approved a fundraiser , not agreed to any kind of joint project . we were only recently made aware of dashcon using the term partnership regarding this event , and asked them to remove it as soon as it was brought to our attention , marketing manager melissa dark tells the verge . as of now , we re not aware of the status of any funds that may have been collected or , indeed , if any were . illysian tumblr on saturday , organizers began the process of explaining the whole ordeal . originally , they said , they had worked out a plan to pay over the course of the weekend using money from walk in passes . then , one of the administrators was unexpectedly pulled into a meeting with higher level hotel staff and told that they had to come up with , or shut down the event . it s not clear exactly why or even if that happened , except that it was largely due to a miscommunication within hotel staff . a photo of a letter apparently on hotel stationery , dated the day after the collection , attested to the fee . we worked closely with dashcon on the contractual understandings . with most identifying information whited out , it raised suspicion on tumblr , and the hotel has stayed almost entirely clear of the controversy . in a phone call , general manager lisa timbo declined to say whether the renaissance had asked for money , whether the letter was accurate , or whether a deal like the one dashcon cited was standard procedure . we worked closely with dashcon on the contractual understandings that we had in place , and we very much enjoyed having them here on the property , she said . the billing protocol that we had established was contractually written and was mutually agreed upon . dashcon it s possible that the letter was a scam or even a last minute attempt to save face , but the evidence points to genuinely motivated people whose project vastly outstripped their planning abilities . one tumblr owner , who said she d volunteered for dashcon , posted a series of skype conversations that suggested confusing , poorly organized , and wildly overambitious management . the new , relatively tiny conference at one point reportedly wanted to host a panel with misha collins , the high profile fan favorite from supernatural , as well as the actor who played draco malfoy . after the initial backlash , dashcon began to look a little better . some attendees admitted there were problems but refuted early , negative rumors even the ball pit . the ball pit largely stemmed from a joke , said panel guest mark oshiro . it was not a point of interest , it wasn t something a single soul talked about , and it was just a quirky thing that existed . in order to support the idea that dashcon was a full , percent disaster , every single detail was used to paint the con and the people at it as horrific failures of humanity . you all deserve a real explanation . after speaking to a lawyer , the baker street babes wrote that dashcon called the billing incident a mistake and was settling it , though stevenson said she was still waiting . in a corrections post , hythe dispelled some likely misinformation . the dashcon staff didn t reply to a request for comment , but they ve promised more details in the coming days . just please bear with us while we put together something eloquent , accurate , and informative , said a tumblr post . jumping to defend ourselves is not the answer here . you all deserve a real explanation , and we re more than happy to provide it . few dispute that dashcon was a fiasco , though we still don t know precisely why . but as the inevitable and sometimes deserved insults mount , stevenson , oshiro , and others worry that the debate could become more about mocking fandom and the people who enjoy it . why doesn t tumblr just come out and say they want a chance to rip on teenage girls ? wrote oshiro . and even as she talked about the convention s hilariously poor planning , stevenson defended the idea . people mocking aspects of dashcon like cosplayers , vendors , panels about fan fiction , etc . have you never heard of a convention before ? 