 on a crisp afternoon late last year , i made my way to manhattan s upper east side to meet edgar choueiri , a professor of mechanical and aerospace engineering at princeton university . choueiri also heads the school s d audio and applied acoustics lab , and over the last decade , he has dedicated his time to the development , application , and refinement of binaural recording systems a century old method of audio recording that captures lifelike d audio in picture perfect fidelity . in his warmly lit apartment , a pair of speakers loomed over me as i sank into a leather couch in the living room . sitting in an adjacent chair , choueiri swiped through his ipad to set up a binaural audio demonstration . moments later , amber rubarth s folksy voice filled the room as she sang an acoustic rendition of louis armstrong s a kiss to build a dream on . the room transformed into an intimate live music venue and the soundscape was vivid rubarth was positioned right in front of me , with her band members on either side . a cellist on the right plucked on the strings of the instrument . a couple of soulful verses later , a violinist on the left grabbed my attention . i instinctively turned to look in that direction . if only for a few split seconds , my brain was tricked into believing the performance was actually live , and not recorded . you can hear a bird flying over your head . you ll hear a whisper in one ear . it puts you in the exact sound field as originally intended , says choueiri of binaural recordings . you can hear a bird flying over your head . you ll hear a whisper in one ear . and if you record a band , you ll hear it exactly as the band was positioned when playing . for decades , binaural recording was a novelty , and overlooked for less technically demanding methods . but with the rise of virtual reality hardware like the oculus rift , sony s morpheus , and samsung s gear systems dependent on realistic d audio to fully immerse their users binaural audio is on the cusp of a renaissance . binaural recording systems are unique because they emulate the workings of the human head . the architecture of our anatomy dictates how we understand the sounds we hear with an ear on either side of a thick skull and spongy brain , we hear sounds enter our left and right ears at different times . if a dog barks by our left ear , it takes a few extra microseconds for the bark to reach the right ear the sound will also be louder in one ear than the other . in addition , sound waves interact with the physical constitution of the listener the pinna or outer ear , the head , and the torso and the surrounding space , creating listener specific variations otherwise known as head related transfer function . the brain scrutinizes these miniscule interaural differences of time and strength in order to localize sound with immaculate precision . experience binaural audio yourself lt ! new pym . parent binaural recording graphic , m snippet thin gttraditionally , recordings have been made using two methods mono and stereo . mono uses a single microphone to pick up sound , while stereo uses two , spaced apart from each other . binaural recording takes the stereo method one step further by placing two microphones in ear like cavities on either side of a stand or dummy head . because the dummy head recreates the density and shape of a human head , these microphones capture and process sound exactly as it would be heard by human ears , preserving interaural cues . the effect is best experienced over headphones , with a clear distinction between left and right perspectives . it s a simple concept , but when done with high quality microphones and played over equally high quality headphones , the effect is eerie it fools the brain into believing it s hearing the sounds firsthand . at ampt s oscar , an early binaural recording dummy . image via acta acustica . the illusion creates three dimensional audio , which is not to be confused with surround sound . interchanging those terms is the quickest way to amuse and sometimes annoy an acoustician . a surround sound system employs multiple speakers to create a degree field around the listener . say you re watching a film presented in surround sound you ll see an explosion on one side of the screen , and a speaker on the corresponding side of the theater will emit a barrage of sounds . a theater equipped with dolby atmos , the company s most recent iteration of the technology , effectively envelops the audience . but by recreating exactly what your ear hears in any given scenario , binaural audio accomplishes a far more natural d sound without a costly armada of speakers . the technique at the heart of binaural audio can be traced back to clement ader , a th century french engineer . in , ader devised the theatrophone , a telephonic system of transmission to broadcast a paris opera show . pairs of microphones were systematically spaced in front of the stage , covering the breadth from left to right . signals from the show were then transmitted via telephone receivers to listeners on the other end . with a pair of receivers , one mounted on each ear , listeners could hear the show from their designated suites at the gallery of palais de l industrie . oscar ii , a visible improvement over at ampt s first dummy . image via acta acustica . in , at ampt bell laboratories brought binaural audio to the chicago world s fair . the acoustics research department of the company created a mechanical dummy , which it named oscar , with microphones placed on its cheeks in front its ears . oscar sat in a glass room capturing sounds while visitors gathered outside used headphones to hear exactly what the dummy heard . the technique revised the experience introduced by ader , but both inventions offered poor sound quality . through world war ii and the decades that followed , progress in binaural faced significant obstacles primitive techniques failed to achieve accurate , high fidelity recordings . but in , neumann , a renowned german microphone company , introduced the breakthrough ku , a prototype binaural recording device . neumann s iteration consisted of a detached dummy head with microphones placed in the eardrums the position captured cues with more precision than any of its predecessors . three generations of dummy heads later , the ku , introduced in , featured omnidirectional microphones , expertly preserving the spatial cues and the overall quality of sound . it continues to be the go to dummy head for binaural recordings . binaural audio found a home in select audio recording communities the technology worked well for radio plays and experimental sound art . meanwhile , musicians like lou reed , thom yorke , and imogen heap have all experimented with binaural audio productions . most recently , the asmr autonomous sensory meridian response community has been employing binaural recordings to trigger physical responses that they believe can be soothing and calming . one of thousands of binaural asmr youtube videos promising healing and tension releasing properties . now , almost a century after the demise of the theatrophones , investors are starting to revisit d audio technology the prototype of sony s vr headset project morpheus includes a custom d audio binaural solution in its development kit . d audio adds to the feeling of presence that we strive so hard to achieve with the visuals in vr , says richard marks , senior director of research and development at sony computer entertainment america . when sound is perceived to come from the same direction as a visual stimulus , the credibility of the virtual experience is greatly increased . while purely visual vr experiences can be made , adding d audio greatly magnifies the impact and depth of a vr experience . d audio offers a more expansive experience than its visual counterpart . unlike with the visuals , d audio is not limited to the field of view of the display and can be rendered to give a complete degree experience , says marks . one of the biggest challenges for vr design is that the user can look in any direction , and may not even be looking when something momentous occurs . but using a d audio cue , it is possible to steer the user s attention to look in the direction of the sound , similar to techniques that are used in live theater . dio s omni binaural recording set up . image via futureofstorytellingvideo director chris milk who s previously done work for kanye west , u , and arcade fire has harnessed the immersive capabilities of binaural recording to bring concerts to the virtual arena . last year , he produced hello , again , a revolutionary vr film of a beck concert . to match the degree visual experience , milk developed a binaural system to produce directional sound . if we were going to let you look in every direction , a one directional sound source would not work , he says . you would look behind but you would still hear as if you were looking in front of you . so we needed something that would dynamically change based on where you were looking in the visual . he ingeniously devised a system that used an omni binaural head with eight ears , with four pairs of dio s free space microphones implanted at every degrees . he followed it up with a software that would process the sound from those ears to provide the effect necessary . viewed with a vr headset , the binaural sound on the headphones matched the visual illusion of the beck video every step of the way . jean pascal beaudoin , the director of apollo studios , stresses the importance of d audio for vr experiences . if a sound is clearly coming from your left , and you turn your head degrees to look in that direction , you now expect that sound to be located right in front of you , says beaudoin . if it isn t , and it s still at your left , chances are you ll be pulled out of the experience before you even realize it . beaudoin provides d sound for vr experiences produced by felix amp paul studios , the vr production company commissioned by samsung gear to produce a series of degree live action videos . i am most interested in the creative possibilities that d audio opens up in terms of storytelling , emotions , and interactivity , says beaudoin . we are barely scratching the surface of the merging vr medium , but with each project , we make progress in establishing a new grammar . thom yorke recording with a neumann dummy head . image via dead air space . despite its potential , binaural audio is not widespread within the vr content world yet . audio sometimes takes a back seat in content production , says adam somers , lead audio engineer at jaunt , a palo alto based developer and one stop shop for capturing and creating cinematic virtual reality . so much work goes into visual elements , whether it s a game or film , that sometimes audio is an afterthought . but talking about vr as a medium for content , it s really important that the medium has the capability of binaural audio built in from the beginning to make it easier for content creators to utilize binaural audio . jaunt ensures the presence of binaural audio in every piece of content created through their platform . back in manhattan , choueiri is considering another problem since the inception of the technology , binaural audio has been reserved for headphone listening . but choueiri wants to make the technology accessible over external speaker systems for a wider audience . the challenge is that with speakers , a right ear not only hears its respective cues , but also picks up information meant for the left ear . it messes up the cues , so instead of hearing d sound , the brain just locates the speakers , choueiri said . it s like watching d movies without the glasses on . slowly but surely , binaural is becoming a linchpin in virtual reality developmentfor decades , this confusing crosstalk between speakers has perplexed the audio community . but choueiri s bacch sp , a filter that enables a pair of speakers to retain the aural cues , creates the illusion of d audio for the listeners . jawbone has employed princeton university s algorithm over the last two years to create the liveaudio filter for its wireless bluetooth speaker , jambox . loading the mini speaker with the digital filter optimizes audio to create a three dimensional experience . while effective , the experience is limited to a sweet spot the device needs to be centered in relation to the listener . the illusion instantly collapses when the listener moves from the spot . choueiri says a version of that software , the bacch dsp app , coupled with a head tracking feature , can sustain the illusion irrespective of the listener s head movements . that app is scheduled to show up in the store for mac os soon , bringing d audio experiences to laptops . slowly but surely , binaural is becoming a linchpin in virtual reality development . oculus most recent prototype , crescent bay , unveiled at ces last month , integrates binaural technology with rift s head tracking for complete audio visual immersion . and while sony s project morpheus hasn t announced final specifications of the product yet , their emphasis on d audio is evident . as adam somers of jaunt put it , binaural audio is critical to an immersive experience within the context of vr . we consider audio to be percent of the immersive experience . 