 before netflix got into the business of producing its own programming , it spent a lot of time emphasizing its recommendation software , the algorithms that would learn your taste and suggest the perfect title from the company s catalog . over the last few years that feature faded into the background , overshadowed by original content , emmy nominations , and its ampnbsprapid global expansion . today , however , netflix recommendations step back into the spotlight . up until now the recommendations you got were based on where you lived . people in the us saw suggestions for action or comedy flicks based on what other people in north america enjoyed . going forward , an anime fan in sweden will see recommendations based on the viewing habits of anime fans from around the world , and the same principle will apply to every category of suggested films . this sounds like a relatively minor change , but it s actually a precarious shift for a core technology that the company has been putting off for some time , one that was a year in the making and involved a team of nearly engineers . the regional approach netflix had been using was a stop gap solution to prevent local catalog differences from throwing off the recommendation algorithm . we were very worried that running the algorithms we knew worked well when we pulled data from a single country and a single catalog , if we tried across places where the catalog differed , the recommendations would be pretty bad , says carlos gomez uribe , vice president of product innovation at netflix , and the leader of the recommendation redesign . a pair of netflix engineers explained the problem at length in a blog post published today the dystopian sci fi movie equilibrium might be available on netflix in the us but not in france . and the matrix might be available in france but not in the us . our recommendation models rely heavily on learning patterns from play data , particularly involving co occurrence or sequences of plays between videos . in particular , many algorithms assume that when something was not played it is a weak signal that someone may not like a video , because they chose not to play it . however , in this particular scenario we will never observe any members who played both equilibrium and the matrix . a basic recommendation model would then learn that these two movies do not appeal to the same kinds of people just because the audiences were constrained to be different . however , if these two movies were available to the same set of members , we would likely observe a similarity between the videos and between the members who watch them . from this example , it is clear that uneven video availability potentially interferes with the quality of our recommendations . the regional model , however , created a new set of issues . each time netflix launched in a new territory , it was trying to make suggestions without knowing anything about its customers . to work well , the software needed a massive data set to crunch . without that , recommendations would be heavily influenced by the handful of users who interacted with the service . if a few oddballs among the first dozen people who signed up in madagascar happened to watch the notebook one night and old boy the next , well , that nation s recommendation system would think the movies are a good match . to get around this , netflix s recommendation team basically had to do the work typically reserved for its machines . when we launched in new markets sweden , germany , france , any of our previous markets we had to spend a lot of time hand tuning the recommendations , says gomez uribe . once it became clear internally that ampnbspnetflix was going to vastly expand its territory , the recommendation team decided to bite the bullet and move off regional recommendations . the team spent a year creating a global recommendation system that leverages the taste graph of the entire subscriber base while simultaneously taking into account differences in regional catalogs . it was time to bite the bulletthe new system has actually been live since the global expansion rolled out at ces , although it wasn t publicly announced then . when the first dozen customers signed up in macao , for example , they were fed recommendations that weigh their initial selections against what customers around the world have already established . if they checked out documentaries on food , they were then directed to a feed of foodie films that reflects what culinary cineastes enjoy from miami to moscow . for regions that already have an established taste graph , netflix will now layer that local flavor on top of the global recommendations , and this will happen for every country once they generate enough data for the algorithms to produce accurate results . even when we launch on a tiny island , that first person who signs up , the moment they start browsing through movies , we can begin to offer them more personalized recommendations , says gomez uribe . the next big challenge for netflix is languagethe next big challenge for netflix is language . today netflix is available in languages , but doesn t specifically gather information from users on their native tongue . currently which languages a member understands and to what degree is not defined explicitly , so we need to infer it from ancillary data and viewing patterns , netflix engineers wrote in today s blog post . when ranking recommendations , should netflix show the best match , or the best match in the language that is most comfortable for that user ? today s announcement doesn t include any new recommendations based specifically around language , but netflix says that it does have live tests running in the field as it works on optimizing its algorithms for this problem . i asked gomez uribe if the new recommendation algorithm would make any attempts to tune its suggestions based on cultural differences . how would a comedy about hitler play in spain versus germany versus israel , for example , and how might that affect recommendations . he demurred , saying , we are very aware that different cultures perceive nudity and violence in different ways . part of our challenge is we don t want to be in the place of guessing how a culture will interpret something . netflix will probably offend a few customers and generate a few headlines when the algorithm runs awry . but those are problems borne of success . countries have different attitudes to what content is appropriate , said ceo reed hastings when ampnbspannouncing the expansion at ces this year . the global potential is both a joy and a challenge to fulfill . 