 mike taylor , who lives in dublin , georgia , says the national security agency has been watching him since . he knows because they communicate with him . they talk to me on a daily basis , he explains evenly over the phone . they insult my looks . they insult my intelligence . they use racial slurs against me . he didn t know why he was being surveilled , however , so he filed a freedom of information act request to find out . when the nsa blew him off with its infamous boilerplate neither confirm or deny letter , he filed a lawsuit . last month , a judge ruled against him . i found taylor s case while sifting through the dozens of federal lawsuits that have been filed against the nsa since former government contractor edward snowden started leaking internal documents . many are written by hand and filed from mental institutions . most get dismissed for frivolousness , but somehow taylor got all the way through to a ruling . he even has a chance to appeal . it s unlikely that the nsa is spying on taylor and calling him names . but you could argue that he has a case . the legality of the nsa s programs has yet to be definitively challengedit s been almost a year since the nation learned that the government has been heavily surveilling americans using a web of programs that potentially violate the constitution or at least some laws . the legality of those programs has yet to be definitively challenged . even if the programs are legal , many feel the government is at least obligated to be transparent about them . anne smith , an apparently mentally stable woman in idaho , filed a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the phone records collection program . it s none of their business what i m doing who i call , when i call , how long i talk , she told the washington post . rand paul , who represents a constituency that strongly opposes government overreach , has filed a class action lawsuit , calling the bulk collection of phone records a clear and continuing violation of the fourth amendment . those are just two examples out of at least major lawsuits have been filed against the nsa , barack obama , telecommunications companies that facilitated data collection , and others involved in the government s surveillance programs since edward snowden s first revelations on june th , , according to investigative journalism nonprofit propublica . there have been various rulings by lower courts and appeals courts , some of which contradict each other . so far , only one case has been dismissed . the lack of consensus suggests that some part of the nsa program should eventually come before the supreme court . lunatics aren t the only ones trying to get an answer i think there is widespread agreement that there are some legal issues in these cases that only the supreme court will be able to resolve , says jameel jaffer , deputy legal director for the american civil liberties union , which has filed a number of lawsuits challenging nsa surveillance . the question of where the constitutional limits are is a crucial one , jaffer says . it s important that the courts be engaged on that particular question , and more generally on these issues of the proper scope of government surveillance in a constitutional democracy . the legal landscape is messy , however . you can t simply sue the nsa for overzealous surveillance on behalf of all americans . lawyers must choose which aspects of the surveillance program to challenge , along with which government agencies and on what grounds . plaintiffs may say the nsa violated the first , fourth , and fifth amendments of the constitution , as well as the freedom of information act and other laws . some challenge section of the patriot act , which the government says authorizes bulk metadata collection others address section of the foreign intelligence surveillance act amendments , which the government says authorizes prism and others challenge the classification of information related to the surveillance programs . justices scalia and ginsburg said the court will have to address the nsa issuethere are arguably three cases closest to reaching the supreme court , all challenging section and the phone record surveillance . two were filed after the snowden revelations , and one was filed back in but just recently cleared a legal hurdle . klayman v . obama et . al . is a billion lawsuit filed on behalf of all verizon customers , alleging that section and the secret fisa court order violate the first , fourth , and fifth amendments , and other laws . dc federal judge richard leon ruled in klayman s favor in december and the government now has six months to appeal . klayman also filed a parallel case against prism and section , but that was dismissed by the judge because he couldn t prove the government had monitored any specific communications . aclu et . al . v . clapper et . al . accuses the government of dragnet surveillance that threatens the work of organizations that work with confidential sources , while also violating the first and fourth amendments and other laws . new york federal judge william pauley found that the program is lawful around the same time that judge leon ruled the opposite way in dc . the aclu has appealed and an argument is likely to take place over the summer . jewel et . al . v . national security agency was filed by the electronic frontier foundation on behalf of at ampt customers in , after the first revelations of nsa warrantless wiretapping . a judge ruled over the summer that the government s state secrets defense was invalid and the case could proceed . the plaintiffs claim the government violated separation of powers , the first and fourth amendments , the foreign intelligence surveillance act , the wiretap act , the stored communications act , and the administrative procedure act . there are also challenges in the criminal courts . the government recently disclosed records of when warrantless surveillance was used against defendants who have been charged and convicted of terrorism related crimes . three of those defendants two convicted , one charged challenged the constitutionality of section as a result . jamshid muhtorov , who has been charged but not convicted of supporting a terrorist organization in uzbekistan , is asking a judge to throw out the evidence from warrantless surveillance . two weeks ago , justices antonin scalia and ruth bader ginsburg implied during an interview that the supreme court will hear a case about the nsa issue , specifically on the fourth amendment challenge , at some point . however , there are reasons to believe the supreme court is not eager to take up any of these challenges any time soon , and they aren t obligated to do so ever . section must be reauthorized in the middle of next year , and the supreme court may be hesitant to address a law that is going to change so soon . the details of the surveillance programs are still emerging , so the court may want to wait until there is a more complete picture . one or all of these cases are eventually going to make their way to the supreme court . some privacy advocates are still optimistic . one or all of these cases are eventually going to make their way to the supreme court . it s just a matter of timing and whether they re consolidated , says amie stepanovich , senior policy counsel at the human rights organization access . she s betting on the klayman case , the aclu case , or first unitarian et . al . v . national security agency , which was filed in california and hasn t had an opinion entered yet . that case challenges the phone metadata program and leans primarily on the first amendment right to free association , followed by claims under the fourth and fifth amendments and other laws . the slow pace of justice may seem frustrating as we close in on the anniversary of snowden s revelations . opponents of mass surveillance say the issue threatens democracy , while proponents say it s crucial to keeping us safe . meanwhile , snowden continues to stoke the fire from exile in russia , while news that the pulitzer prize went to the journalists who broke his story reinvigorated the debate . americans need closure , and the supreme court is one way to get it . and maybe then mike taylor can finally find out what the government has got on him . 