 wonder woman begins on the paradisiacal island home of the amazons , a mythical tribe of warrior women sent to earth to protect humans from their basest impulses . when world war i spills onto the island s shores , the film s titular heroine , diana gal gadot , leaves its relative safety to help american spy steve trevor chris pine deliver a german laboratory notebook to british intelligence . that notebook , stolen from a german chemist nicknamed dr . poison , contains the germans newest superweapon it s a formula for a new kind of gas , mustard gas , diana explains , translating the notebook for britain s military leaders . hydrogen based instead of sulfur . gas masks would be useless against hydrogen ! gasps one of those leaders . even in a film that includes a magical island created by zeus himself , these details about the gas are so strangely specific that they deserve a little fact checking . chemically speaking , does this formula make any sense ? not really . first off , mustard gas is such a horrible , terrifying weapon , it doesn t need to be made more potent . but if you were a chemist bent on raining destruction on the allied forces , you wouldn t do it by replacing the sulfur atom in mustard gas with a hydrogen atom . you d know that sulfur is the linchpin holding together this poisonous molecule . video warner bros . pictures the souped up mustard gas in wonder woman can crack glass . it s got a bat like structure , explains raychelle burks , a chemistry professor at st . edward s university in texas . sulfur s smack in the middle , and then you ve got two bat wings that come out and they re kind of crinkly cut . both of those bat wings are made up of two carbon atoms and capped with a chlorine . the four carbon atoms each sprout two little tufts of hydrogen fuzz , for a total of eight hydrogen atoms . although there is a villain in a human form , the race against time is a chemistry one . so , mustard gas also known as sulfur mustard has plenty of hydrogen already . and an additional hydrogen couldn t replace sulfur , because hydrogen only likes to bond to one other atom at a time . unlike sulfur , hydrogen doesn t have enough spare hands to hold on to both bat wings . still , burks says , the film does get the prominent role of chemistry in wwi right . although there is a villain in a human form , the race against time is a chemistry one , she says . in that way , they did capture world war i as being a chemist s war . image by ben mills wikimedia commons the chemical structure of mustard gas , with sulfur yellow in the middle connected to two wings . both wings contain two carbon atoms black , each bound to two hydrogen atoms white . chlorine atoms green bracket the entire structure on either end . the real life dr . poison was a german chemist named fritz haber . he won the nobel prize for the breakthrough that made the large scale production of fertilizer possible . he also spearheaded germany s chemical weapons program , and presided over the first successful use of a chemical weapon during world war i not mustard gas , but chlorine . with the help of the wind , the germans wafted chlorine gas across the allies trenches on a spring day in and killed more than , soldiers , writes sarah everts in chemical ampamp engineering news . this experiment in chemical warfare sparked an arms race that earned world war i the moniker the chemist s war , despite an international ban on chemical weapons . everts quotes german officer rudolf binding , who wrote i am not pleased with the idea of poisoning men . of course , the entire world will rage about it at first and then imitate us . each new chemical agent was met with a more sophisticated countermeasurebinding was right . a twisted call and response ensued where each new chemical agent was met with a more sophisticated countermeasure . among the earliest defenses against chlorine gas were urine soaked handkerchiefs the ammonia in urine could render the chlorine relatively harmless . but when the germans first weaponized mustard gas in , it presented a new challenge . contrary to its name , mustard gas does not actually have any mustard in it . it s named for its mustard like odor . nor is it a gas . soon known as the king of the battle gases , mustard gas is actually an oily liquid that can pass through leather , rubber , and most textiles , everts writes . image wikimedia commons this canadian soldier has blisters caused by mustard gas . artillery shells filled with mustard gas rained tiny droplets onto the battlefield that didn t need to be inhaled to inflict mass casualties . they soaked into the soldiers uniforms and covered their skin , causing a delayed reaction . hours after exposure , soldiers would start to vomit , and their skin would burn . huge blisters would form , and , if they inhaled the mustard gas , the lining of their lungs sloughed off . many went at least temporarily blind . both recovery and death were slow and agonizing . and the oil persisted on soldiers bodies and in the environment , where mortars could kick up residual mustard gas that had settled onto the soil months before . wonder woman doesn t show the gruesome effects of the hydrogen based mustard gas on people . instead , we see it shriveling a gas mask which isn t how mustard gas works , cracking glass it can t , and exploding in an airplane , which goes up like a chemical tainted hindenburg . it seemed like the filmmakers wanted to make the gas more flammable , burks speculates , and people might equate hydrogen with flames . like can we have a chimera ? and the answer is no . you cannot . you don t need to be the big , scary monster . no , this is scarier than that . still , the film captures the aftermath and horror of chemical weapons in a scene where the germans bomb a village with artillery shells containing the fictionally souped up mustard gas . an orange mist floats low over the ground as diana walks through to find scattered bodies . the thing that caused that devastation ? a tiny molecule you can t fight with your fists , or with weapons . once that creeping mist catches you , it s too late . bigger is not scarier , burks says . you don t need to be the big , scary monster . no , this is scarier than that . and it s a teeny , teeny molecule . wonder woman is a superhero movie , so it doesn t give anything away to say that diana beats the bad guy in the end . but knowing that chemical weapons continue to be used even today touches that victory with a sense of futility , which the filmmakers seem to have intended . after all , humans will continue to dream up new , horrific ways of hurting one another . but wonder woman gives us a chance to escape to an imaginary world where there s someone or something out there , trying to stop us . 