 yesterday , kickstarter featured a dungeons amp dragons documentary as its project of the day the great kingdom , a feature length film about the manipulation and betrayal behind the creation of the game . it s a little bit like the facebook story , producer andrew pascal tells the verge . one guy came up with the genesis of the germ of the idea , and then the other guy really just took it and ran with it . the game created by gary gygax and dave arneson become a worldwide phenomenon from which neither managed to get rich . instead , a rift grew between them and their respective fans , and they ended up squabbling in a series of nasty lawsuits . the great kingdom shows this progression through archival footage , interviews , and reenactments . every story has sides , is the film s tagline . how true . the filmmakers didn t plan it this way , but the infighting depicted in the great kingdom was mirrored by infighting around the making of the film . the project is pascal and sprattley s second attempt at a d ampd documentary , and their second time fundraising for one on kickstarter . every story has sides . originally , the pair raised , on kickstarter along with director anthony savini in february of to make dungeons amp dragons a documentary . realizing they had irreconcilable creative and personality differences with savini , pascal and sprattley decided to walk away from the project and start again from scratch . around the time pascal and sprattley launched the kickstarter campaign for the great kingdom , savini launched a lawsuit . he accused the pair of nine separate charges that basically amounted to acting in bad faith . according to the complaint , pascal and sprattley pocketed some of the funds collected on paypal for the first project , illicitly worked on the second project during arbitration with savini , re interviewed some of the same people who had been interviewed for the first film , and caused confusion among partners and backers . last year there was a falling out among the producers of this film and now two of the original producers have set out to create their own competing documentary , savini wrote in an update to his kickstarter backers . we would never object to competition , our position is that they have wrongfully attempted to use the assets of this film in their own , competing documentary . the community around dungeons amp dragons can be acrimonious . players take sides on everything arneson versus gygax dungeons amp dragons versus advanced dungeons amp dragons and in the more recent drama , dubbed the edition wars , a spinoff game called pathfinder that competes with various versions of d ampd . the history of the game is rife with copyright lawsuits and broken friendships . the latest edition of d ampd has begun rolling out , and its creators hope that it will unify these various factions . they have wrongfully attempted to use the assets of this film in their own competing documentary . we like to call it the curse of tsr , pascal says , referring to arneson and gygax s company . gamers are very territorial and they re very opinionated , and so because of that there s sort of a natural inclination to form factions and form groups and rivalries and things like that . pascal declined to elaborate on the creative and personal differences that led to the split . savini declined to comment for this article , directing the verge to the complaint filed in his lawsuit . though neither film has been fully produced and released , it s possible to glean what the differences will be based on the dueling kickstarter campaigns and a close reading of statements made by their creators . savini s film , dungeons amp dragons a documentary , seems more academic a definitive look at dungeons amp dragons , according to the pitch . by contrast , the great kingdom includes reenactments , a focus on the creators personal lives , and a sense of humor that s missing from the original film . pascal and sprattley , who say the film was their idea , also seem concerned that dungeons amp dragons a documentary was taking too long to finish . the film was slated for a release , to coincide with the th anniversary of d ampd . at this point , december is the earliest it might come out . meanwhile , pascal and sprattley are aiming to do their film in a year . our goal is to finish , they write in their new kickstarter . we ve worked too hard not to . if they don t make their fundraising goal , they plan to wait a bit and then relaunch the campaign . perhaps pascal and sprattley will eventually reconcile with their old director or at least reach a d tente , as gygax and arneson did . we don t hate each other , arneson said in a interview . we just kept going our own two separate ways . update original director anthony savini sent a statement by email . we had an agreement that we would all move forward making this film and if we couldn t the film would stop . never split up the party . originally , when things started to go south , i tried very hard to keep all of us together . back then we were three friends making one film . we were also partners under my production company for the first year . update pascal wrote in to respond to savini s response . there was never an agreement of this nature made between andrew , james and anthony that stated if we were unable to move forward in a cohesive partnership that the previous film production or any future productions , including the great kingdom , would cease . james and i put our heart and soul into the creation of these films for the d ampd community . it s our desire that not only the great kingdom succeed but that that the previous project is completed and is successful . our obligations to the kickstarter community that supported us was one of the prime reasons for us to start work from scratch on the great kingdom . we have never and will never use footage or funds from the previous project . and it is because of this obligation that we will offer the great kingdom as a free download to all of our former kickstarter backers . 