 like most newly published authors , andrew groen has spent a lot of time lately doing talks and trying to get the word out about his new project . he s travelled to popular destinations , and done his best to convince people to buy his history book . the difference is that groen isn t traveling the real world instead , he s piloting a ship inside the online game eve online , venturing to bustling trade hubs and using the in game chat to spread the news . his book , empires of eve , chronicles the formative years of the sci fi virtual world and the book tour is befitting its subject . flying around and doing it in eve space is very futuristic , says groen . eve online is a relatively niche game , but one that often makes headlines thanks to its massive battles , which can involve thousands of real people piloting thousands of spaceships . damages from these virtual wars can often cost the equivalent of thousands of real world dollars . unlike most massively multiplayer online games mmos , eve online is largely shaped by its players , not the developers . its inhabitants create their own alliances and governments , even religions , and this in turn leads to strife , conflict , and eventually warfare . for groen , this sense of permanence unlike most online games , eve players can build and destroy things that impact the rest of the community is what made the game an ideal fit for a history book . we can look at eve , and we can say this looks just like human history . human history is playing out inside of this virtual world , he explains . we re seeing all of these real , amazing aspects of humanity revenge and greed and friendship and love inside of this virtual space . that to me is a harbinger of things to come . his book empires of eve , which released earlier this month after a successful kickstarter campaign in , isn t a complete history of the game , but instead puts into context a cataclysmic battle known as the great war , an event that spanned nearly two years from to . though it s a book about a video game , it reads more like a sci fi game of thrones , with iconic leaders , shocking betrayals , and devastating battles . the book does a fantastic job of putting events into context , letting you understand the bigger picture , while focusing on the key personalities . by the end , tens of thousands of people from the miners gathering materials to build new ships to the leaders spouting propaganda on the game s forums have been involved in the virtual conflict in some form . and the outcome ultimately shaped the future of eve online s power structure . two years ago nobody was even intending to write these stories down . groen , a former journalist who has written for places like wired and ars technica , spent the past two years researching the book . that included talking to more than players , poring over forum posts , and analyzing data from sites like dotlan , which tracks things like the number of ships destroyed in a battle or which corporations owned which star systems on which dates . now that the book is out , he s found that outside of a few outliers unhappy with how they were portrayed the eve community has largely embraced the book . it s easy to forget now that there is a history book . two years ago nobody was even intending to write these stories down , he says . they were going to be lost . hardcore players in the eve community understand that , and i think are pretty thankful for that . he adds that eve is in the unfortunate position where there is only one historian right now , so there s not that many people to have debates with . one of the most fascinating things about reading empires of eve is the various ways the barriers between the real world and eve online can blur . sometimes the results of a large scale battle involving thousands of people will come down to a technical error , as one side experiences more lag than the other , thus dooming them to defeat . other times , a huge influx of players will occur simply because another online game shut down , resulting in a shift in the game s power structure . groen found found that the real and virtual world can blur when it comes to the players , too . though people often played as characters very different from their real personalities , they d often slip back into the role they used to play , becoming a mixture of the two . that s particularly true of the book s main character , groen says , a controversial figure known as sirmolle . he s very nice , very kind , he says of his time interviewing him , but every once in awhile he ll dip into that space dictator character , known as sirmolle , and suddenly he s a very formidable person . he s a little bit mean , he has mean things to say about his enemies , things like that . when the emotion takes over , that kind of teleports people back into that moment . he wouldn t talk to me because my in game character was not the right race . it wasn t easy to find all of the key figures in the story . it s an incredibly difficult reporting challenge to get in touch with somebody when the only thing that you know about them is the alias with which they played a video game years ago , groen notes . but for the most part he says people were more than willing to talk . in some cases , the emotion was still raw from those who were defeated and still hold grudges . a few people wanted to keep their identities secret , because they didn t want to be associated with their virtual life . and in one instance a player refused to talk to groen simply because he had the wrong avatar . he wouldn t talk to me because my in game character was not the right race , and his in game character was racist against my in game character , groen says . this was a guy who was so deeply into his role play character that he refused to talk to a historian because our in game characters were racist against each other . eve online is sometimes described by critics as boring . despite the grand stories told within its virtual space , the actual act of playing isn t all that exciting it s filled with complicated menus and a lot of busy work . for this reason the game seems to attract a certain kind of player . if there s one thing that i really took away from talking to a lot of eve players , it s that they are uncommonly intelligent , groen says . it is disturbingly common to be talking to an eve online player who is a famous fleet commander , or a grand leader of men , and you say well , what do you do in the real world ? and they ll say oh , i run a nuclear reactor up in portland just nonchalantly , or i run an international logistics company or i used to be a dc attorney . a well placed source has told groen there s a corporation in the game made up entirely of fortune ceos , though he hasn t been able to confirm this for himself . the biggest takeaway from reading empires of eve is that , while the events are set in a video game , they re still real in a lot of ways especially for those who experienced them firsthand . the emotions are real , and years after the events took place people still feel strongly about them , whether it s the thrill of victory or the despair of loss . it s not quite as significant as something that happens in the real world , but it s friggin close . groen says . the things that you re able to achieve within this game are staggeringly large . when you are a human being who can rise to a level in eve where , people will do what you say , that s not a digital accomplishment . these accomplishments don t really need to have an asterisk beside them to be interesting . 