 when you put on the oculus rift , a virtual reality headset , it feels like you re in another world . you can turn your head in any direction and see things that don t exist as if they were right in front of you . but the moment is short lived . as soon as you try to move your hands , feet , or body , the illusion begins to crumble . the rift s immersion only extends to your head . the virtual reality experience is not going to be complete with just the visual side , oculus rift inventor palmer luckey admits . you absolutely need to have an input and output system that is fully integrated , so you not only have a really natural way to view the virtual world but also a natural way to interact with it . we don t have that , and it makes me sad , luckey says . but as it so happens , a number of companies are already trying to fill in those gaps . when the first oculus rift dev kits started shipping in march , a company called sixense saw a second chance . two years earlier , sixense and razer had teamed up to launch the hydra , a novel motion controller that used an electromagnetic orb to track a pair of wands in d space . to put it mildly , the hydra flopped . but when the oculus rift arrived , developers weren t satisfied experiencing vr with only their heads , and that same hydra offered an easy , affordable way to get their hands in on the action . the formerly neglected peripheral sold out overnight and ended up moving more units over the course of the month than it had in the space of an entire year . despite its many faults , it quickly became the de facto peripheral for new virtual reality demos . gtin truth , the existing hydra doesn t make a lot of sense for vr . the controllers are tethered to a base station and have an accurate range of just feet , making it difficult to even turn your body around in virtual reality . but when the rift caused hydra sales to accelerate , sixense realized it could commercialize a better version of its tech a wireless version with an foot range and a custom three axis magnetic coil that amprsquos more compact and more cost effective . the company launched a successful kickstarter project for an intriguing new design the sixense stem , a set of small wireless modules that could be attached to various parts of the body or placed inside larger controllers ampmdash even ones designed by other firms . sixense ceo amir rubin says that anyone can use the module however they like , with no licensing fees . could kickstarter failures turn into rift successes ? that amprsquos what tactical haptics is counting on . founded by dr . william provancher of the university of utah , tactical haptics has built a controller with a twist ampmdash literally . the reactive grip moves four sliding plates underneath your hand to twist your skin in ways that make it feel like you amprsquore holding objects that don amprsquot actually exist . the illusion of weight and tension is incredible ampmdash but to actually move those objects in d space , the reactive grip needs a motion controller like an attached wii remote or a sixense stem . though the company amprsquos own kickstarter failed last week , provancher tells us the idea isn amprsquot dead . he amprsquos taking meetings at ces next month to look for investments . and in the meanwhile , a number of companies including buttkicker , woojer , and vivitouch are pursuing another form of haptics specially tuned subwoofers you attach to your chair , shirt , or head to induce powerful body shaking vibrations during your games . another failed kickstarter , araig , imagined an entire exoskeletonlike suit where electrical impulses can force your muscles to contract in response to virtual impacts . some people don amprsquot want to experience virtual reality with just their eyes and hands , though . i want to walk and run and jump , says jan goetgeluk . he amprsquos the founder of virtuix , one of two startups hoping the wave of interest in vr can help them sell an omnidirectional treadmill . the virtuix omni and the cyberith virtualizer both follow the same basic idea they combine a harness around your waist with a slippery surface under your feet , so you can rotate your body in any direction and walk or even run without actually going anywhere or bumping into anything . they amprsquore rather expensive , starting at for an omni , and they take up a good bit of space . still , there amprsquos one obvious way to defray both those costs . we get at least one email per week from someone who wants to start a vr arcade , says goetgeluk . the return of the vr arcadebut if you amprsquore willing to go to a vr arcade , you might not have to run in place . startups like survios , vrcade and protagonist are using the oculus rift in much larger virtual reality environments ampmdash basically the closest thing we have yet to the holodeck from star trek . you can actually walk around an entire room because the system can recognize your surroundings and adapt the game to match . protagonist amprsquos atlas system ampmdash another failed kickstarter ampmdash uses markers on the floor and a smartphone strapped to your chest , vrcade adds motion capture cameras , and survios literally straps a razer hydra , a playstation move and an oculus rift to a helmet to combine multiple tracking methods . in order to make virtual reality fit your environment instead of the other way round , so called real space virtual reality requires custom games ampmdash you amprsquore not going to be playing battlefield on this , says protagonist founder aaron rasmussen ampmdash but those games can be extremely immersive as a result . oculus founder palmer luckey counts zombies on the holodeck ampmdash a survios game ampmdash as one of his favorite vr experiences thus far , shooting and slashing through zombies with the use of his full body . and just because you amprsquore stuck in a single room in reality doesn amprsquot mean you can amprsquot move further in the virtual world . survios co founder nathan burba tells us that while any given section of a game might be small , you can move from one x foot playroom to the next with the push of a joystick . a slew of jerry rigged contraptions with no marketso if all these startups are building all these promising components of a complete virtual reality system , why is palmer luckey sad ? so far , all these companies have to show for their work is a slew of jerry rigged contraptions , and there amprsquos no market for them yet . at the kickstarter stage , many of these startups have already failed . and luckey amprsquos not convinced that any of them are the right hardware for virtual reality yet . it amprsquos still so early on that it amprsquos hard to say which of them is the best or if they go as far as they can go , luckey says . there are things out there that are cool , but there are other things i amprsquove seen , things that are not necessarily public facing yet , that are much cooler . of course , you might be able to say the same about the oculus rift itself . while he credits the rift with pushing vr further and faster than any previous piece of headgear , virtuix founder jan goetgeluk thinks it won amprsquot be alone . i think the head mounted display , a year from now , will be a commodity , he tells the verge . several people we spoke to for this article suggested that major display vendors are working on their own solutions , hinting that samsung and sony are preparing their own head mounted displays to compete with oculus . the head mounted display , a year from now , will be a commodity . luckey takes these comments in stride . i do think it amprsquos true that there will be more headsets amphellip if we re the only vr headset on the market in five years , than vr probably isn t taking off like we d hoped it would . in the meanwhile , the uncertainty over which peripherals will eventually be necessary poses an issue ampnbspfor prospective virtual reality game developers . vr games need a controller of some sort , but each device that developers support adds more work . for now , oculus and sixense seem like fairly safe bets given the proven interest . oculus has already shipped , developer kits , and sixense is preparing for , preorders of the stem . but even the rift and the stem aren amprsquot consumer products quite yet , and the rest of the vr hardware ecosystem is a rather wild west . we want people to be able to play these things . though luckey doesn amprsquot think gamepads , keyboards or mice are really the right interfaces for virtual reality , he tells us oculus may not have a choice on day one . at the beginning , i think we amprsquoll focus primarily on gamepads , he says . we don amprsquot want to say you amprsquore going to need a , , system in addition to your oculus rift . we want people to be able to play these things . but if another company doesn amprsquot rise to the challenge and figure out how to build the right input device for vr , the inventor of the oculus rift says he might have to do it himself . i specifically believe that we are going to be doing that , says luckey . we re not going to make virtual reality input unless we think we can make the best virtual reality input , he clarifies . but one way or another , we won amprsquot be stuck with gamepads for long . 