 i reached the breaking point , as many parents do , about two and a half months in . my newborn son , oliver , was hitting a phase where his five senses were really coming online . the mere act of being awake was often overstimulating sometimes he would start to cry when we turned on a bright light or closed a door too loudly . it was late afternoon and he was sitting in my lap wailing . i rocked him , fed him , and changed his diaper , but nothing helped . in desperation i did something that until that point i had resisted i grabbed my iphone and opened up the comics app . as soon as i started flipping through panels of the wolverine saga , the crying stopped . his little mouth gaped open in wonder . i took his hand and swiped it across the screen . a new image appeared . he smiled in delight . my mother came in from the kitchen . what are you showing him ? she asked with horror . don t you know how bad that is for his brain ? it s not that serious , mom , i countered , waving her off . a little bit of time playing with my phone isn t hurting him . my wife , overhearing us , joined in the conversation from the next room . you re going to turn him into a vegetable , she shouted . you re both nuts , i fumed , but i put the phone back in my pocket . oliver burst into tears . photo courtesy of the boston public library . knee jerk technophobiaevery new narrative technology has been demonized upon arrival by those convinced it amprsquos harming their children . in , the american annals of education declared that the ampldquoperpetual reading amprdquo of novels ampldquoinevitably operates to exclude thought , and in the youthful mind to stint the opening mental faculties , by favoring unequal development . no one can have time for reflection , who reads at this rapid rate . amprdquoradio was so addictive , parents warned , that children were skipping meals to tune in , and film transformed viewers into sexually deviant criminals . television was a mental wasteland . video games created violent killers . as for comic books , dr . fredric wertham wrote in my mother s suspicion of screens was just knee jerk nostalgia ampldquobadly drawn , badly written , and badly printed ampmdash a strain on the young eyes and young nervous systems ampmdash the effects of these pulp paper nightmares is that of a violent stimulant . . . unless we want a coming generation even more ferocious than the present one , parents and teachers throughout america must band together to break the comic magazine . amprdquoi viewed my mother amprsquos suspicion of screens as just another form of the knee jerk nostalgia that makes people believe new gadgets are addictive , dangerous , and capable of affecting not just how we think , but the way our bodies work . a few days after the iphone incident , however , i got an email from my mother with links to a half dozen scientific studies about the effect television , computers , and video games can have on young children amprsquos developing brains . too much screen time can , according to the various studies , lead to a delay in verbal skills , poor concentration , emotional instability , and a greater risk of developing attention deficit disorder . in , the venerable american academy of pediatrics officially decreed that exposure to screens is detrimental to children under the age of two . some of the most damning data my mother passed along came from the millennium cohort study , which tracked the long term health and development of children in the uk born between and . it found that by the age of five , children who spent more than three hours a day in front of a screen were more likely to engage in antisocial behaviors such as fighting and stealing than their peers . i wasn amprsquot just stunting my son amprsquos intellectual potential , it seemed . i was turning him into a dangerous hooligan . too much time with these screens can lead to impaired focus . ampldquoi have a lot of concerns about the impact of technology on young children , amprdquo says dr . gary small , a professor at the semel institute for neuroscience and human behavior and the author of ibrain . ampldquotoo much time with these screens can lead to impaired focus and social skills later in life . amprdquo the new wave of smartphones and tablets , says small , are far more compelling to infants than television . ampldquowhen we put kids in a room with an ipad , they will choose that over other toys . they will often choose it over their own mothers . amprdquoas much as it pained me , this was objective evidence i just couldn amprsquot ignore . i amprsquom the kind of guy who falls asleep reading twitter . at least once a month i get so caught up in an iphone game i miss my subway stop . my love of the digital world has led me to a great career , but now it seemed my status as a tech obsessed dad was hurting my son . when i bounced him on my lap and surfed the web , was that like second hand smoke for his fragile young brain ? baby s first ipadduring the first two years of a baby amprsquos life , its brain triples in weight , marking a period of explosive growth that will never be matched again in its life . those early years are a crucial time for mental development , setting the foundation for adulthood . synapses , the connections between neurons in the brain , explode in number . we amprsquore born with about , synapses per neuron , but by age three we amprsquoll have around , . from that point the number of neural connections actually begins to decrease . this explains , for example , why children are capable of learning complex language skills that intelligent adults find difficult to master later in life . for me , that amprsquos an argument in favor of giving my son access to technology at an early age . if the paradigm for his budding mind is swiping through apps and playing interactive games , he will be geared to build great digital tools . why would i emphasize spending time with books when they will likely be dusty artifacts by the time he amprsquos a teenager , relics of another age like the telegraph and the typewriter ? if oliver wants to be a figure skater or toll booth operator , i amprsquoll support him . but as a parent with the privilege of pushing him in what i think is the right direction , i take douglas rushkoff amprsquos motto to heart program or be programmed . learning to love technology , to build and to code , are the best skills i can give to prepare him for a bright future . what matters is the difference between passive and active consumption searching for a way to justify this rationale , i called dr . dimitri christakis , director of the center for child health , behavior and development at seattle children s research institute . ampldquoscreens are purely a delivery mechanism . what parents should be focused on is the content , amprdquo he told me . a blanket ban on screens , he argued , doesn amprsquot make sense . ampldquoi amprsquom a member of the american academy of pediatrics , but i have to say , their statement about the effects of electronic media is clearly out of date . amprdquowhat matters , says christakis , is the difference between passive and active consumption . in a study he conducted , two groups of kids played with blocks and watched tv . the group who spent their time engaged in active play scored significantly better on subsequent language acquisition tests . christakis is now replicating this study comparing the effect of television to interactive ipad games . the research isn amprsquot finished yet , but christakis says , ampldquoi suspect the effect of the ipad on the brain will be much closer to the blocks than the tv . amprdquoheather kirkorian , an assistant professor in developmental psychology at the university of wisconsin , came to a similar conclusion . she taught two groups of children new words one group just watched a video , the other had to touch a screen to produce an outcome . ampldquofor kids under months old , they learned more when there was an interactive component . and so i think that shows the potential touchscreen devices might have as educational tools , especially when compared to television . amprdquoa balanced approachmy wife and i took oliver on his first trip outside the country recently , a train ride to a wedding in canada . it was a scenic journey first we rushed past the hudson river on our left , then lake champlain on our right . but it was also a long day , hours on the rails , and when he got bored my son started to screech . my wife held him up to the window so he could take in the epic countryside rolling by , but he was not impressed . he tried to lick the window . oliver strained for the screen when i fired up a game of anomaly korea on my ipad . ampldquodon amprsquot you think we should be teaching him to appreciate the beauty of nature ? amprdquo my wife asked . feeling guilty , i closed my game and redirected oliver back to staring out the window . a family at the dinner table , each focused on their own personal screen , is the epitome of the idea of being ampldquoalone together . amprdquo but an ipad game seems like something my son and i could learn to love together . and some experts agree . ampldquoif you amprsquore there to guide them , today amprsquos interactive devices can be a great way to learn and to bond , amprdquo says michael levine , executive director of the joan ganz cooney center at sesame workshop . rather than making arbitrary limits on screen time , says levine , parents should make sure kids amprsquo experience with technology is shared . an ipad game seems like something my son and i could learn to love togetherlevine says he can relate to my desire to inculcate my son with my love of today amprsquos technology . ampldquofor dustin hoffman in the graduate , the future was amplsquoplastics . amprsquo i tell my kids , think digital and global . there is a certain kind of modern literacy that you are trying to introduce . amprdquoin some ways , says levine , keeping kids away from screens completely for the first few years of their life will set pretty unrealistic expectations about their exposure to technology . ampldquolet amprsquos not be pollyanna here . we are looking at wearable technology becoming the norm within a couple of years . amprdquothat wedding weekend was spent in a campground an hour outside montreal where there was no cell service or wi fi . for the first day i compulsively checked my phone , just in case some stray signal happened to poke through the clouds enough to let me refresh my twitter feed . but eventually i gave up trying . oliver loved walking around the lake , so we did laps through the forest , stopping to watch a flock of geese feeding near the banks . sometime during that trip , i realized it was silly to worry oliver wouldn amprsquot become a digital native unless i force fed him a tech heavy diet from day one that idea was just as foolish as the notion that brief exposure to gadgets and screens was somehow toxic for his brain . as long as we balanced the different aspects of his life , encouraged his passions and tempered his addictions , things would sort themselves out . and besides , whatever technology i amprsquom preparing or protecting him from today will likely seem as outdated to a teenage oliver as my collection of rap cds . ampldquothe world of digital media is transforming so rapidly , it amprsquos very hard for researchers to keep up with the effects on children , amprdquo says daniel anderson , a professor of psychology at the university of massachusetts who studies childhood development and media . ampldquotv today is , fundamentally , the same as tv years ago , but the way we engage with computers today is very different from , even years ago . amprdquo in raising his own son , anderson had ideas for how much television he should watch , but no clue about how to respond to the social networks that ended up becoming his son amprsquos obsession . ampldquoi expect those changes to keep accelerating , amprdquo anderson says . ampldquowe amprsquore beyond the event horizon , so to speak . amprdquo