 kremlin . ru when the winter olympic games opened last week in sochi , much of the conversation on social media focused on the event s shortcomings poor sanitation , empty stadiums , hotels in disrepair . but a very different , and far more worrying sochi story has been unfolding in the mainstream russian media , where many reporters and broadcasters are being muzzled by a government intent on presenting itself in the best light possible . late last month , the committee to protect journalists cpj published a damning report on how russian media outlets have been silenced when trying to report on negative sochi stories forced evictions of local residents , exploitation of migrant workers , and environmental damage caused by construction projects . in just about every case , government agencies quashed the stories outright , or through implicit threats . it s a grim scenario , and one that has become all too common in russia , where president vladimir putin has slowly but surely consolidated control over the country s major media outlets over the past few years . the majority of news outlets , particularly those controlled directly by the state , prefer to cover sochi the way they would cover a deceased man in a positive light or not at all , the report reads . see a new russia , see its face and possibilities , take a fresh and unbiased look . the games got off to an ignominious start last week , when a giant display of the five olympic rings malfunctioned during the opening ceremony . pictures and video of the display spread like wildfire across social media , but tv viewers in russia saw something slightly different . state owned broadcaster russiya cut to pre recorded rehearsal footage once notified of the glitch , with producers telling the associated press that the decision was made to preserve the integrity of olympic tradition . it wasn t the first olympic mishap to be edited out of a broadcast , and it s far from a criminal coverup . but the incident does speak to the great care with which russia is treating the image of these games . they re already the most expensive olympics in history , and putin has branded the event as an opportunity for russia to reassert itself on the global stage . i would like the participants , fans , journalists and all those who watch the games on television to see a new russia , see its face and possibilities , take a fresh and unbiased look at the country , putin told reporters last month . before last week s opening ceremony , however , the olympics had been largely overshadowed by fears of terrorism , putin s anti gay propaganda laws , and alleged corruption and labor abuses . these issues have been well documented by western media outlets , but have gone largely unreported within russia itself . russian journalists who attempted to report these stories have so far been met with stiff government resistance . they were gagged , and they were gagged very strongly , says nina ognianova , coordinator of the europe and central asia program at the cpj , and co author of the report released last month . they were harassed into stopping their coverage , journalists who had independently reported on the negative impact of the games were taken off the story and substituted with more obedient reporters . and that was done under very direct pressure of various governmental agencies . we have to write that all skies are clear over sochi . one case detailed in ognianova s report involved a sochi correspondent who filed three separate stories to her editors in moscow one about the controversial arrest of a journalist , one about poorly constructed water facilities at a complex for evicted residents , and a seemingly innocuous piece about worsening weather conditions in sochi . her editor rejected all three . you may have a storm , a twister , and even a richter scale earthquake , the editor told her . still , we have to write that all skies are clear over sochi . russian president vladimir putin has gradually tightened his control over the media in recent years . flickr nato russia council the sochi skies have indeed been pleasant so far , but conditions on the ground there have been anything but . once the games began , the conversation among western journalists quickly shifted to the shoddy and apparently unfinished facilities within the olympic village . images of yellow tap water , half finished sidewalks , and packs of stray dogs began circulating across twitter and other social media , raising serious questions over how authorities spent the reported billion in olympic funding more than the combined cost of all previous winter olympics . unlike the regional , and far more serious stories described in cpj s report , the issues surrounding sochi s facilities were too widely reported for the russian government and mainstream media to ignore . their reports and statements have been largely defiant , however , with russian officials accusing western media outlets of biased coverage . putin and others claim the west s critiques are rooted more in envy of russia s success , rather than truth . whenever russia demonstrates any positive development , the appearance of a new strong player , of competition , is bound to cause concern in the economy , in politics and in the security sphere , putin said this week . we see attempts to deter russia here and there . unfortunately , this had to do with the olympic project . in an article published to its website this week , the network rt largely seen as a kremlin mouthpiece accused the western media of needless russia bashing , writing that reporters are overblowing certain problems into catastrophic proportions . the putin friendly newspaper pravda struck a similarly accusatory , if hypocritical tone on monday , lashing out at nbc for editing its opening ceremony footage to cut out all the positive moments about russia . russia as a besieged fortress , with hostile forces outside . spinning negative international stories into galvanizing rhetoric is a common tactic among government controlled media , says maria lipman of the carnegie moscow center . authorities typically portray any criticism from western media as the work of outside forces that want to see russia fail , or are envious of its rise . such anti western rhetoric has intensified and persisted since , lipman says , when disputed parliamentary elections sparked widespread protests , forcing putin to consolidate his conservative base . it creates a sense of russia as a besieged fortress , with hostile forces outside , lipman says . these forces are normally not very specific , she adds , though it is assumed that it s the west . there are of course some independent journalists and bloggers still reporting on the darker side of sochi a group headed by prominent activist alexei navalny recently published an interactive website outlining the massive corruption and croneyism behind the olympic project but lipman says they don t have nearly the same reach as state controlled media , and their platforms are dwindling . putin has gradually tightened his grip over the russian media in recent years whether through vaguely worded laws that give the government freer rein to prosecute journalists , or through implicitly endorsed corporate maneuvers to place pro kremlin interests in charge of major media companies . earlier this month , independent russian television station tv rain announced that it was on the brink of bankruptcy , after one of russia s main providers said it would no longer carry the channel . the decision ostensibly came as a response to a controversial poll that tv rain published on its website , asking readers whether the soviets should have surrendered leningrad during world war ii , but many speculate that the shutdown was politically motivated and months in the making . for free press advocates , its demise underscores what has become a sad reality . the space of non government media that pursue even relatively independent editorial lines has shrunk , and continues to shrink , lipman says . and this trend is bound to continue . update a previous version of this report stated that russian tv viewers did not see the olympic ring debacle during the broadcast . the piece has been updated to reflect the inaccuracy . 