 police said quartavious davis was part of a stunning crime spree . armed and masked , davis , with a group of others , robbed a string of businesses in the miami area witnesses put him at stick ups at little caesar s , a gas station , a walgreens , an auto parts store , a beauty salon , a wendy s , and a jewelry store . one witness claimed davis pointed a gun at his head and robbed him . another witness said , when he attempted to write down the plates on the getaway car , davis opened fire . the witness fired back . davis was eventually found guilty and sentenced to , months in prison nearly years . at the trial , prosecutors called on an array of evidence . dna tied davis to the car , and surveillance video put someone matching his description at multiple robberies . others involved in the robberies testified against him . and then there was davis phone through a controversial use of records , known as cell site location data , police were able to place davis mobile device near the location of six of seven robberies when they occurred . robbery cases turned into major court battlescell site location data can provide police with a rough idea of a suspect s location during a given time period , or even in real time , and its use in cases like davis has become a rallying cry for activists around the country . multiple robbery cases have already turned into major circuit court battles over such data , resulting in a range of decisions governing how it can be used . and that broad legal patchwork has turned into something even more complicated , as various lower courts across the country have also made rulings governing how and when the data can be obtained . the result is that a texas cop doesn t need a warrant for some data , while a montana cop does indiana police need the information in certain circumstances , but there are no protections for the information in wisconsin . in the davis case , as with the other robbery cases , police obtained location records on customers without a warrant . wireless companies in the davis case , the small service provider metropcs keep records of which nearby cell tower carried a customer s call , or in some cases a request like an email ping , and in which direction the ping was sent . the service providers keep the records on a rolling basis , some for a few months , some for years . although the science is imperfect at best , and is much more effective in cities than rural areas , prosecutors can use the evidence to sway juries . aclu after the verdict , davis filed an appeal , in part based on the prosecution s use of the cell records . without a warrant , the argument went , police were in violation of the fourth amendment , which protects against unreasonable searches . the government in turn argued that it only needs permission under the stored communications act , or sca , which will hand over a court order to law enforcement if there are reasonable grounds to believe that such records are relevant and material to an ongoing criminal investigation . that standard is much more achievable than the probable cause bar needed for a warrant . police have to meet a bar lower than probable cause the aclu , taking up the davis case and others , has argued that the higher standard must be applied , as the information can be extraordinarily revealing . with thousands or tens of thousands of data points , representing weeks or months of location data , police may be able to show a suspect was near a bank robbery , but will incidentally find much more . which nights , for example , was the suspect not sleeping at home ? when was the suspect at church ? there s really a lot of private and very sensitive information at stake , says nathan wessler , a staff attorney on the aclu s speech , privacy , and technology project . police , in rebuttal , have argued that such data is no longer protected when it s handed over to a wireless service provider , under a legal theory known as third party doctrine , which has also been used as a defense in lawsuits against the nsa . ultimately , after winning an early appeal , the full eleventh circuit court of appeals sided with the government in the davis case . this week , the supreme court rejected a request to hear the case , making davis conviction final . the supreme court has declined to hear these casesa similar robbery conviction in baltimore was overturned , but is now being heard by the full fourth circuit court , which oversees cases in maryland , the carolinas , virginia , and west virginia . yet another robbery over stolen phones from a radioshack , tracked with historical location data is facing appeal in front of the sixth circuit court , affecting kentucky , michigan , ohio , and tennessee . the fifth circuit court which has jurisdiction over louisiana , mississippi , and texas has determined that police don t need a warrant for historical cell site data . without a supreme court decision , various other states have moved to govern cell site data in different ways , and the aclu ampnbsprecently mapped the decisions . some , like pennsylvania , let individual judges decide whether a warrant is required . others require a warrant for real time tracking of location when a suspect is not in police custody , but can be tracked through location data but not for historical data . in many states , including missouri and new mexico , no binding decisions have been made at all . something that people forget about cellphones in general , of any type , is that you re leaving a permanent record of all of your physical locations as you move around , edward snowden ampnbsptold the intercept in an interview published yesterday . the aclu and others say that sensitive information is only becoming more sensitive . as location tracking tech improves , the data obtainable by police will reveal more and more about our locations and habits , making it too powerful a tool to be governed idiosyncratically across states . in the worst case , the most lenient protections could mean the private lives of innocent people are more likely to be combed over by police . meanwhile , as the appeals and subsequent rulings sweep over the states , wireless carriers have offered a window into how frequently such requests are made by police . in recent transparency reports , the major wireless carriers have logged tens of thousands of yearly law enforcement requests for historical and real time location information . pending changes in law , those requests show no sign of relenting , and it s unclear if the supreme court will ever elect to rule on the matter . the one thing we do know is that there will be more opportunities to take up this issue , wessler says . 