 the notifications began rolling in a week ago . i just stole caseynewton on stolen for , on getstolen , went a typical tweet . i ignored the first few , but eventually curiosity got the better of me . i downloaded the app , stolen , and saw that it had turned my twitter profile into a trading card . anyone who had an invite code to play the game could buy me so long as they had enough in game currency . according to my profile , a pr person i m friendly with had scooped me up . her profile listed me as part of her collection . and at the time , there was nothing i could do about it . in the days since stolen s launch , it generated an outsized buzz for an app that had only around , people actively playing it . as recounted by fortune , the game represented a last ditch effort by developer hey , inc . to create a hit following the failure of heyday , a journaling app that stalled out around million downloads . but amid withering criticism over privacy concerns and the game s potential to enable abuse , the company pulled it from the app store on thursday evening . we ve heard everyone s concerns , the game s official account tweeted , and have decided the best thing to do is shut it down . anyone who purchased in game currency can get a refund through the app store . we ve heard everyone s concerns . hey founder siqi chen told me he made the decision to shut the game down after concerns that it was negatively affecting some of its players , particularly those who were being stolen without their consent . our goal with taking it down today has just been to make sure we stop what is happening that we stop the harm , real and perceived , that people are getting from the existence of our product , he said . we didn t spend hours and months , sweat and tears to build something like this and have people see it this way . this is not who we are . chen said the company had not yet decided what to work on next , but said it did not plan to revive the stolen concept . chen had previously founded serious business , a company built on facebook s once thriving games platform , and with stolen his team decided to revisit their biggest hit from that era . launched in , friends for sale ! was a popular facebook game that let you buy your friends with in game currency . in one creepy twist , the game referred to your friends as pets , and in another , it let you sell them to others for in game profit . but there was no similar outcry about the game , or about the clones that followed it . that s one thing that surprised us , chen said . still , he said that s an oversight on our part . the market changes . people s expectations change . and we didn t account for it . chen pitched friends for sale ! as a humorous app for socializing , though it profited by aggressively monetizing users power fantasies . according to venturebeat , the game s business model was born when a rich user offered chen , for million in in game currency . more than million people played friends for sale ! , and one person eventually spent more than , building their digital human zoo . but the novelty eventually wore off , and facebook s game platform deteriorated rapidly after it shut down the spammy tactics many games employed to acquire users . serious business never had a follow up hit anywhere as big as friends for sale ! , and zynga acquired the company in . stolen was friends for sale ! for the twitter age . it mimicked the game s basic mechanic of buying and selling people in an effort to turn a virtual profit . it also let users buy in game currency using real money . but instead of only acquiring friends , stolen let you acquire celebrities , politicians , actors , investors , journalists , and brands . anyone who uses twitter , in other words . stolen s premise contained the seeds of its demisethe premise contained the seeds of stolen s demise . journalist holly brockwell gave voice to a number of concerns generated by the app ampnbspin an interview with chen published wednesday . chief among them that it allowed strangers to trade users names and likenesses without their permission and that trolls could post abusive comments on profiles they had acquired . chen apologized , and promised the company would closely monitor any abuse of the platform . it also created a way for users to opt out of having their profiles listed for stealing . but the next day , the company threw in the towel . stolen s abrupt demise is likely to obscure the fact that for thousands of people , it was actually a lot of fun . i hated the idea of the app , but after i downloaded it i found myself playing every day . stolen was addictive because it played on the anxieties so many of us have about twitter and other social platforms . who s following me ? who s ignoring me ? do my contributions here have any value ? are my peers more popular than i am ? stolen looked those worries in the eye and said , here s a giant stack of money why not simply buy your way out ? you couldn t make justin bieber follow you . but you could absolutely steal him . and indeed , i found myself buying profiles of people who i admire and who never followed me back . hi felix salmon ! when a high profile person stole me , i felt a surge of pride . i compulsively checked my in game value , which peaked around million before edging steadily downward . and i relished stealing friends from other friends a magnificent , harmless troll that always made me smile . we were trying to build a positive product , where people compliment and show how much they care about the people they care about , chen said . i love justin bieber . i love rihanna . william shatner joined today ! and william shatner gets to say , ampnbspi care about these people . these people i like . and he gets to see who his biggest fans are . that s the design we intended to build . stolen was addictiveall of this distracted from the fact that , as a game , stolen felt rather pointless . there was no way to win , or , outside of spending lots of money , even to stay ahead . you could spend million to steal someone only to have them stolen back from you seconds later . once you acquired someone , the only thing you could do with their profile was to watch its value decline . the app s system for valuing users and distributing cash bonuses appeared for the most part to be entirely random . at first i wondered when stolen s novelty would wear off . when it didn t , i wondered if twitter would shut it down . the company never said anything about stolen , but adam bain , its chief operating officer , was an enthusiastic user . what i never saw coming was that chen would pull the plug himself . but pressure was mounting rep . katherine clark d ma sent letters to twitter ceo jack dorsey and apple ceo tim cook today urging them to ban it . every concern i read about stolen in its short life , i shared . the last thing twitter needs on its platform is a new way to enable abuse . and yet part of me is sad stolen never got a chance to make it right . for willing participants , it was a flirty game of tag . and that , i think , is the crux of it . had the game started by asking for our permission , perhaps it wouldn t have had to ask our forgiveness . 