 feminist critic anita sarkeesian has risen to fame by dissecting pop culture . her series tropes vs . women in video games , which breaks down gender based gaming cliches ranging from kidnapped princesses to women as prizes , has become both a successful youtube channel and a linchpin in the video game world s culture wars . but her latest project involves talking about fact instead of fiction . ordinary women daring to defy history created by sarkeesian , former offworld writer and editor laura hudson , and producer elisabeth aultman is a biographical web series profiling influential women throughout history . the project will focus on women who defied gender stereotypes but often found themselves pushed to the sidelines or erased from history books while their male contemporaries were venerated . the first five episode season features th century pirate ching shih anarchist emma goldman mathematician ada lovelace journalist ida b . wells and murasaki shikibu , author of the first modern novel . the crowdfunding pitch for ordinary women , with its , goal , is far more ambitious than that of sarkeesian s last campaign . in , her site feminist frequency asked for a mere , to make tropes vs . women in video games , an outgrowth of her existing youtube video work . the response both positive and negative was overwhelming . backers pledged nearly , toward the project , leading feminist frequency to add several more videos as stretch goals . at the same time , the project drew unexpected ire from a wave of online anti feminists , who launched a dedicated campaign of violent threats and abuse that has continued for nearly four years . in , online reactionary movement gamergate deemed sarkeesian one of its greatest enemies , accusing her of scamming backers by releasing videos too slowly or of attempting to censor video games with her criticism . today , feminist frequency has broadened its scope significantly . sarkeesian has so far put out tropes vs . women videos covering both negative gaming tropes and positive examples of female characters , along with reviews of new games and movies . now registered as a nonprofit , feminist frequency was chosen as one of intel s partners for a diversity initiative in , and it s one of the roughly organizations twitter has tapped for advice on handling harassment . last week , it partnered with game developers zoe quinn and alex lifschitz s anti abuse project crash override , allowing the group to receive tax deductible donations . and there s still a year left of tropes vs . women , a project that sarkeesian readily admits has left her exhausted . it felt like writing a master s thesis in three months with every episode . with tropes , it was supposed to be five episodes that were like minutes each , with a few examples . the international attention and the hate campaign against me really changed the way that we approached the project , says sarkeesian . each installment is packed with offhand references to dozens of games , constructed to carefully anticipate the counter arguments of her most fervent critics , who analyze the to minute videos with the intensity of conspiracy theorists poring over the zapruder film . it felt like writing a master s thesis in three months with every episode , she says . in january , feminist frequency announced that the remaining topics would be divided into more specific tropes split across shorter videos , drawing to a close later this year . i love tropes . i think i m really proud of that work , and we re still continuing to do it , says sarkeesian . but i did get really burnt out , and i m really looking forward to doing something new . each episode of ordinary women will be devoted to a single woman , aimed more at depth than breadth . and sarkeesian says that unlike tropes vs . women , which became increasingly large and amorphous as funding grew , the series will have a set first season that s researched and filmed before the first episode comes out . its creators are also aiming for something more complex and visually compelling than tropes vs . women s straightforward editing . for ordinary women , the team will create animations and music based on art from the subject s time period , and sarkeesian will host wearing outfits loosely inspired by the era . nearly half the total budget including crowdfunding campaign fees and the cost of backer rewards is intended for animation and post production . if everything goes right , sarkeesian , hudson , and aultman plan to release their first video in september . series creators laura hudson left , elisabeth aultman , and anita sarkeesian . among other things , sarkeesian sees ordinary women as a positive antidote to the hackneyed representations of women in fiction many of them driven by a piecemeal or selectively edited version of history . i often hear comments like , we don t know how to write women , or of course women are oppressed and relegated to these degrading roles in games that take place in the past , because that s what women were back then ! she says . i want this to act as inspiration for creative folks to write more engaging women . we want to show that there were real women that you can tell the stories of or base stories on that have done extraordinary , incredible things . i want this to act as inspiration for creative folks to write more engaging women . if there s a problem at the core of ordinary women , though , it s that the first season arguably doesn t deliver on its promise to profile important women we ve forgotten . ada lovelace is one of relatively few women who is frequently cited in popular histories , often credited as the first computer programmer . emma goldman and ida b . wells are less prominent figures , but they re still familiar names , and ching shih had the dubious honor of inspiring a pirates of the caribbean franchise character . i first encountered murasaki shikibu as a child , when she appeared in a s carmen sandiego game . the counter argument is that these women still don t have the same iconic status as male historical figures , especially in the bare bones curricula of primary and secondary schools . while the videos will be released on youtube for everyone , ordinary women is primarily aimed at girls and young women growing up on a diet of textbooks that give all marginalized groups short shrift . i want to help inspire a new generation of girls to be excited about their ancestors , and also inspire them to challenge the status quo and do amazing things , says sarkeesian . and while famous historical figures of any gender were often free to pursue groundbreaking work because they were born to wealth and other privileges , ordinary women s creators are trying to avoid making woman seem synonymous with rich white woman . especially post gamergate , anything related to sarkeesian s work can take on bizarrely epic proportions . it s difficult to logically square the furor over tropes vs . women , for example , with the videos mild tone . sarkeesian says people who hear about the series through her detractors regularly send her confused emails after actually watching an installment . but if you forget the online controversy , tropes vs . women isn t advanced gender theory or radical feminism , but a series of videos about recognizing common narrative themes and archetypes . and ordinary women feels like a similar project . if the series succeeds , it will concisely introduce young audiences to some of the women who have shaped world history while encouraging the rest of us learn a little more about them . 