 during her first few weeks at the university of toronto , mare sheppard had no idea what she was doing . she enrolled in computer science , and while she loved problem solving and had dabbled in programming , her high school hadn t offered classes on the subject , so she had little prior experience . she used to sneak glances at her peers work in hopes of finding a classmate who might be able to help her out . she noticed that one student , raigan burns , always seemed to jot down notes before the teacher actually wrote them down on the board . so i was like , okay , this guy probably knows what he s doing , she explains . i have to admit , adds burns , i knew you were watching , so i was kind of showing off . but by the time the school year was over , it was sheppard who ended up with the better grade . that was in . years later the pair would form a game studio called metanet software . in , they released the cult classic freeware game n , a platformer about a ninja jumping through perilous environments in a vaguely futuristic world . an enhanced version , n , came to the xbox in . these days , after more than years of working together , the pair seems almost perfectly in sync they finish each other s sentences , and when one loses the thread of a story , the other picks it right up . when they talk , you hear a lot of we instead of i . later this year , they ll be releasing the final version of the game , called n , on the playstation . it s a game that takes all of those years of work and crams them into a single experience . it may look like a simplistic game about an athletic stickman , and it is that it s also the culmination of a decade long relationship . this is essentially a game that took years to make , says burns . the original n was built in just six weeks , but it took about four years for the pair to get to that point . when burns and sheppard first met they weren t thinking about making their own games . instead , they played other people s games together , using emulators to explore the libraries of old consoles . they lamented about how a career in programming computer applications seemed pretty boring . two people led them to realize that games were where they should focus . one was another student , a few years their junior , named jonathan mak . burns and mak the developer of classic playstation titles like everyday shooter and sound shapes were in the same introduction to electrical engineering class , and the two hit it off over a shared love of music . while burns and sheppard were just thinking about making their own games , mak had already made a number of them while he was still in high school . the second inspiration was someone they never actually met . burns and sheppard had become enamored with a freeware shooter called soldat , which was made by a polish teenager named micha marcinkowski . both mak and marcinkowski served as inspirations at a time when indie games were still in their infancy . if this guy could do it , we could do it , too , they thought . it was a huge failure . they spent the next four years building prototypes and experimenting with ideas , but never actually finished anything until they stumbled across a contest to build a flash game . to them , it was as an opportunity to finally complete something , and they spent the next six weeks cobbling together what would become n . it didn t win the contest , but over time n slowly built a following . within months , an unexpected community formed around this hard as nails platformer one fan built a website so players could keep track of and rate the game s many levels , another created a forum so people could discuss strategies . the game became a cult hit , ultimately catching the eye of someone at microsoft who wanted to bring the game to the fledgling xbox live arcade download store . burns and sheppard enlisted the help of programmer nick waanders to handle the xbox port , and they eventually signed a deal with atari to create a handheld version of the game as well . the plan was to spend some of their time supervising the ports , making sure they matched their internal standards , while also working on the next game . but it didn t work out like that . the handheld ports in particular proved onerous , and the two found themselves spending hour days focused on designing new levels . that left little time to work on something new . n was a modest success , selling hundreds of thousands of copies . even today the sales are still trickling in , and it was enough to keep the studio afloat . but after the stress of porting the games and the long hours spent devoted to n , they were ready to work on something new . they had a big project in mind robotology , a game that would take the concept of a d walking simulator and translate it into a d platforming game . it was a huge challenge , and progress was slow . for basically two years , says burns , we just did r ampd on robotology . but after those two years , the two came to a difficult realization it just wasn t working . they had solved many of the technical problems , but the actual game wasn t fun . it was really de motivating and demoralizing , explains sheppard . it was a huge failure . it got so bad that they had to return a grant that the ontario government had provided to help fund development . it was like two wasted years , and the failure made it difficult to get back into the groove of making games again . the two years after robotology , we were essentially just depressed , burns explains . then they found hope in n . n and n while the creators had largely moved on to other things , the game s community never went away . players would request new features and levels , and the studio would constantly get emails from fans praising their original creation . metanet had made a habit of updating the game every few months or so , but it was mostly small tweaks and fixes . they decided that in order to get out of their funk they should do something bigger . n was beloved , but it was a game that was rough around the edges . the menus , level design , and even the code used to build it felt wrong to the studio so many years removed from ampnbspn s original release . it felt incomplete . it s something we really wanted to finish , says sheppard , but we couldn t because it s something that we hated for a long time . so they got to work creating an improved version , scrapping the original code and recreating it from scratch . and then something unexpected happened while working on version . of n , the two rediscovered their love for making games . they had fun making new levels , and enjoyed using their newfound experience to make the game much better . it wasn t a chore anymore . around that same time , a representative from sony had mentioned that they wanted to do something with the game if the studio was interested . eventually they decided to go for it . the initial decision to do it was hard , because it did feel like giving up to a certain extent , says burns of the decision to return the game . in fact , when sheppard announced the game at gdc , he wasn t even present . i didn t even go to her talk because i was too ashamed , he explains . everyone s coming out with new cool stuff , and we re still stuck on this one thing . n is , in essence , the game the two had always wanted to make . it s the version of n that was only possible after experiencing a decade of the ups and downs of game development . it has the same core philosophy of the originals a platformer stripped down to the essentials , with a unique , blazing fast sense of movement and a ridiculously challenging level of difficulty but expands on that core in multiple ways . it has more than , levels , new multiplayer modes , and a level editor . the visuals are noticeably better thanks to slick new vector graphics and wonderful animation courtesy of programmer shawn mcgrath , whom the studio enlisted to help . meanwhile , metanet partnered with designer masa to swap the grey , minimalist look the series is known for with something much more stylish . there s even some color this time around , with bright pinks and blues , contrasting the more subdued palette of the original . all of this work and attention to detail burns says they ve spent six to eight months designing the menus alone is in service of creating the best version of n possible . the main goal is to never work on it again in a way that we can feel good about , burns explains . in a way where we don t , in five years , think , man , we should go back . n is scheduled to launch later this year on the ps , and sheppard and burns want it to be the last game in the series . after more than a decade , it s time for something new . the plan is to go back to making and actually releasing small , free experiments . and if one of those ideas resonates with players in the same way n did , they can work on turning it into something bigger for a commercial release . they don t know what kind of game it will be , and it will likely pull elements from failed experiments like robotology , but it definitely won t be a new n . we hope it s not another years before we come up with a game , says burns . 