 the verge in celebration of our th anniversary , this month we re publishing a series of interviews with innovative leaders about what the next five years hold . to read more about this series , read our editor nilay patel s introduction here . aaron levie spends more time thinking about the future of work than most . when the year old entrepreneur co founded box , it was as a place for average people to store their files online dropbox before there was dropbox . but years ahead of dropbox ceo drew houston , levie saw that the real money in online storage was in the workplace and so the company turned to making products that let people collaborate at work . the result is a company that successfully went public and beat wall street s expectations in its last earnings report , though it still has yet to turn a profit . levie says it will be cash flow positive by the end of the year . when levie is away from box , he s surveying the tech landscape for other innovations . he has been a savvy investor , making early bets on companies including stripe , zenefits , instacart , authy , robinhood , and color genomics . his work has given him an optimism about the way that new productivity tools will make working life better for the average cubicle dweller making organizations more transparent , and good ideas easier to spread . levie is also an evangelist for artificial intelligence , which is slowly but surely working its way into the office . the future of work is in many ways a story about the future of ai about what it can predict , what it can prevent , and what it can do on your behalf . the interviewyour company exists , in part , because mobile devices enable us to demand consumer quality experiences in our work software . five years from now ish , how close will we be to parity between work and consumer software ? will we even recognize a distinction ultimately between these two things ? i think you sort of nailed it , which is mobile and cloud sort of conspire to redefine what enterprise software looks like and how it runs and how it operates . i would say we are already on the cusp of that happening , where our enterprise technology should resemble and be as simple as our consumer technology . what we actually have is an issue where there s just a disparity of the tools that the most early adopting types of companies are using and the tools that the rest of the world uses . if you were to look at maybe how we work , we re probably already using mostly technology that feels like , and is indistinguishable from , consumer software . but if you go to large corporations all around the world , whether it s dow chemical , or ford , or these big businesses around the planet , there s a separation of the haves and have nots of modern technology . i think five years from now , we will have converged . companies won t be implementing old technology anymore . subscribe to our newsletter so you don t miss the rest of the verge interviews . terms apply . subscribehow will the tools themselves changes ? i think what s going to happen is enterprise software will become more and more deceptively simple . ampnbspit ll feel like we re using just a consumer application . i think we would agree that a product like slack , or what facebook is doing with facebook at work these just resemble consumer applications . and how does that change organizations over time ? if you study modern management science of just how organizations have been built up over the past years , you have a very clear hierarchy . the hierarchy has been built up to empower the flow of information up and down the organization . we had to structure our organizations in a very specific way because we didn t have technology to help us communicate in real time with anybody , anywhere . the best ideas don t necessarily free flow to the people making the decision . you have a lot of companies that are very hierarchical , where the way you get ahead is you hoard information , you hoard power . the best ideas don t necessarily free flow to the people making the decision . you get only a small subset of the ideas to work off of . most organizations , the way they re designed is not necessarily the right organizational structure with the right people at the top , because it s the people that have gotten ahead using a very specific set of tools that were built up in a non digital era . now , imagine an organization that can share information in real time with anybody , anywhere across the company . you essentially have a virtual space that flattens the organization , where now it s actually not just about the people that are able to obtain and retain the information , but the people that put forth the best ideas and can execute on those . i think you ll start to see that work just changes in a pretty material way , because it s not about how much information you have versus everybody else . everybody has the same level of information . now it s about who can execute on that information and who can continue to put forth better and better ideas . the speed at which our companies are going to run and operate is going to change pretty dramatically . the kinds of organizations that will win will be those that can adapt to this in the best way , and so far we ve seen that it s companies like the ubers and the facebooks of the world that are able to operate and work in this way . the legacy companies just cannot move and change fast enough to act on this . hearing all this , someone who works at a more traditional , siloed organizations , might think , wow , it sounds like work is going to take over my whole life , and i need to make total institutional awareness of every interaction inside my company . ampnbspall of these changes that you re describing , which do have many advantages in the organization do they have real advantages for the employee ? there are a lot of people around the world that actually want to do awesome things . they want to do their best work , but they re not recognized by the organization . their ideas don t bubble up to the top , because of the complex and archaic way that we built businesses . i think that some people will lose in this future the people that got ahead hoarding information and working in a way that was very specific to that model of an organization . you ll have a new era of people that are able to win on their ideas , and able to win on what maybe we would consider to be actually better reasons , that open up opportunity for a lot of people that previously their voices were not necessarily heard . i m generally optimistic . i did a couple internships before we started box . it was just so obvious that due to the hierarchical structure of an organization , if you were or entering that company , it s going to take you or years for your ideas to be valued by anybody at the top of the organization . that s just how it was structured . actually , nobody at the top of the organization wants you to get ahead , because the whole design of the system is that way you can have a clear hierarchy , people can keep their jobs , etc . we actually do want disruption to that structure . we want organizations to be able to get the best ideas so they can change more rapidly , so they can perform in the best way possible . i m generally optimistic . for many people who do this kind of knowledge work , email has been the foundation of their day for decades . will that still be the case five years from now ? email is to communication as newspapers are to media or news , which is to say that there s going to be multiple channels over time . email has been the dominant channel , but we now know there are other experiences , there are other paradigms that we want to be able to have with our communication . we want a real time experience . that s where a slack or a chat tool comes in . you can t fit real time in email , and any time you try , it creates just a very complex frankensteinian product that nobody really wants , like google wave or something . five years from now , do you think you will send fewer emails than you do today ? i actually send not a large amount of emails , so i don t think i could send fewer emails . i think that i already am using different tools . how do you think advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning will reshape work over the next several years ? we think about it in a bunch of ways . most of the most interesting ai machine learning examples that we ve seen so far have been on the consumer side . all of this stuff serves to make our daily lives a little bit more convenient . it helps us engage with the people we want to connect with , tells us when there s a birthday coming up . that s essentially what it s doing . siri helps us interact with information in our device in so many ways . we ve never actually seen real deep machine learning or narrow ai applied to business problems . it s just never really happened at any meaningful scale . there s been some kind of pattern recognition and anomaly detection , but never really have we applied actual advanced intelligence and machine learning to business problems . what happens when we take all these business applications and we start to apply real intelligence ? what happens when we take all these business applications and we start to apply real intelligence to them ? that , to us , paints a very , very different picture of what could possibly happen in the workplace . there s a whole range of outcomes , but at the starting point you just think how much time we all collectively waste doing things that literally require no thought . when you can ampnbsphave the computer do those things for you , now maybe we ve started to save , , percent of the time that we have in a given day . technology is helping us just focus on the things where we fundamentally have to interact with the tool or system , but the technology is doing the rest for us . all the way to the other end of the spectrum , which are things that people weren t doing in the first place . now it s possible for the first time ever to have computers aid a person in a way that wasn t previously possible . that s where the power of ai in healthcare or life sciences or financial services starts becoming incredibly powerful which is , how do you take the experiences that tens of millions of patients have had on a specific drug and apply that to just one individual patient that a doctor is interacting with ? how can we take all of the data that we have and be able to apply it in a highly precise way that no individual could have previously done because they weren t able to process across all of that information ? it s going to be everything from saving time to completely changing business or human outcomes because of this technology . sundar pichai had a pretty good analogy of ai is the new mobile which is to say software that isn t mobile today just feels out of date and clunky . well , software in five years from now where you re having to do anything manual is going to feel out of date and clunky . if you re in sales , it should be telling you who to sell to . the technology should be telling you what to do if you re in sales , it should be telling you who to sell to . if you re in marketing , it should tell you who to market to . if you are in healthcare , it should give you suggestions of the potential prescription or the diagnosis that you should have . if you are in manufacturing , it should instantly collapse your supply chain so you know where the potential problems are going to be so you can go right after them . i m probably more in the optimistic side of the spectrum . there s a lot of fear that it will disrupt jobs , but i think it ll probably more have an impact , at least for the foreseeable future , of raising of the level of work that we re all able to do because we just won t waste our time doing the stuff that is entirely redundant to what a computer can do . when it comes to the future of work , does it feel like we re on the verge of kind of a fresh wave of really generational companies that may have something to do with ai and machine learning ? i m probably more on the side that ai will have a much bigger impact on existing modern technologies than sort of an ai first company emerging that does a bunch of these new things . i think there are some companies that are pure ai first that are building powerful platforms that i think have a strong chance of being successful , but because you need a large amount of data and interaction already to be able to make use of that , the companies that should have a strong benefit or advantage should be companies like slack and box and workday and salesforce . because they already have the usage , they already have the data , and now ai is just a turbocharger for what people can do . ai will be something where you will get disrupted if you don t have it , but i believe it s an enabling technology as opposed to a disruptive technology because it s intended to dramatically enhance our existing tools and services . now , the one caveat i would say , just so i don t look stupid and not like somebody claiming that phones need keyboards or something , is if there s a fundamental shift in where ai is in five or years from now and it does things we simply can t even contemplate today , potentially you would want completely new types of experiences to be built off of that that existing incumbents couldn t adapt to for business model reasons or whatever . that would be what makes it disruptive . five years from now , are there technological tools you hope you have that you don t have today ? virtual reality will probably have more impact in the enterprise space than the consumer space . i think virtual reality will probably have more impact in the enterprise space than it does in the consumer space at its mature peak , because i think the implications are so enormous that it at least has the makings of being one of the very , very fundamentally disruptive technologies . we sort of see vr as maybe being to the non office worker as ipad was to the knowledge worker , which is the ipad was the first thing that was like , okay , i can kind of digitize my entire mobile experience around documents and email and communication . there s the perfect form factor for being able to go and do that . i think vr has the ability to bring that same level of immersive experience , but in a world where we haven t necessarily enabled people with best in class technology . whether that s manufacturing , when you re designing a product or you want to go look at the building that you re creating , or in education , or if you re in healthcare and you want to be able to instantly learn about or interact with multiple patients and different experiences . we always overestimate the change in two or three years and underestimate it in a decade . it s probably in that type of category , which is things that we think about vr being useful for today are just based on us just imagining a very linear shift . it s going to be more of a function change . how will trump s election change the course of business either yours or silicon valley s in general ? are you making contingency plans you weren t before for the next four years ? this election exposed serious divisions throughout the nation . at box , we re committed to our values of openness and equality and will do everything to fight for them , including being an advocate for racial and gender equality , lgbtq rights , fair immigration policies , and more . there are many policies we ll need to debate in tech , but equality should be a non negotiable principle for america . this election showed that many communities have been left behind . second , this election showed that many communities have been left behind as we ve entered the st century . in silicon valley , we need to be more honest about the negative consequences technology can have for people both in america and abroad . this isn t to say we shouldn t aggressively push forward with innovation . it simply means that we have to work better with each other , the government , and our communities to help the benefits of innovation be more broadly shared and advance policies that help people weather the disruptions technology can cause . this is only going get to get more important . technology is on the verge of re shaping industries like healthcare , transportation , and manufacturing , just to name a few . finally , we all want america to remain a leader in innovation and the global economy . we have to recognize that it s not a given we ll end up ahead . america s role in the world of technology is unmistakable today , but maintaining our leadership is going to require making smart policy choices , cultivating partnerships between the public and private sectors , renewed investment in education , and fostering a culture of entrepreneurship . we can t take anything for granted . this interview has been edited and condensed for clarity . 