 until two weeks ago most people had never heard of the merchant consumer exchange mcx , a digital payments platform backed by some of the biggest retailers in the us . that s because their product , an app called currentc , hasn t launched . but when companies like cvs and rite aid blocked the nfc readers for apple pay and google wallet because of exclusive contracts with mcx , the company was suddenly front page news . after that rough introduction to the mainstream , things got worse for mcx . a security breach let hackers make off with email information on currentc users . consumers descended on the app , slamming it with negative reviews in the app store and google play even though most hadn t actually used it . amid all the sturm and drang , the actual product got lost in the controversy . earlier this week , we sat down with mcx ceo dekkers davidson to get his pitch on why anyone should use currentc when heavyweights like apple pay are already on the market . this interview has been edited and condensed for claritybp why would people or merchants use currentc or mcx ? what do you get by cutting out the credit card networks ? pay the cash price at the pumpwhen you go to the gas station today , you ll often see a credit price and a cash price . and the difference can sometimes be , cents a gallon depending on where the price of gasoline is pegged . if you want to go pay for gas , you have to get out , walk into a store , either make the cash payment , or say i m going to fill it up and walk back in . so here s a world that is possible . you can drive up to the pump , and using low energy bluetooth , the pump can actually recognize that it s ben who s pulled up . if you are on the currentc network , and you have pre authorized a certain payment method , the merchant then has the opportunity to adjust and roll back the price at the pump to either a cash price , or something that s much lower than you d pay with the current credit network . bp your system works with qr codes . i ve always found them to be a little finicky and not that straightforward . so how do qr codes work on currentc ? on the issue of the finickiness that you report , prior to becoming the ceo of mcx over a year ago , i spent two years building a prototype system . and at first it was tentative and slow , but like any new behavior it pretty much became second nature and relatively easy to use . one of the key things when building the technology we re using is that it s quite forgiving . you don t have to hold your phone at a certain angle with a certain light , it s actually designed to read a qr code pretty quickly and we can demonstrate that to you at some point . if starbucks can make qr codes work , we can toostarbucks is the inspiration and the leader in this space . we all talk about how people put all their attention on apple pay , and starbucks has actually been doing this with qr codes , a solution that s pretty similar to ours , for years . i would say that starbucks does millions transactions a week by using qr systems , about percent of their transactions are with qr codes , and if you try it or watch others try it , it becomes second nature . it becomes very fast and very simple . if it had the problems i think it would have not progressed . starbucks has shown that you can use qr codes and that consumers embrace them . bp there have been a lot of high profile credit card hacks recently at places like target and home depot . one of the things people seem to like about apple pay is the anonymity and security . mcx is about sharing information between customers and merchants , but is that something people want right now ? i think every customer will see it a little differently . i think the other pieces of what s really important for consumers is you ve got to have a secure system , and i can talk more about that , and a system that also ensures consumer privacy , consumers want the ability in some cases to be totally anonymous to merchants . and if they want that , they ll get that . if they want to reveal more to merchants , they can do that , but it becomes the consumer s choice . but privacy and data security , are table stakes , must have . we ve identified the source and we re stronger for it . i think we all are on guard in this world that there are people who will attack systems . we had a partner s whose email system was attacked early last week . you have to be vigilant and you have to be strong , to anticipate that and correct it . in this case , we ve identified what was released , which was just email addresses , we ve identified the source and we re stronger for it . we think apple pay , which has also embraced the concept of low value tokens as we did three years ago , we re probably in simpatico on that one . i pull out my phone , i hold up my phone with a qr code that says i am a customer at lane six . now we ve each sent a token and a message to the cloud that says i am the seller and i am the buyer and i want to pay for this transaction with the payment instrument that i ve selected in my phone . there s no piece of paper to sign , there s no printout , there s no signature to hand back . there are never credentials in my device at the point of sale , it all occurs in a secure server . so like with apple , if anyone were to intercept the low value tokens there s nothing they could do with that . bp it seems that a lot of what mcx was predicated on was building a more direct relationship between merchants and consumers , but what evidence do we have that they want that ? it feels like right now people are at a stage where they ve seen a lot of credit card hacks happen at a lot of big box stores . what people seem most interested in right now is this idea of anonymity and security . most loyalty cards end up lost in your sock drawerthe average american household is signed up for loyalty programs but they use four , maybe five . it tells me that there s friction for those who don t use the cards that are in their sock drawer or ones that they threw away . you re probably aware that cvs and rite aid , particularly cvs has one of the world s largest loyalty program going . today , when you go to cvs , you pay and then you have to have a separate conversation about your loyalty program . if you want to redeem , it s a fairly tedious process . and i m generally someone in a hurry , so for me it s even worse to be in line , behind someone trying to effect this transaction . it involves a lot of stress and anxiety . so when you show up at the point of sale for any merchant that has a loyalty program , for example it rings up . , and i have of credit i can redeem right now . with the currentc app i hit a button , is subtracted from the . , and i pay . and i m out . i also can see the points are taken out , and also the rewards when they re added in . you can do the same thing with offers , the same thing with coupons , which is you re walking into a store , you have a coupon for pampers , that says two for one , and you can push the button and activate that offer , at the point of sale it s done automatically . this puts all the power in the hand of the consumer to make it simple , to make it rewarding and to make it hassle free . so for us , it s a lot more than about payments . paying by mobile is a flat value proposition , it ll be cool for a while , but we hear from our merchants and they hear from their consumers that they want something that brings it all together , that s what we re doing . you re in a tricky spot now because your partners can t use apple pay or google wallet , but you haven t released a working version of your own app to the public . you ve denied that they would be fined if they worked with other payment platforms . so i guess just walk me through what you think is the best solution there , and what the plan is and why exactly you would make the kind of decision that they did if there s no downside to them accepting apple pay . look , i m an entrepreneur , i ve run businesses , startup businesses for years . as ceo of this venture , i ve never in my career found that you get much mileage when you tell your customers what they can or cannot do . and so we re not operating that way . from mcx s perspective , we re focused on building a compelling , affirmative , value proposition for our merchants or consumers . the respective decisions cvs and riteaid made , and meijer made , they have to make the decision that s best for their business . there are consequences , so if you decide to not keep the agreement that you made with the other merchants we re not going to put a lot of energy in helping get those merchants launched in the near term . there are consequences . so if you decide to not keep the agreement that you made with the other merchants we re not going to put a lot of energy in helping get those merchants launched in the near term . we re a small startup venture , less then people , so we re going to focus on those that are keeping connected to one another . so this exclusivity that they ve acknowledged is very short lived , i can tell you it s measured in months , not years . i would observe parenthetically that i don t think too many people complained when apple went to market with the exclusive that you could only buy it at at ampt , which was the case for a while , and i think that was a reasonable business decision that apple made , and they did what was in their best interest , and while verizon customers may have been disappointed , they has made a choice as well . i think every business has a good sense for whats right for them and most importantly what s right for their consumers , and they have to make that decision for themselves . and i think that s happened here . 