 cloud gaming has never seemed closer . sony amprsquos million gaikai acquisition finally bore fruit at ces , where the company announced playstation now ampmdash a hugely ambitious initiative that could revolutionize the distribution of video games . playstation now lets you stream playstation games over the internet to almost any device imaginable , from sony tvs and the ps vita to smartphones and tablets . it amprsquos not the first service to promise something similar , but sony is certainly the biggest company to attempt it . and with the playstation amprsquos vast library as a starting point , it amprsquos the most likely to succeed . another thing if sony amprsquos ces demos are any indication , playstation now actually works , and works well . i played games like the last of us and god of war ascension streamed straight to the inch screen of a ps vita and a much larger bravia tv and came away impressed . image quality was mostly pristine and , although you could notice latency if you were looking for it , the experience was smooth enough that i don amprsquot think the average player would mind . ampldquoi think what the consumers will see is gameplay that amprsquos almost like playing on a console , very low latency , amprdquo said playstation vp of marketing john koller in an interview with the verge . ampldquothe immediacy is very important for us . amprdquo but despite all this , a lot of questions remain about playstation now . the obvious one is how on earth all of this works . playstation now evolved from gaikai , a cloud gaming company that streamed games from its massive banks of pc servers in a similar way . but the fact that the playstation uses traditional x pc hardware is the very reason it amprsquos unable to play games designed for the playstation , which was built around the unique cell processor . as it turns out , sony has built an entirely new array of servers based around that processor in order to stream ps games to every device imaginable . they have to run ps hardware to facilitate the gameplay , said koller . but exactly how those servers will be allocated remains up in the air . we haven amprsquot gotten to that yet , koller said when asked if there would need to be one ps running somewhere for each gamer using the service . we haven amprsquot gotten to the actual metrics on all that , but the scale is sufficient that we think consumers will be able to experience it in large amounts and enjoy it . the scale is sufficient that we think consumers will be able to experience it in large amounts and enjoy it . for now , though , it looks like that scale will only extend as far as the ps amprsquos back catalog . sony isn amprsquot saying anything about when other games might come to the service , nor will it say whether that massive cloud computing power might be harnessed for anything more . microsoft has touted the xbox one amprsquos ability to tap into remote servers in order to offload certain elements of game processing , but sony is purely focused on using the cloud for a backwards compatibility solution . on the other hand , xbox exec albert penello has cast doubt on the viability of cloud gaming , telling polygon that it amprsquos problematic under all but the most ideal of network conditions . obviously if you have a big pipe you re going to have a fantastic experience . xbox has a long standing belief in the cloud and for the last decade has delivered the largest cloud gaming service in the world , xbox live , said a microsoft spokesperson when reached for comment on playstation now . xbox one took cloud gaming even further with game ai in the cloud , cloud processing of compute cycles , game saves in the cloud , and more . in terms of game streaming , we don amprsquot have any specific plans to share at this time , but it amprsquos great to see innovation in the industry . my experience with playstation now was positive , but it amprsquos all but impossible to tell whether it was an accurate representation of what will launch in american homes this summer . koller wouldn amprsquot give away the location of the server used during the demo , for example . but he amprsquos bullish on what will happen when playstation now is opened to a wider audience . we amprsquoll be in strategic locations , sufficient enough to provide the same type of service that you just experienced very seamless , very quick . cloud gaming will always be bandwidth dependent , however , and while koller says playstation now should scale well , he notes that obviously if you have a big pipe you amprsquore going to have a fantastic experience . while the service is focused on ps streaming for now , playstation now is more expansive than might have been expected from sony . until now , the company has said nothing about how gaikai might work with non sony devices it was primarily positioned as a tool for ps backwards compatibility , with streaming to vita as a bonus . but today sony confirmed that playstation now would work with smartphones and tablets , and koller indicated to me that it may not be limited to the company amprsquos own devices i think we amprsquore becoming much more open in terms of how we bring our content to market . ios support may even be a possibility , with the vp noting that apple has expanded support for gaming controllers . this openness has limits , though ampmdash when i asked if sony might ever try to bring a playstation now app to the xbox one , koller laughingly said , i don amprsquot think so . you don amprsquot own it , it amprsquos just more of a license to play it . it makes sense that sony would want to open up playstation now to as wide an audience as possible ampmdash after all , it amprsquos another way to sell games . but the precise mechanics of that remain up in the air . sony announced vague details of rental and subscription models at ceo kaz hirai amprsquos keynote speech yesterday , and it sounds like you won amprsquot be able to own a game for now streaming . i think owning is a difficult concept , said koller . you don amprsquot own it , it amprsquos just more of a license to play it . it amprsquos a little bit of a different way to view the gameplay experience , but either way you amprsquore engaging with fantastic content immediately . gaikai amprsquos original business model , however , was built around using streaming as a means to the end of a traditional purchase , and that amprsquos how sony positioned the service when originally announcing it for ps . while that functionality may not be available when playstation now launches , sony would like it to come to pass . i think the ideal would be , you amprsquove played it , if you like it , now would you like to purchase it ? amprsquo says koller . i think that is a result that could happen from a rental or from a subscription . the company won amprsquot say how much those fees might be , nor on whether a playstation plus subscription will also be required . those who already own ps titles on disc or download shouldn amprsquot expect to get automatic access to playstation now . i want to stress that the ownership component and the playstation now component are two different entities , says koller . and the hours you amprsquove sunk into those games might not count for much , either ampmdash koller admits sony still needs to look at how trophies and friends lists and those types of things carry over , so there amprsquos some work to be done there . it amprsquos clear that the service isn amprsquot quite yet ready from a planning standpoint , even if we take sony at its word that it amprsquoll work at a technical level . right now , playstation now can amprsquot be called much more than an impressive ces tech demo , and sony still needs to fill in a lot of the blanks . but it amprsquos hard not to get excited about the promise . if sony walks the walk upon its summer launch , it amprsquoll have taken the most significant step yet in making cloud gaming a reality a milestone along the path to a future where video games are available on demand without physical media or long download times . in the end , the biggest clue might be in the name ampmdash playstation now isn amprsquot quite here yet , but it sure feels close . 