 the crowd at east grinstead makes for an odd sight most of them are wearing plastic goggles with long antennas sticking up , apparently ignoring their surroundings and staring out into empty space . despite this , they react like a crowd at a football match , letting out oohs and aahs in unison , responding to some unseen action . suddenly , a small drone skitters out of the trees on their right , crashing through the brushes before landing in a spray of dirt and leaves . there s a cheer from the begoggled watchers and a small round of applause . this is the world of first person drone racing , ampnbspan activity that currently occupies the ill defined ground between dedicated pastime and fledgling sport . as drones become an increasingly mainstream phenomenon , racing leagues have popped up around the world . anyone who takes it seriously pilot or spectator doesn t watch their craft from a distance , but instead uses mounted cameras and special video goggles to see the world from their drone s perspective , also known as first person racing or fpv . as far as drone racetracks go , the meter long course at east grinstead is decidedly rural . instead of a warehouse or a parking lot , the ampnbspfpv league one of the uk s fledgling drone racing organizations has decided to plot a circuit through a strip of woodland pitched on a steep hillside . the course is too narrow for the drones to race abreast , so instead , they re competing individually in time trials . each pilot pays a buy in and gets four goes round the track , with the winner taking home the pot . just a few hundred meters away there are fields and open skies , but here the course is almost lost among the trees , with sharp turns , steep inclines , and even a miniature ravine all designed to test a pilot s fine rotor skills . there s no point in thinking , yeah , i can get through that and forgetting about the propellers . we ve had a quarter of the people complete the course so far , says thomas greer , a year old network engineer from glasgow who runs the fpv league . which is more than i expected . he says that although a few of the participants in the race the first to be thrown by the newly formed fpv league are professional pilots who do commercial filming work by drone , they still struggle with this sort of precision racing . you need to be good with spatial awareness and know exactly how wide your quad is . there s no point in thinking , yeah , i can get through that gap and forgetting about the propellers . the racers are all men of mixed ages , wearing mostly jeans , t shirts , and cargo shorts . more than a few work in the computer industry in one capacity or another , and all are racing small , custom built drones constructed around centimeter long x shaped carbon fiber frames , with four propellers or props on each corner . although the video goggles let them fly from anywhere nearby , today s race has a special cordoned off area in the middle of the track for pilots , where they take a seat in picnic chairs , leaning into the corners as they race as if playing an intense session of ampnbspmario kart . it s a bit like a video game apart from it s not virtual , says bradley austin , a year old first time fpv racer who teaches video game design for a living . in a game you crash , you reload , you crash , you reload . if you crash your drone you ve got to go pick it up and solder it back together so you ve got that adrenaline going that your investment might smash into a tree . crashing is both a constant threat and a shared joy at fpv races . some drones are clothes lined by tree branches , others get snarled in bushes , some bounce off the rocks , and more than a few fail before they ve even crossed the starting line , thrashing about on the floor in a cloud of leaves and dirt like a toddler throwing a tantrum . the best crash , however , goes to a pilot who manages to get his drone wedged between a pair of trees just as greer predicted . when his heat is over and the marshals have given the all clear , he and a few other pilots race down to where the drone is stuck , taking pictures in front of the craft and declaring it the crash of the day like hunters posing with a kill . although in this particular crash the drone comes away unscathed the pilot puts it down to a brand of indestructible props he s been buying from china ampnbsp more often than not there s repair work to be done between races . up the hill from the course in the grass garden of what was once a stately house and that s now home to a scientology center , there s a gazebo full of chargers and spare parts , and a taped off area for pilots to test out their on the fly adjustments . more time is spent tinkering than racing , but quadcopter racing comes with a deep well of arcane detail for pilots to engross themselves in ampnbspeverything from battery discharge rates to the proper way to balance propellers can be debated and fiddled with . joking about the possibility of a drone olympics like a lot of enthusiasts who find their field of interest embraced suddenly by the wider world , the quadcopter pilots display a particular mixture of derision and pride when chatting about the popular acceptance of the craft . they re irritated by the idea of kids buying camera equipped dji phantoms to take a peek next door , but joke easily about the possibility of a drone olympics , with just the slightest hint of seriousness . they also , for the record , don t like to call them drones and prefer the term quadcopter but popular usage is a hard rap to beat . when asked how much it costs to get into the sport , one pilot laughs and responds do you want the official cost , or the wife cost ? the atmosphere around the charging tent is friendly and open , but extremely male i only spot one female spectator and no female pilots . he says that although you can get started in the sport with a mini quad , once you ve bought the video goggles , a transmitter , charger , spare batteries , and other assorted bits of kit , total expenditure usually hits around or . of course , says another pilot , that s just for a single drone , and enthusiasts own more than one , with different frame sizes and rotor setups . you need to look at the rules , he says . the correct number of drones to own is n they multiply , they self multiply . the winning craft in the day s racing looks particularly chic , with neat wiring , green , bug like antenna , and a central camera that makes it look like a cute cyclops . it belongs to dominic clifton , a software engineer who also designs an ampnbspopen source flight controller for drones used by many of the pilots in attendance . as he accepts the prize money for his winning flight time you can watch the footage from his drone above , the day s racing suddenly begins to feel somewhat official . there are outbreaks of applause and photographs , and greer gives a short speech thanking both the participants and the day s sponsors a uk based supplier of drone parts named radioc . whether fpv drone racing is headed for the big time or not is a popular topic of conversation . more than a few organizations have already taken the initiative and declared themselves the official so and so league for their own country or region , but as sports go , fpv drone racing still feels refreshingly free wheeling . some people might dismiss this as amateurism , but in east grinstead s scrubby woodland , it feels accessible and welcoming . greer tells me that at the moment he s more interested in changing perceptions about the aircraft than becoming the sepp blatter of the drone world . where it goes in the future , i don t know is the honest answer . where it goes in the future , i don t know is the honest answer , says greer . this is just a hobby for me but i seem to be good at organizing things . he adds that at the end of june he ll be taking some of the league s drones and goggles to a nearby model show to let the public get a proper hands on . we re going to give people a chance to try and see it for themselves , so they can experience flying from the quadcopter perspective , he says . by giving people the opportunity to see how much fun it is and how easy it is he trails off . for those who already involved , the attraction of owning and flying a drone speaks for itself . subscribe to what s tech ? on itunes , listen on soundcloud , or subscribe via rss . and be sure to follow us on twitter . you can also find the entire collection of what s tech ? stories right here on the the verge dot com . 