 someday , perhaps soon , you re going to drop your phone in the toilet . you ll be pretty upset when you realize how much it s going to cost you to replace it . what might take longer to remember is how many photos , videos , and screenshots you lost . the insane text your cousin sent you when he was high , the selfie you took at cape canaveral , the last photo you took of your dog before he passed away all potentially lost . the solution is to make sure those photos are backed up somewhere in the cloud , preferably automatically . there are several existing services that can do it , but they re alternately annoying and complicated and so all too often just don t get used . but two companies think they have found a way to get consumers to actually back up their images to the cloud . the answer isn t to try to get you to install a cloud backup app next to your photo and camera apps it s to replace them . these new solutions don t look much like photo storage apps like loom or everpix , and that s on purpose . they look more like the photos app or the camera app you already use . they re more relatable , and don t ask you to consider how to manage your photos in the cloud . nobody has successfully replaced the photos app , says picturelife ceo nate westheimer , citing a recent betaworks study of users home screens , so he made it his mission to do so . the latest version of picturelife pictured for iphone and android is meant to supplant your photos app wholesale . when you boot it up , it reads all the photos and videos you ve taken on your phone and displays them nearly instantly . there s no lengthy import process or account creation screen to worry about . there s only a neat timeline of your photos . you can use picturelife as your photos app , and if you choose , you can turn on backup , which the app offers for free . picturelife bundles in gb of free cloud storage the size of the average camera roll , says westheimer . because picturelife replaces your photos app but adds backup as a feature , westheimer says , people will be more likely to back up their stuff . picturelife offers unlimited storage for a hefty a month . once the app s set to back up your photos , you can view them all on the picturelife website , which is one of the fastest of its kind that i ve tested . picturelife is , in fact , not so different from when i last tested it a year ago . it includes a variety of nice features like automatically importing all the photos you ve posted on facebook and instagram for safe keeping . westheimer calls picturelife the last man standing in the cloud photo app game , but that s not entirely true . a new photo app called shutter takes picturelife s idea one step further , aiming to replace your camera app . by supplanting both your camera and photos app , shutter hopes to alleviate you from ever having to delete photos you shoot . with picturelife , conversely , backed up photos will still need to be deleted from your camera roll to save space . shutter also offers unlimited storage for the photos you take on your phone , a real selling point . everyone s shooting p videos and buying megapixel phones , says shutter creator jonathan benassaya , but you can t enjoy them . even if he s not right that most people have megapixel cameras , he is right that the amount of storage our photos take up is getting too large for the amount of storage on most smartphones . shutter is designed to bait you into trying streamnation , its parent website , where unlimited storage isn t free . streamnation lets you upload as many photos and videos as you d like from your computer for . a month , but you can still access all the photos and videos you ve taken with shutter for free . streamnation s two faced pricing plan is a smart way to reel users into its ecosystem without taking too much collateral damage . streamnation desktop users upload about gb per person , benassaya says a far cry from the amount most people will ever upload from mobile . i think the cloud is something new for consumers , he says . even though dropbox has million users , i don t know how many of them really use it with more than the free storage offered , and with all their content . thus , shutter is designed to get people in the door with its free storage plan , while streamnation hopes to keep them . both services were built to make storing media easier , but it seems they ve both decided that storage isn t sexy . to percent of content that is stored on a hard drive for consumers is media it s a photo , it s a video or a music file , says benassaya . yet , most cloud storage services still look like windows explorer . instead , the two companies are appealing to the average consumer as well as photography hobbyists . both apps offer a variety of great ways to interact with your photos , like through memories picturelife and flashback streamnation which offer a glimpse into the past , or through the exif data of your photos . picturelife also lets you edit your photos , something few cloud storage companies offer , and both apps work with existing iphoto , aperture , and lightroom libraries on desktop . there are a variety of ways to emulate picturelife or shutter s functionality using today s leading cloud storage services . google , dropbox , facebook , and others notably all have auto backup features for mobile , but none are very good at browsing all of your photos . apple s photo stream has confusing limits and doesn t feel native to the cloud . dropbox , which acquired loom and snapjoy last year , has a nice mobile photo app called carousel , but its web based photos page is still terribly basic . everpix , another delightful photo service , collapsed under the pressure of competing with companies like dropbox and google on pricing . google and flickr remain great options , but bundle your photo management into a social networking experience . facebook , meanwhile compresses your photos and offers no singular , navigable timeline view of all your photos . picturelife s new slogan is the smart home for your photos , not a hard drive in the cloud as time goes on , dropbox , google , and others will evolve and become more than just cloud storage services . they ll adapt better to the kinds of files people store . if they can improve their own photo and video capabilities faster than picturelife can find a market , the company could quickly find itself in the same position everpix did . it s a tough ask for picturelife , which relies on amazon servers to store data , and can only make a few dollars per user on top of its monthly subscription service . streamnation , on the other hand , owns its own servers and is more in control of its fate . these companies don t want to be part of the same conversation as amazon or google , though . picturelife s new slogan is the smart home for your photos , not a hard drive in the cloud . these companies understand photos and making mobile apps people actually want to use , and are hoping to use this skill to turn ordinary people into cloud storage customers for the first time . not everyone is the scrapbooking type , after all , but nobody wants to lose all the photos they ve taken on their phone so these apps aren t selling cloud storage . they re selling great photo apps , with peace of mind served up on the side . 