 inside a nondescript office park in silicon valley , a robotic arm is running a test . with rapid , precise movements , the arm pipettes colored liquids into wells on a tray . within a few minutes its work is done the arm has pipetted the logo for transcriptic , a fast growing , google ventures backed robotics startup that could upend the way biologists do their research . transcriptic s small team is calibrating the robot arm , which serves as the linchpin of the company s efforts to transform life science research by making it cheaper and more accessible . scientists send in raw materials ampmdash dna , for example , or biopsied mouse tissue ampmdash and tell transcriptic what to do with it . costs for the service start at a few dollars per test , and the turnaround time is typically limited only by how long it takes for cells to divide . the company began taking orders from all comers earlier this year , selling services including cell cloning , genotyping , and biobanking . early customers include stanford the california institute of technology the university of california , san diego and the university of chicago . since july , the number of customers has roughly doubled every month . the heart of transcriptic is what it calls the work cell , the automated lab where the robot arm performs its duties manipulating samples using the various connected machines that run protocols . the company had never previously allowed journalists inside its walls . but recently , transcriptic invited the verge to come look behind the curtain ampmdash the work cell is normally hidden behind an actual , physical curtain ampmdash to see how the company is using robotics to do work that has previously been the province of phds . at first i was like , this is kind of crazy , says blake byers , a partner at google ventures , which led a . million seed investment in transcriptic last december . are you really going to automate all the nuance that is biology ? but byers , who earned his phd in bioengineering from stanford , came around in part because of his own experiences in labs . it amprsquos a fact that i amprsquove wasted many hours of my life moving my hand around to transport small volumes of liquid from one tube to another . i amprsquove wasted many hours of my life moving my hand around to transport small volumes of liquid from one tube to another . that feeling was familiar to max hodak , the year old entrepreneur who founded transcriptic nearly two years ago . a native of new york city , hodak built and sold his previous startup before he could legally drink . that company , myfit , focused on helping students identify the right colleges . but hodak spent much of his time as an undergraduate at duke university researching brain machine interfaces , and saw firsthand how much time in the lab is wasted . sometimes researchers have to wait days or weeks to use a particular machine . other times they spend days on end doing work that is essentially robotic ampmdash transferring liquid from one small well to another . and if they should make a mistake , they might not even notice for weeks . hodak s proposed solution is a company that tries to do for biologists what amazon web services does for information technology by making basic services cheap and accessible over the web , it lets customers try things that were not previously possible . most of biology is in the analysis , hodak says inside his office . the humans don amprsquot add value in going to the bench and doing this stuff by hand . humans add value by writing papers and running creative experiments that test sophisticated hypotheses . but that amprsquos not what we amprsquore spending most of our time on as a field . for now , transcriptic is a lean operation , with nine people working in a small two story office that contains the company s lone work cell . to conserve costs , employees build much of their own equipment using d printing and laser cutting tools . among other things , they built an automated freezer that would have cost them , retail for about , . the company amprsquos main competitors are the nation amprsquos , contract research organizations , a multibillion dollar industry that provides third party support for clinical studies and trials . but hodak doesn amprsquot want his customers to merely run the occasional test ampmdash he wants them to build whole new companies and services using his robots . eventually , he says , two people will be able to found their own biotech company working from a coffee shop transcriptic runs the tests , and the coffeeshop biologists sell the analysis . it s an idea that has some appeal to biologists contacted by the verge . if you go into a lab , they basically look the same as they did in the s , except for computers , says josiah zayner , a biochemist at the university of chicago . among other experiments , zayner has used proteins to create a new musical instrument . zayner is frustrated that computers in his lab still aren amprsquot networked ampmdash checking in on one of them requires pulling the data off a usb drive . it seems archaic , given the progress of cloud computing . i really think this is a step in the correct direction , he says of transcriptic . imagine if science was industrialized , what could be accomplished . imagine if science was industrialized , what could be accomplished . chaitan khosla , professor of chemistry and chemical engineering at stanford , agrees . discovery biology and chemistry , as practiced in university and industrial labs , is more expensive than it needs to be , khosla says . if an organization takes on the challenge of lowering these operating costs without compromising safety and effectiveness , then that is a good thing . i would try it , and would support it , if it worked for me . the question for researchers will be whether they trust a small startup with their life s work . some academics believe that completing research tasks by hand connects researchers to their work in an important way . you ll meet professors who have an allergic reaction to outsourcing research , byers says . transcriptic still has to persuade customers that its results are at least as accurate as the ones they would get by hand . direct comparisons can be difficult , hodak says , but the company is collecting data to make its case . ampldquobiology is very finicky , and it still takes some work to get a protocol reliable and stable on our platform , amprdquo hodak says . ampldquoonce it s stable , it requires monitoring and periodic revalidation ampmdash but it s vastly more reliable than working by hand . amprdquoand among the younger generation , resistance is decreasing , hodak says . it amprsquos the world amprsquos easiest sale to convince a grad student that they want to use this , he says . and if they do , transcriptic should soon outgrow its single work cell and start building more of them . already , it s working on a next generation design . soon , research may become one more information technology , managed in the cloud instead of the lab . ampldquothere isn amprsquot a lab in the world that doesn amprsquot have more ideas they amprsquod like to test , more hypothesizes they amprsquod like to run , amprdquo hodak says . ampldquobecause it amprsquos very expensive to run even a simple project , and it takes a lot of time , this leads to a lot of weirdness in how decisions gets made on what gets done . amprdquo hodak s eyes widen , thinking of all the work his robots will do . it really changes the field . amprdquo