 steve williams couldn t breathe . the former athlete had cardiomyopathy , which occasionally choked his lungs with fluid , making him gasp for air . but this felt different williams felt like he was dying . he was raced to an orange county hospital , and shortly after checking in , his heart stopped . for minutes , er workers compressed his chest in an attempt to revive him . at one point , his wife mary remembers being called into his room to say goodbye to her husband of years . it seemed williams was a dead man . the heart is just a pumpinside the year quest to build a mechanical organby joaquin palomino photography by john francis peters steve williams couldn t breathe . the former athlete had cardiomyopathy , which occasionally choked his lungs with fluid , making him gasp for air . but this felt different williams felt like he was dying . he was raced to an orange county hospital , and shortly after checking in , his heart stopped . for minutes , er workers compressed his chest in an attempt to revive him . at one point , his wife mary remembers being called into his room to say goodbye to her husband of years . it seemed williams was a dead man . incredibly , doctors rebooted williams heart but for three days , he was in an induced coma , his body packed in ice to minimize brain damage . when he woke up , his mental facilities were intact , but his body was ravaged . his liver was congested , fluid reappeared in his lungs , and his heart s right and left ventricles were practically destroyed , making it hard for blood to circulate throughout his body . without a heart transplant , he would soon die . without a heart transplant , he would soon diedonor hearts , however , are scarce each year , only about in patients that need a transplant worldwide receives the life saving surgery . williams best shot at survival was to have his heart almost completely removed and replaced with a total artificial heart a synthetic machine that stands in for a living , beating organ . williams would be among a handful of patients who receive artificial hearts every year . right now , they serve as life support for people who are about to have transplants . but if the device s manufacturers have their way , one day soon mechanical hearts will replace our faulty biological ones forever . luckily , williams had landed in one of the few places in the world that could perform the extreme procedure he d been transferred to the cedars sinai heart institute in los angeles . but the proposal was harrowing his chest cavity would be cracked , critical arteries severed , and the heart he d lived with for years pulled out of his body . scared is such a simple word we were totally blindsided , mary told me . but there was really no other choice for me , williams says . the mechanical heart offered by cedars sinai is manufactured by the arizona company syncardia . it has a simple design a pair of fist sized artificial ventricles that attach to the atria , the heart s blood collection chambers the aorta , the body s largest artery and the pulmonary artery , which connects the heart and lungs . two tubes with the circumference of garden hoses attach the polyurethane ventricles to an air pump outside the body , which sends roughly short bursts of air per minute into the machine . that air forces blood in and out , replicating a rapid heartbeat . the device must be constantly plugged into a power outlet or connected to a battery pack . without electricity , the heart quickly shuts down unless power is restored , the patient dies . replacing his central organ with plastic looked promisingwilliams agreed to have a mechanical heart installed as a temporary measure while waiting for a donor organ . in april of , the day before his surgery , doctors introduced williams to someone recovering from the same operation . the patient was tethered to an air compressor that sat at his bedside and made a perpetual thump thump thump thump sound so loud it could be heard from across the room . two tubes protruded from an incision on his stomach . the scene was unsettling , but williams wasn t fixated on the tubes , the pounding sound , or the man s pulsating chest . he mainly noticed how healthy he looked . almost two thirds of syncardia total artificial heart recipients can get out of bed and walk two weeks after surgery , and the majority survive long enough to get a transplant . as odd as it might seem , williams thought temporarily replacing his central organ with plastic looked promising . steve williams at his homewilliams surgery went smoothly . he was discharged with a freedom driver , a toaster sized battery and air pump designed by syncardia that fits snuggly into a backpack and lets people return home . until , most mechanical heart recipients , no matter how healthy they were , stayed connected to large , relatively immobile batteries and were confined to hospitals . the operation and the driver allowed williams to resume a somewhat normal life . he saw his son graduate from high school , for instance . he takes daily walks on the beach , gardens in his backyard , and more than a year after he nearly died , remains in relatively good health . williams is forever connected to a battery or plugged into a power outlet i was a year old guy that typically would be dead , and my wife would be the sad woman with two kids living off my insurance policy , williams says , as his heart labors away at his feet outside an orange county starbucks . that s what i have to say to myself to remember how lucky i am . but living with an artificial heart has its downsides williams is constantly accompanied by a caretaker , typically his wife , in case the device malfunctions he is forever connected to a battery or plugged into a power outlet the large doses of blood thinners he takes make his body run cold and he can t submerge himself in water . then , there are the more impalpable challenges he hasn t heard silence in over a year just the constantly beating sound of the air pump and he draws stares in public . williams stopped seeing movies in theaters out of respect for other viewers the noise from his artificial heart would bother most audiences . it s a love hate relationship you have with these devices you re thankful you re alive , but it s a compromise to have them , williams says . it s human nature to want things to go back to the way they used to be . sometimes they never do . there are few people alive in the world who have no natural heartbeat . fewer than , patients have received an entirely artificial heart in the device s three decades of existence , and most patients haven t used the machines for long . as with williams , mechanical hearts are typically just a bridge to an eventual transplant . but that may change . a handful of companies , including syncardia , are trying to get regulatory approval to market the first permanent mechanical heart for wide scale use , which would replace a patient s biological organ over the remaining course of their lifetime . think along the lines of knee replacements and hearing aids , says piet jansen , chief medical officer for the french company carmat , which is running an early clinical trial for a long term mechanical heart . at some point we will have an implantable blood pump that permanently replaces a sick heart . the heart pumps , gallons of blood every dayif it works , the technology could save a lot of lives . more than million people in the us have heart failure , according to the cdc , and many need a new organ to survive . the lucky few that get a transplant often face complications such as rejection of the donated heart , infection , and vital organ failure . mechanical hearts can be more reliable , and some predict they are the future of treating total heart failure . but the technology raises also practical and ethical questions . it s unclear whether plastic and metal hearts can ever truly replicate their biological counterparts , which pump , gallons of blood every day , service , miles of blood vessels more than double the circumference of the world , and work without a hitch year after year . living with an artificial heart is also hard on patients , and once the surgery begins , it s irreversible . you ve cut out a big chunk of the heart , and you ve cut out the parts that are necessary to sustain life , says stuart finder , a health care ethicist at cedars sinai . once you start the intervention , you can never go back . syncardia s total artificial heartthe heart is just a pump , and for the past half century bioengineers have doggedly tried to replicate the biological machine with a mechanical one . success has always been just beyond their grasp . in the s , scientists promised to develop a total artificial heart by the end of the decade , to cure end stage biventricular heart failure . the proposal intrigued congress , which funneled hundreds of thousands of dollars into the newly created artificial heart program at the national heart , lung , and blood institute . while it seemed relatively easy to craft an effective blood pump , designing one that agreed with the human body and worked for decades without fail was much harder . one of the first prototypes , built in the s , had an unlikely power source plutonium a byproduct of nuclear weapons manufacturing . the element generates thermal energy for close to a century through radioactive decay in theory , it could keep recipients alive well into old age . the atomic heart had some obvious drawbacksthe atomic heart , however , had some obvious drawbacks . even when functioning properly , patients would be exposed to high levels of radiation . and what if it malfunctioned ? would enough radiation seep into the patient or harm their loved ones ? co workers ? neighbors ? a member of a federal assessment panel even wondered if terrorists could kidnap mechanical heart recipients , dissect them , and turn them into weapons . despite protest from researchers , the atomic heart was ultimately killed before it was implanted in anyone . but it did pave the way for the first clinically tested permanent mechanical heart the jarvik . the jarvik s design was simple two man made ventricles , connected to an external air pump , expand and contract the artificial organ , propelling blood throughout the body much like williams artificial heart today . in , barney clark , a year old dentist with end stage congestive heart failure , agreed to have a jarvik installed . he didn t expect to live long , but was willing to endure the operation for the sake of science . on december nd , after nine hours of surgery , clark woke up with two plastic ventricles and titanium in his chest . he was the first human to live without a natural heartbeat . a abc report on the occasion of clark s operationclark s body had a hard time accepting the implant . he bled internally and suffered multiple strokes his mental health deteriorated . in tv interviews , he stared off camera with a distant look in his eyes , a washing machine sized air compressor called big blue working tirelessly beside him . on a few occasions he supposedly asked doctors to unplug the device and let him die . a patient compared the device to a threshing machine in his chest cavitythen , on a snowy day in march of , after multiple organs failed , clark experienced brain death . his artificial heart , which beat nearly million times over days , was shut down . four more jarvik hearts were implanted after clark s , and each produced equally grim results . the device caused kidney failure , hemorrhaging , stroke , and seizure . sociologist renee fox documented the jarvik experiments in her book spare parts . one jarvik recipient endured such heavy internal bleeding after his surgery , fox writes , that half of his total blood volume had to be replaced . the patient later compared the device to a threshing machine in his chest cavity . in , after nearly a quarter of a billion dollars , the national heart , lung , and blood institute pulled funding from the artificial heart program . the plastic and metal machines , it seemed , were incompatible with the human body , and the pursuit of the bionic man appeared to be over . but not everyone gave up . while the device was impractical as a permanent replacement for the heart , a young heart surgeon from arizona named jack copeland saw the potential to use artificial hearts as a bridge to transplant . in the mid s he implanted a machine commonly referred to as the phoenix heart in a dying man . controversially , copeland didn t have fda approval or the person s consent for the operation , but he saw no other options . we didn t have time to sit down and consider all of the implications , he says . we were trying to save his life , and that in the end that was the most important consideration . the urgency gave copeland some legal protection , and to the chagrin of some medical ethicists , the fda did not punish him . after the mechanical heart was installed , copeland was impressed by its efficacy . the guy did well on the device , he recalls . it worked a hell of a lot better than the heart that had been inside him . the patient survived for hours on the machine , but died shortly after getting a biological transplant . a few months after implanting the phoenix heart , copeland began using the jarvik as a bridge this time with federal approval . in he co founded cardiowest , which later became syncardia . its researchers obtained rights to the jarvik heart and tweaked it . by , after making minor changes to the old machine , copeland and his colleagues had created a bridge to transplant device that was approved for a year long human trial . the human body can adjust to incredible thingsof the people in the trial , died after the artificial heart was installed . but the rest survived long enough to get a transplant promising results considering that all the participants were considered at high risk of imminent death . soon thereafter , the cardiowest device became the first and only fda approved artificial heart for a bridge to transplant . once widely rejected by the medical community , mechanical hearts have since become a viable temporary treatment for end stage biventricular heart failure . it s like chemotherapy in the s people used to think it was crazy to give poison to someone who was dying , and now it s routine , says francisco arabia , a biological and mechanical heart surgeon , and surgical director of cedars sinai s mechanical circulatory support program . there s no doubt life is not the same with a total artificial heart , but the human body can adjust to incredible things . kerrie cancel de la cruzon the sixth floor of cedars sinai where heart patients recover after surgery a room hums with what sounds like a loud clock , each tick separated by exactly one half of one second . kerrie cancel de la cruz , a year old mother from texas with an ear to ear smile and a neck to chest scar , sits in the middle of a din coming from an air pump that keeps blood flowing through her foot , inch frame . de la cruz has an ear to ear smile and a neck to chest scara large sticker that reads tink in bold red letters is plastered across the pump . i thought , you re a ticker , but i m not going to call you ticker , she says to the machine . i like tinkerbell , so i named you tink . on a visit last april her walls were covered in family photos and a stuffed teddy bear hung off her bed . flowers from her husband and a fellow artificial heart recipient wilted on her bedside table . de la cruz was born with a weak heart . at , she had a defibrillator implanted , and at , after giving birth to twins , developed atrial fibrillation , a disorder that causes an irregular heartbeat . her skin turned pale grey , her stomach bloated with fluid , and she experienced such severe pain that it was hard for her to get out of bed . de la cruz needed a new heart , but her small body and high level of antibodies made her an unlikely transplant candidate . she was transferred to cedars sinai in the spring of , where arabia explained that her best treatment option was a mechanical heart . the operation would increase her odds of survival seven fold , while also helping her regain strength which she would need in order to receive a donor transplant , arabia said . still , de la cruz was reluctant . at first i didn t want it , she recalls , tears welling up in her husky blue eyes . i was tired , i fought a lot . it felt like it was time for me to go . patients like de la cruz , who are out of options , often end up at cedars sinai the plush medical center adjacent to beverly hills performs more total artificial heart transplants than anywhere else in the country . when arabia describes the operation , reactions are mixed , he says . a few patients mostly men are excited at the prospect of getting a super heart , but the majority don t want the implant . it isn t until they re dying in the icu that most people agree to it . patients on the brink of death are between a lion and a crocodile . as christiaan barnard , the south african surgeon who performed the first human to human heart transplant in put it patients on the brink of death are between a lion and a crocodile . if the lion is a mechanical heart , a biological transplant is the crocodile while it might be a better option , it still poses a grave threat . taking a living heart from one person s body and putting it into another person is a high risk procedure with ample room for error . the donor heart first has to be methodically extracted from a very recently deceased body , transported hundreds , sometimes thousands of miles on ice , and installed in an entirely foreign vessel . dr . francisco arabia of cedars sinai hospitaloccasionally a flaw in the donor heart will cause it to fail shortly after the transplant . other times the transplant beats for a few months or years before giving out . human hearts are like a used car , they can have flaws , disease , arabia points out . sometimes the patient s body rejects the transplant a painful process where the immune system attacks and kills the foreign organ . nearly a quarter of heart transplant recipients show some signs of rejection within a year of surgery . to battle rejection , patients must take expensive and risky immunosuppressant medication . while the pills safeguard the new organ , they also increase the odds of infection , cancer , liver disease , and kidney failure . this doesn t only take from your body , it takes from your mind , spirit , and soul . artificial hearts are different . since they aren t made of human tissue , rejection isn t an issue , and defects are rare . they work percent of the time , arabia says . you know what you re getting . but they re not without complications and downsides both physical and emotional , as de la cruz knows . this doesn t only take from your body , it takes from your mind , spirit , and soul , de la cruz says . despite de la cruz s initial reservations , she had the operation . but in january , after a short stay at a temporary home in los angeles , she returned to cedars sinai . while de la cruz s body accepted the mechanical implant , the freedom driver wasn t strong enough to support her . she had to be hooked up to a more powerful air pump , forcing her to spend months living in a hospital room . each day she dreamt of resuming her old life being home with her family swimming in the gulf of mexico eating and drinking freely de la cruz could only consume . liters of fluids each day , and had to stay away from sodium . the ordeal was hard on her two children , particularly her youngest daughter , who s in elementary school . i shared the same room with her when i was home , and when i had to go back to the hospital , she said , mom , i really miss you , i can t sleep , de la cruz recalls , sitting cross legged in her hospital bed . when i asked her why , she said because i can t hear your heart beating . if you haven t been through this , you don t understand . despite its drawbacks , syncardia has helped hundreds resume a somewhat normal life while waiting for a donor transplant . now , the company is preparing to leap forward pending fda approval , it plans to offer its total artificial heart the same model de la cruz and williams have as a permanent implant for patients in the us . if approved , the device will become available to a wider set of patients , including those not eligible for biological transplants . creating an effective long term mechanical heart has been cardiac surgeons dream for decades , but the endeavor has been incredibly difficult and expensive . one company , called abiomed , received fda approval to use a permanent mechanical heart in . the device was expensive and hard to implant . after clinical tests , only one person was fitted with the machine before the company abandoned the device . one of syncardia s challenges is what appears to be a precarious financial situation . the arizona firm registered for an ipo in september , hoping to raise money to pay off tens of millions of dollars in debt and expand into latin america and asia . to serve as many patients that need the device , the company has to have the wherewithal to reach and treat them , syncardia ceo and president michael garippa says , referring to the ipo plan . syncardia withdrew its public offering in october and has since laid off some of its employees . garippa blames the fumble on volatile market conditions . the french company carmat is developing an artificial heart , but it also faces an uphill battle . unlike syncardia s machine , with its driver in a backpack , carmat s heart is almost fully implantable and is powered by small lithium batteries that can be worn on a belt or a holster under the arm . a layer of chemically treated cow heart tissue or pseudo skin coats the heart , wherever it touches blood , making it more biocompatible and reducing the need for blood thinners . it is still in early clinical trials . i have never felt so good , a patient said . shortly thereafter , the patient diedthree people have been fitted with carmat s heart . the first patient survived two and a half months before the machine short circuited nearly three times longer than his projected survival . the second patient , who had the device installed last august , was able to return home roughly five months after operation , telling the newspaper le journal du dimanche in april i have never felt so good . shortly after the interview , the machine s motor malfunctioned and the patient died . the third patient , who was implanted six months ago , is still alive and well . once a fourth person is fixed with the device and survives at least days , the company can move beyond its early clinical trial and begin a second set of tests . it s clear that carmat s heart is still far from ready for the market . aside from the two malfunctions , it weighs nearly three times more than an average human heart and is incredibly expensive . nonetheless , the company estimates around , people in the united states and europe could eventually benefit from the machine , which may usher in the next generation of mechanical hearts . if we had a small , totally implantable artificial heart , all powered electromagnetically , that would be the standard , there s no doubt , arabia says , noting that it may be a while before a reliable , self contained artificial heart is available . we want something we can implant and forget about , just like a normal human heart . perhaps the biggest moral conundrum , though , has nothing to do with living with a mechanical heart , but dying with one . unlike biological hearts , artificial ones can pump blood throughout the body and oxygen to the brain when the rest of the body breaks down . death is dragged out and may require the machine be shut off . i ve had patients where the liver and kidney failed , the skin turned yellow and died , and the only thing working normally was the brain , arabia says . on a hot spring afternoon , steve and mary williams drive a few miles from their modest orange county home to the pacific ocean , where the couple regularly takes a two mile walk on a meandering bike and pedestrian path . steve misses surfing more than almost anything else , and coming to the beach keeps him grounded . i don t have a heart . after pulling into a handicapped parking space , williams unplugs his heart s air compressor from the car s charger , straps on a backpack that weighs roughly pounds , and steps into the southern california sun . as he walks up a wheelchair ramp to the coastal path , a man in an army fatigue hat and board shorts yells what are you doing , you re not handicapped ! williams stops and locks eyes with the pedestrian . i don t have a heart , he responds , noticeably flustered . what s your disability ? mary ushers him away before things can escalate . he gets comments like that all of the time , she tells me . a waitress once asked if williams had monkeys inside of his backpack , due to the strange sound coming from it . another person accused him of carrying a bomb . stares and comments are minor compared to other complications . earlier this year williams accidentally knocked the air pump onto the floor while preparing to take a sponge bath , and the battery stopped working . he took a few steps out of the bathroom , then crumpled onto the floor . a backup battery kicked in , jolting williams awake . the fall and the jolt left him with superficial injuries a chipped tooth and a large cut above his left cheekbone . he took a few steps out of the bathroom , then crumpled onto the floor i m trying to live a normal life but it can be hard with this thing attached to me , he says , his words slowed by a stroke he had after the operation . williams keeps track of all the promising breakthroughs in the heart transplant field . we discuss scientists effort to create bioartificial hearts using stem cells , full body transplants , and bioengineers quest to develop a continuous flow device , which are small , implantable turbine like pumps that send blood through the body at a steady stream , much like a hose or faucet . it s controversial technology , but the machine has just one moving part , doesn t experience much wear and tear , and is relatively quiet . today , williams is stuck in a sort of limbo . if his heart had stopped beating years ago , he probably would have died . if it stopped beating years into the future , he might have a permanent and non intrusive artificial heart . or perhaps a perfect clone of his original organ . instead , he has a mechanical heart that , while burdensome , keeps blood pumping to his organs and oxygen to his brain . it s a hard life , yes , but williams feels lucky to have it . when people ask what it s like i tell them , sure , i don t have a heart , but i had a lot of problems with the heart i was born with . if i kept it i probably wouldn t be here today . at am on april th , williams was making coffee for mary when his home phone rang . he answered tersely , bothered that someone was pestering him so early in the morning . the call , however , was one he had anxiously been awaiting for the past weeks a donor heart was being transported to cedars sinai for him . williams and mary raced to the hospital where he was prepped for surgery . at the following morning , williams had his artificial heart removed , was placed on a heart lung bypass machine , and had a stranger s biological organ installed in him . the surgery went smoothly . he had crossed the bridge , so to speak . he had crossed the bridge i m just in shock still i can t believe i don t have the artificial heart i can t believe there s no noise i can t believe i don t have to take the blood thinners , he said a few weeks after the operation . i should be dead at least three times from this whole ordeal , but i m not . i m just so grateful for everything . a few months later , the transplant was still holding up well . williams plans on volunteering at cedars sinai and helping artificial heart recipients adjust to their new lives . and in july , after seven months of being monitored closely as an inpatient at cedars sinai , de la cruz also crossed the bridge . her operation , though , didn t go as smoothly as williams de la cruz s body rejected the new organ and she went into kidney failure . she is now in and out of the hospital and may soon need a kidney transplant . this is exhausting i was looking forward to getting the heart and trying to live a better life , she said at the end of october . despite the grim circumstances , de la cruz maintains her optimism . there are still things that can be done to give me the quality of life that i was hoping for it will be better . edited by elizabeth lopatto , michael zelenko