 in san francisco amprsquos upscale pacific heights neighborhood , some students from kindergarten to the eighth grade attend classes at the private san francisco waldorf school . on any given afternoon outside of the cheerful , modern white building , parents congregate to wait for their kids . chit chat includes the typical fodder like play dates and birthdays , or who was cast in the school play . but occasionally the topic of illness arises ampmdash which is where things can take a turn towards the atypical . you might , for instance , hear about ampldquochicken pox parties , amprdquo where healthy kids come over to sick kids amprsquo houses to catch the disease . of course , there amprsquos a vaccine for chicken pox . it amprsquos been available since , and is part of every state amprsquos recommended vaccine schedule , which the majority of us children receive . but sf waldorf represents an unusual population only percent of incoming kindergarteners are up to date on all their vaccinations , one of the lowest rates in san francisco for a school of its size and vastly lower than the national average of percent . which puts sf waldorf firmly in the crosshairs of a national debate . a vast minority of parents across the country , around . percent , opt out of vaccines by citing either religious or philosophical reasons . and these non vaccinators have , in recent years , been the subject of intense media scrutiny . in part , you can blame a former playboy bunny jenny mccarthy , who abc recently hired as a new host on the view , has waged an ardent , vocal campaign against ampldquotoxins amprdquo in vaccines that she believes were responsible for causing her son amprsquos autism . recent outbreaks of preventable illnesses have only added more fuel to the fire . this year , states have reported cases of measles , making the second worst year for the disease since . in august , the illness struck people linked to a single texas megachurch that eschewed vaccinations . and just last week , a new study concluded that vaccine refusals were largely to blame for a outbreak of whooping cough in california . anti vaccinators are typically branded as na ampiumlve simpletons , while pro vaccinators are slammed as being reactionary reductionists the issue of vaccination invariably provokes polarized debates , often manifesting in online comment sections and on twitter and facebook . often , the levels of savagery and vitriol are on par with those surrounding debates about abortion and gun control . anti vaccinators are typically branded as na ampiumlve simpletons , while pro vaccinators are slammed as being reactionary reductionists . the reality , like most things , is more nuanced . at the sf waldorf school parents are educated , liberal leaning , wealthy enough to afford the , a year for kindergarten , and often working in technology , law , and other white collar professions that demand critical thinking skills . but some of them are also treating flawed , precarious medical advice as gospel ampmdash and disregarding the health of an entire community in so doing . looking at the decisions of these parents to stray from standard medical advice , and also at the community of doctors and educators who support them , provides a unique window into one of our country amprsquos most taboo topics . amplsquonot fully proven on some level amprsquowhen rebecca and mike became pregnant with their daughter , laura , the issue of whether to give her the standard childhood vaccinations seemed like a choice between life and death . but not in the way you might assume . rebecca , who asked that her name and the names of her family members be changed , has a family history of autoimmune dysfunction . her father died of scleroderma , and her sister suffered from pxe ampmdash both rare but serious diseases that manifest in the skin . rebecca was afraid that vaccines , which by design stimulate the body amprsquos immune response , might unintentionally trigger a disease that laura may have been predisposed to inherit . ampldquoi was afraid that her immune system was at risk of reacting against her , amprdquo rebecca says . ampldquoand my questions about that were not answered in a convincing way by the medical establishment . amprdquo it amprsquos my responsibility to be very vigilant . rebecca and mike didn amprsquot vaccinate laura for anything . when she enrolled at sf waldorf , they signed what is known as a ampldquopersonal belief exemption amprdquo or a pbe ampmdash a piece of paperwork that allows parents to opt out of some or all of the vaccines required by the state for entrance into kindergarten . in the us , states offer pbes and offer exemptions based on religion . laura amprsquos parents say they did not take the decision lightly . ampldquoas someone who has chosen a different path , it amprsquos my responsibility to be very vigilant , amprdquo rebecca says . at the slightest sign of illness , her daughter goes right to bed , is fed bone broth , and stays there . rebecca doesn amprsquot take laura on trips to countries with high incidence of serious disease , like polio or measles . this year , the united states has had cases of measles . by contrast , the republic of georgia had , . health concerns weren amprsquot the only factor behind rebecca amprsquos decision she amprsquos also suspicious about the true motives of pharmaceutical companies that profit from the sale of vaccines . ampldquoit makes it hard to feel there are neutral , trustworthy sources of information , amprdquo she says . rebecca amprsquos fears about government and big pharma collusion , along with her theory that vaccines trigger autoimmune disorders , are not uncommon among her fellow parents at sf waldorf . although the more infamous fear that vaccines cause autism isn amprsquot as much of a concern more about that in a minute , parents do worry that the shots might trigger allergies , asthma , and even type diabetes . waldorf is an educational system developed by rudolf steiner , an early th century austrian philosopher , which espouses to create well rounded children through experiential learning and ampldquoage appropriate amprdquo content . children are taught the arts and handicrafts , like woodworking and weaving , along with their academic subjects . the use of computer and tv screens at sf waldorf is , if not forbidden , strongly disfavored ampmdash so no angry birds or mickey mouse , even at home . team sports are discouraged until the sixth grade . there is nothing intrinsically waldorfian about opting out of vaccines , and the school takes no official stance on the issue . in fact , several parents and school administrators complained that connecting the issue with the school was unfair and misleading , and objected to the premise of this story . and yet , it is true that sf waldorf tends to attract parents who trend towards organic food and alternative health care ampmdash acupuncture , herbal medicine , and homeopathy ampmdash and who prescribe to the adage of the body as temple . for some of them , vaccines are ampmdash at best ampmdash a necessary evil . and at worst , they amprsquore just evil . ampldquoi was very influenced by naturopathic medicine , amprdquo says john , an sf waldorf parent who also asked that his name be changed . ampldquothey talk about vaccines are going to be very strong in supplanting the body amprsquos natural ability to develop immunity . amprdquo john and his wife did vaccinate against polio , measles , mumps , and rubella , but they opted out of chicken pox and flu vaccines for their two kids . ampldquothey should still be exposed to some things , amprdquo john says . both of his children partook in chicken pox parties they were sent to the home of a child with the illness , shared a lollipop , and soon after came down with chicken pox themselves . parents like john vaccinate selectively , while other parents space shots out rather than follow the vaccination schedule prescribed by the centers for disease control and prevention cdc . others delay vaccinations by several years , believing the more mature their kids amprsquo immune systems are , the better they amprsquoll be able to withstand the onslaught of foreign agents . ampldquoi delayed vaccinations until my kids were crawling , amprdquo says jane , an sf waldorf parent with three children . ampldquoi believed that while my children were cocooned in the nice little lair of my sling that they didn amprsquot need vaccinations , and if there was any potential for some kind of injury that it was just better to wait . amprdquo jane amprsquos kids are now fully vaccinated . by skipping or delaying vaccinations , parents put their own kids ampmdash as well as fellow sf waldorf students and community members ampmdash at risk of serious illness . but the school ampldquosupports the parents amprsquo right to choose , amprdquo says cory powers , the grade school administrative coordinator at sf waldorf . administrators also take great pains , powers adds , to communicate that parents who opt out of vaccinations should prepare for heavy responsibilities someone infected with measles will face a minimum day quarantine , as recommended by the san francisco department of public health . that amprsquos a lot of days to take off work to care for a sick kid . ampldquowhen the parent comes and signs a personal belief exemption , we tell them that if you make that choice , it amprsquos not a frivolous or casual one , amprdquo powers says . but for the most part , she notes , parents who choose to skip or delay vaccinations are the opposite of frivolous . rather , she describes them as ampldquochoosing extremely consciously and holistically . amprdquo ampldquothese are people who are also questioning gmos , amprdquo powers says . ampldquothings that are not fully proven on some level . amprdquowhat science saysbut there amprsquos a big difference between not eating gmos and not getting a vaccine . if i don amprsquot eat a corn chip at my local taqueria because i have doubts about the lack of research on gmos and believe it amprsquos because science and the government are in monsanto amprsquos pocket , i amprsquom not going to put my dining companions at risk of disease . but if i decide not to vaccinate my kid , i make him a potential carrier . he may be able to fight off measles , mumps , rubella , and other illnesses ampmdash but what if he spreads a disease to somebody who , for whatever reason , isn amprsquot so lucky ? if i decide not to vaccinate my kid , i make that kid a potential carriermuch like any medication , vaccines aren amprsquot percent effective or percent safe . even the cdc spells this out right on its website . but they exist and are widely used because the potential harms of not using them are far greater than any associated hazard . take , for instance , the mmr measles , mumps , rubella vaccine . the cdc estimates that for every , children in a developed nation who get measles , ampndash will die . by comparison , for every , ampndash , cases of mmr vaccination , the cdc estimates there will be a ampldquosmall increased risk amprdquo of febrile seizures among children under seven . the medical establishment , to date , has found no evidence of neurological or autoimmune disorders having been caused by vaccines . the most famous claim , that the mmr vaccine causes autism , was intensively studied and debunked . andrew wakefield , the british surgeon behind the original hypothesis , was long ago discredited and stripped of his medical license . other parents have worried that thiomersal , a preservative containing mercury that was used in vaccines until , causes autism . the preservative was removed from most vaccines as a purely precautionary measure , and subsequent studies have failed to find a shred of evidence for the thiomersal ampndashautism link . chicken pox parties also lack medical backing . the idea that it amprsquos healthier to become immune by catching an illness , rather than getting a vaccine , isn amprsquot supported by scientific research . ampldquothere is absolutely no evidence for ampmdash good science or any theoretical evidence for ampmdash the idea that a natural infection makes your body stronger , amprdquo says john swartzberg , a clinical professor at the uc berkeley school of public health . ampldquonatural infection challenges the body with a lot more foreign protein than a vaccine , so it amprsquoll put a lot more stress on the body . becoming very ill is not good for the body . amprdquobut decades of research , statistics , and ongoing assurances from scientists and government agencies still can amprsquot convince some parents . politicians can be bought , the thinking goes . the peer review system in scientific journals is corrupted by big pharma influence . scientists aren amprsquot studying vaccines hard enough , because the money lies in convincing the public that they amprsquore safe when they amprsquore actually not . ampldquoit becomes a question of faith , amprdquo says colin phipps , a chiropractor in san francisco who doesn amprsquot believe in vaccines and speaks on panels about the topic . ampldquodo you have faith in the cdc ? the fda ? big pharma ? science not driven by profit or motive ? do politicians have our best intentions at heart ? or do you have faith that the body is built to deal with pathogens in the universe ? amprdquofor at least some physicians in san francisco , addressing the vaccination fears of parents has become a difficult balancing act . ampldquoi think vaccines have become a scapegoat for our fears about medicine , the government , and mistrust of authority , amprdquo says dr . julia getzelman , whose pediatric practice attracts some vaccine skeptics . getzelman perceives vaccines as ampldquoone of the th century amprsquos greatest health successes , amprdquo and considers the concerns of parents to be ampldquonebulous amprdquo in nature . but that doesn amprsquot mean she forces vaccines on her patients some of the children getzelman sees follow an amended vaccine schedule , one that amprsquos contrary to cdc recommendations . ampldquonobody in the mainstream supports the alternative vaccine schedule ampmdash there amprsquos no science behind it , amprdquo getzelman admits . ampldquobut when you amprsquore on the front line of trying to individualize care , it doesn amprsquot necessarily always fit with the mainstream . amprdquothe guy in the iron lungin america , we live in a pax romana with regards to disease . it might not seem that way sometimes , what with our rising rates of autism , cancer , kids dying from peanut allergies , and so on . but as recently as years ago , there were no preventative measures for mumps , which can make men sterile . or rubella , which can cause serious birth defects if contracted by a pregnant woman in her first trimester . measles killed hundreds of people a year , and hospitalized percent of those who caught it ampmdash most of them children . those who grew up in the s remember going to the county fair and gawking at ampldquothe guy in the iron lung amprdquo paralyzed from polio . the specter of disease was real and present . today , we have what amprsquos known as ampldquoherd immunity . amprdquo that is , enough people have been vaccinated that they protect the unvaccinated , or those whose vaccinations fail . the chances of an american getting these formerly common childhood illnesses are very slim . the chances of dying from them are even slimmer . not because the diseases aren amprsquot serious , but because they aren amprsquot nearly as prevalent . in fact , herd immunity is actually why some parents don amprsquot vaccinate . ampldquowhen you think of it that way , it amprsquos hard to want to get vaccinated when you hear anecdotally about things going wrong from vaccines , amprdquo says dr . justin davis , a san francisco physician . time and time again , you get the message rewards come to those who think out of the boxdavis also points out an irony he perceives among his patients . many of them consider themselves ampldquoglobal participants amprdquo ampmdash they bike , recycle , and generally take proactive measures to protect the environment . but when it comes to vaccines and immunity , these parents utilize resources more selfishly . he is somewhat sanguine about this . ampldquoi take longer showers than i should , and i drive a car and take airplanes . who am i to say how people of privilege should choose to use the resources available to them ? amprdquo davis says . of course , there amprsquos an inherent problem with that position ampldquoif everybody were to opt out of vaccinations , amprdquo he admits , ampldquothere would be huge ramifications . amprdquoone of the tenets of a waldorf education is to teach self reliance , independence , and critical thinking skills . ampldquothey amprsquore saying , be educated before you just go along with the herd , amprdquo says one parent . clearly , this same type of impulse also leads some parents to question the status quo with regards to vaccines . ampldquopeople on the pro vaccinations side think that people who don amprsquot vaccinate , or vaccinate selectively , are crazy and uninformed , amprdquo says john , the parent whose kids got chicken pox from the lollipop . ampldquoi think that the people who make these decisions are actually the most well informed parents , and they amprsquore generally working with their healthcare providers to make these decisions . amprdquoquestioning authority is an impulse that can often serve you well . and that truth is held in particularly high regard in the bay area . after all , this is the land where apple computer was born and ampldquothink different amprdquo became a mantra . where the expression ampldquodisruption amprdquo became the tech term du jour to describe companies that were either breaking or skirting the law . where bradley manning was elected grand marshal of the san francisco gay pride parade . time and time again , you get the message rewards come to those who think out of the box . but when well educated , high performing people choose to engage in risky , self serving medical behavior , it also begs the question what made them feel so alienated from mainstream western medicine to begin with ? the answer , according to vaccine advocate dr . paul offit , largely comes down to how medical practitioners are perceived . in his takedown of alternative medicine , do you believe in magic , he writes ampldquopractitioners of modern medicine can appear callous and insensitive . patients feel more like a number than a person . that amprsquos where alternative healers come in they provide individual care , because they care amphellip where modern medicine is spiritless and technological amphellip alternative medicine is spiritual and meaningful . amprdquoit is not surprising that a class of person deeply involved in searching for and expressing their own individual uniqueness ampmdash and that of their children ampmdash would be turned off by a cookie cutter approach to health . and it amprsquos not surprising that in their disaffection , they amprsquod turn away and seek , as one parent put it , ampldquoother modalities . amprdquoand that amprsquos when the doubts begin to creep in . 