 nasa ordered its officials to put an end to communications with russian government officials and scientists yesterday . the order was leaked through an internal memo , obtained by the verge , in which the us space agency explained that teleconferences , email exchanges , and meetings with russian officials were to cease immediately . this ban excludes the international space station iss ampmdash nasa sent an american astronaut to the station in a russian capsule just last week ampmdash and doesn t pertain to interactions that occur during meetings with multiple countries beyond russian soil . why is nasa the chosen place to punish russia ? people aren t excited about it . nobody thinks it s going to be fine , says a nasa scientist who agreed to speak to the verge on condition of anonymity . everyone is wondering , amplsquowhy are we doing this ? why is nasa the chosen place to punish russia ? the agency confirmed the veracity of the memo last night in a statement that called for an end to its reliance on russian space transport to the iss and an increase in nasa funding . the choice here is between fully funding the plan to bring space launches back to america or continuing to send millions of dollars to the russians , nasa said . the agency added that the decision to cut ties with russia should be perceived as a resolution by both nasa and the obama administration to invest in america . so what had initially seemed like a push to broaden the ongoing sanctions against russia over the crisis in ukraine now appears to have more to do with politics within the us than political strife abroad . this nasa statement is dismaying beyond belief , says ampnbspjames oberg , a former rocket scientist and author of star crossed orbits , a book about us russian space missions . it s dismaying that nasa officials would be ampnbspdirected to use this crisis to score domestic political points on behalf of the white house . ampnbspmarco c ampaacuteceres , senior analyst and director of space studies at teal group , is also perturbed . it sounds like they are trying to use the crisis in crimea as a way to increase nasa s funding , he says , but it s a disingenuous way of making the case , especially since there are a lot of other good reasons to increase nasa s budget . nasa is extremely underfunded as it is . currently , the agency s budget is just under billion ampmdash a level of funding that the agency has maintained more or less for the last six years . nasa is extremely underfunded as it is , c ampaacuteceres says . any recent increases have been barely enough to keep up with inflation . the current cost of sending a single american astronaut to the iss is ampnbsp million . but under the ampnbspwhite house s budget proposal , nasa says it will be able to start flying astronauts to the international space station using ampnbspprivately built spaceships by . the proposal has been touted as a way to put an end to nasa s reliance on russian shuttles ampmdash and is undoubtedly what nasa was referring to yesterday when it said that the agency is now looking at launching from us soil in . who s calling the shots ? the decision to suspend contact with russian entities is a us government decision , not a nasa decision , says ampnbspjoanne gabrynowicz , a retired law professor at the university of mississippi who specializes in space law , in an email to the verge . according to her , nasa likely participated in the decision making process , but the white house and the state department would have instigated the ban on russian communication . they would also have had the final vote . ultimately , she says , nasa will do what the us government . . . directs nasa to do . the move to stop communications with the russian space agency is unprecedented , says frans von der dunk , a space law professor at the university of nebraska , in an email to the verge , because the ban won t allow scientists and astronauts to interact with their russian counterparts outside the iss . in the cold war era there was political antagonism , but that did not keep nasa from working with the soviets on the in orbit docking of the apollo and soyuz craft , he says . relations with russia in space have always been remarkably friendly , even if the two countries were racing to the moon . and the rivalry between russia and the us , he says , has always been mainly political ampmdash the astronauts and cosmonauts were always appreciative of each other s achievements . we have a little bit of experience with the government being haters . but that doesn t mean nasa employees aren t used to giving foreign scientists the cold shoulder . we have a little bit of experience with the government being haters , the ampnbspnasa scientist says , citing nasa s ampnbspstrained relationship with the chinese space program as an example . when i first started working at nasa , they told us that they won t let the chinese go on the international space station ampmdash they don t let us interact with chinese scientists at all . concerns aplentyeven though nasa s message no longer appears motivated by russia s interventions in the ukraine , it could still damage nasa russia relations . for a few years we have been dependent on their transportation , which is maybe awkward , but it was manageable , oberg says . ordering nasa employees to cease communicating with russia could jeopardize the future of the us space program . there are some steps in space that once undone can t be easily redone , he says , and i have little confidence that either side is acting rationally at this point . the worst thing we can do is stop talking . nasa astronaut ron garan echoed oberg s concerns ampnbspon twitter last night , stating that in any crisis the worst thing we can do is stop talking . we should not sacrifice what works in an attempt to salvage what doesn t . yet others regard the threat as an empty one that it will carry little weight with russia . to say that they are cutting off russian ties , but will continue to work together is sort of soft , c ampaacuteceres says , since the international space station is really their only significant relationship . von der dunk thinks that suspending contact with russia will not be sufficient to keep the russians from doing what they would be planning to do otherwise regarding crimea . for that to work , he says , there would certainly be a need for much more and broader sanctions . private american operations such as spacex aren t readyc ampaacuteceres says he is more concerned with nasa s prediction that the agency will be able to launch from us soil as early as . even with a marked increase in nasa funding , he says , the likelihood of a us based launch is minuscule because nasa doesn t currently have access to a viable means of transportation to the iss . there really isn t any great option in terms of a vehicle , he says . even if you were to increase nasa s budget by or percent ampmdash maybe even ampmdash you still wouldn t have a good way of getting up there . c ampaacuteceres says that although nasa is developing a heavy lift rocket system called the space launch system , it won t be ready for a crewed spaceflight before . moreover , von der dunk says it will be a few years before private us operations such as spacex and orbital sciences can provide flights to and from the iss . the only means of access to the iss for astronauts is the russian soyuz system . there s no alternative . for now , the us space agency and its russian counterpart , roscosmos , will continue to work together to maintain safe and continuous operation of the international space station , nasa says . so although some us programs might be affected by the ban ampmdash ampnbsp nasa officials might not attend some conference or some receptions , ampnbspc ampaacuteceres says ampmdash the announcement is largely symbolic . unfortunately , the consensus among experts appear to be that by trying to hit both russia and congress with the same weapon , nasa and the obama administration are likely to miss their mark entirely . 