 let amprsquos just get this out on the table i amprsquom a bmw fan . i amprsquove owned a couple of them over the years . there are multiple bmw branded articles of clothing in my closet . i amprsquove written treatises on the misappropriation of the company amprsquos emblems . hell , my twitter handle is an homage to the slogan of bmw amprsquos motorsport division , ampldquom power . amprdquoyou might say that i take bmw seriously . so when i had an opportunity to go on a multi hour drive of the curious , all electric i at ces last week , i was happy to do so ampmdash but i had my reservations . the i doesn amprsquot look like a bmw . it doesn amprsquot sound like a bmw . it doesn amprsquot suck bmw gasoline into a bmw engine . could it possibly drive like a bmw ? perhaps i was asking the wrong question . the i is the first production model in the bmw i series ampmdash a range of vehicles that , in bmw amprsquos words , exhibits a new understanding of premium that is strongly defined by sustainability . in plain english , that means that i vehicles are intended to give bmw flexibility to do weird , cutting edge things with materials and power plants that would be frowned upon in the company amprsquos established portfolio of top selling cars like the , , and series . the i is really about saving the planet with earth friendly materials and alternative powerplants , and the uncomfortable truth is that good ecological karma can occasionally be at odds with tradition in this industry . the demographics aren amprsquot necessarily the same ampmdash at least , not yet ampmdash and at a glance , the i appears to be a tacit acknowledgement of that . as i walk around the car with jose guerrero , bmw i amprsquos us product manager , he tells me that the car amprsquos black , glossy rear end and swoopy lick of glass wrapping continuously from side to back are designed to evoke a modern smartphone . i probably would amprsquove never made that connection had he not said anything , but i see it now the decklid looks a bit like an iphone with the display turned off . the futuristic taillights are concealed underneath , becoming visible only when lit . guerrero also notes that i models have their own headlight style , defined in part by a u shaped line of illumination that runs along the bottom of the lens . just a cursory glance around the car and you can see that the i has already blown up two long running bmw traditions the twin bulb headlight , and the so called hofmeister kink ampmdash a slanted line defining the lower rear corner of the side window on practically every bmw since the s . this car also features rear suicide doors coach doors , as bmw would prefer you call them , which open backwards . you amprsquore not going to find that anywhere else in the company amprsquos lineup . when all four doors are open , there amprsquos no b pillar ampmdash the beam normally found between the front and rear doors of a car ampmdash which makes it feel enormously open and accessible . by the time i amprsquom done acquainting myself with the i , i conclude that the iconic kidney grille is just about the only aspect of its design that makes it a bmw by sight alone . adherence to tradition is extraordinarily hard to come by on this car . and , of course , that rebellious attitude continues under the hood the i is driven not by internal combustion , but by a horsepower electric motor . you won amprsquot find one of bmw amprsquos trademark inline sixes here , though you can spring for an extra cost range extender ampmdash basically a two cylinder gasoline engine just powerful enough to keep the battery at a constant percent change so you can amprsquot run out of juice on the road . unlike a traditional hybrid the prius , for instance , the range extender engine can amprsquot drive the wheels ampmdash it amprsquos strictly a generator . both the electric and range extender models qualify for the federal , plug in vehicle credit , which helps take the sting out of the base price just north of , . that can climb beyond , if you option it out with goodies like leather seats , navigation , and parking assistant , which will parallel park the car for you . bmw s bog standard idrive is present and accounted foronce you open the door , you amprsquore greeted with a few more subtle hints that the i is , in fact , a bmw for instance , the door frame shows exposed carbon fiber , a nod to the car amprsquos all carbon skeleton . years ago , carbon fiber was the exclusive domain of racing teams ampmdash but bmw amprsquos been working to perfect the manufacturing methods needed to mass produce it since then , gradually bringing it in small doses to more production cars like the last generation m and m . in the i amprsquos case , an enormous amount of carbon is used , more than any other bmw currently on the road , in an effort to reduce weight and extend range . it tips the scale around , pounds by contrast , the more conventionally constructed nissan leaf weighs , . the i also employs bmw amprsquos bog standard idrive system mounted between the front seats . in its current incarnation , idrive consists of a jog dial that can be twisted , pushed in cardinal directions , pressed downward , or drawn on ampmdash the entire top of the dial is a touchpad that can be used to enter characters for finding navigation destinations . i found the character recognition to be practically useless , particularly at speed when it amprsquos difficult to keep your finger from bouncing around , but twisting the dial to select letters is easy enough anyway . idrive has never fully recovered from the terrible reputation it developed when it debuted on the last generation series over a decade ago , but don amprsquot fear it it amprsquos actually quite good in an auto industry still dominated by mediocre , fussy electronics . if you amprsquove tried to use the byzantine navigation system in a chevy volt , it amprsquos night and day . on the i , idrive is paired to an . inch display if you select the technology package option , which i imagine most i buyers will that serves as the interface for practically all of the car amprsquos controls . it amprsquos bright , attractive , and readable in the relentless desert sun where i tested it . it amprsquos the centerpiece of a really unusual interior , which diverges strongly from traditional bmws ampmdash from the driver amprsquos perspective , the display appears to float above a flowing bamboo veneer , complete with a storage area to dump your phone and sunglasses . i suspect bmw amprsquos goal here was to appeal to a different demographic than a series buyer the list of differences between these two cars amprsquo design elements is far longer than the list of similarities . both are attractive and modern , but nothing alike . on the road , i might describe the i as the yang to tesla amprsquos yin . both cars ooze luxury and quality , but mashing the i amprsquos gas pedal doesn amprsquot melt your face the same way a model s performance plus will . this compact , curvy , bmw of the future feels like a family hauler ampmdash a well constructed family hauler , mind you , but a family hauler nonetheless . it doesn amprsquot really fit with bmw amprsquos long running english tagline , the ultimate driving machine . the car feels efficient and utilitarian , but i was never really overtaken with a desire to hit a highway or a curvy stretch of road the same way i might be in a i or an m . i never felt like i was riding some meticulously crafted wave of driving perfection out into the desert . this isn t your grandfather s bmwby the same token , you could make an argument that bmw amprsquos german tagline , freude am fahren ampmdash joy in driving ampmdash is appropriate . there amprsquos something inherently entertaining about driving an electric vehicle the high tech whir of the motor spooling up as you pull away from a light , the math and science of monitoring your range and maximizing the drivetrain amprsquos efficiency through careful braking and acceleration . it amprsquos possible that entertainment will fade as evs become standard fare , but for the moment , it puts a smile on my face . of course , not all evs are created equal . there amprsquos a huge difference in range bmw amprsquos been coy about exact numbers so far and i didn amprsquot have enough time with the car to do a proper range test , but you can expect somewhere in the neighborhood of to miles on a charge depending on the efficiency mode you choose . bmw describes the i as a city car . meanwhile , the tesla model s can get well over miles between electronic fill ups . the wildcard is the i amprsquos optional range extender , which adds about miles to the range ampmdash and when you deplete it , you just pull into a gas station and refill the tiny . gallon tank . i tested the electric only i , but if i were to buy it , there amprsquos no question i amprsquod tack on the range extender ev chargers still aren amprsquot ubiquitous enough to plug in everywhere you go , and range anxiety is a very real phenomenon just watch my model s video from last year . when you do plug in , the i supports dc fast charging , which can refill percent of the battery in under an hour unfortunately , it amprsquos a totally different standard than tesla amprsquos growing supercharger network . ev charger fragmentation is a terrible , terrible thing ampmdash especially for an industry this young . then again , with the i , bmw isn amprsquot trying to go head to head with the model s ampmdash there amprsquos a , difference in the base price . if anything , it sits in a relatively empty space between the nissan leaf and tesla amprsquos large sedan . for pure evs like these , it amprsquos still the wild west . whether there amprsquos actually money to be made in this particular segment ampmdash a luxurious city car that only very lightly grips bmw amprsquos marque and its many automotive traditions ampmdash is a question we probably won amprsquot be able to answer for a year or two . by the time i pulled the i back into the bustling parking lot of the las vegas convention center , i wasn amprsquot asking whether it drove like a bmw anymore . partly because i wasn amprsquot sure ampmdash i amprsquod like to have the car for a few days to take it through the twisties , load it with groceries , and judge range and charging performance ampmdash but also because i amprsquod felt like this car is obscuring what it means to drive like a bmw . for now , that amprsquos fine the i range is safely segmented off to the side , a billion dollar experiment , leaving munich amprsquos bread and butter models effectively untouched . but fossil fuels are eventually going away ampmdash that amprsquos not an opinion , it amprsquos an inevitability . and when that day comes , bmw is going to need to decide what it wants to be . 