 cars are really just big gadgets , and that s especially true when you re batman . there have been multiple iterations of the batmobile , both in film and in the comic books , and they all serve as an extension of the character it s a car packed with high tech tools perfect for snatching bad guys . these interpretations can be very different there s the tank like tumbler from christopher nolan s films and the sleek , art deco inspired racer from tim burton s interpretation but the idea is always the same what kind of crazy , crime fighting car would you build if you had the unlimited resources of bruce wayne ? in the recently released game batman arkham knight , which introduces batman s car to the series , the answer is a combination of all previous batmobiles . this version is sleek and nimble , able to speed down the streets of gotham , but it can also transform into a strafing tank for taking down enemy vehicles . according to ian ball , design director at arkham knight developer rocksteady studios , there s one key characteristic that makes a batmobile a batmobile . it comes in black , he says . adding the batmobile doesn t just mean creating a car , it means changing the city arkham knight is the third batman game developed by the london studio , following arkham asylum and arkham city , and it s the first where you can drive the iconic car . but the delay isn t because of a lack of desire ball says that the team had wanted to do it in previous games , but was limited by technology arkham knight is the first game in the series designed for the newer xbox one and ps consoles . that may sound like a stretch , but it s because adding in the batmobile doesn t just mean creating a car , it means changing the city to accommodate it . the next gen version of gotham is bigger , has wider streets to race down , is littered with shortcuts to make driving fun , and there are destructible environments so that you won t get stuck on a bad turn . we didn t want you to have to reverse if you crash into a corner , says ball , we wanted you to tear right through those . early on in development the car was much simpler , reminiscent of burton s batmobile and the iconic roadster from the adam west tv series which you can also purchase in game as downloadable content . it was designed to help you get around the city quickly , but that proved to be a problem navigating gotham as batman has always been one of the best parts of the arkham games , using batman s gadgets to quickly zip through the city under the cover of darkness is a lot of fun . the team found that the batmobile didn t really add to that . you were just using it as a transport method , ball explains , and batman can already travel around the city pretty well by himself . so to just get in a car , drive somewhere , and get out didn t feel that exciting . he describes the initial versions of the driving mechanic as a bit hollow . that all changed when they added in the tanks . unlike most other batmobiles , the one in arkham knight is also a transformer . in pursuit mode , it s a racing machine , able to track down enemies with speed , but in battle mode , it s something altogether different . the car s body raises up from the ground , and a canon sprouts from the top , armed with anti tank rounds and non lethal bullets designed to deliver minimum long term trauma and render combatant immobile . it looks sort of like a souped up , batman themed version of halo s warthog , and its gyroscopic wheels mean that it can move laterally , perfect for taking down slow moving tanks . it s got a very distinctive grunt . this multi functionality is what defined the look of the vehicle . it s a batmobile born of function over form . the strafing battle mode meant that the wheels had to be in a particular spot , while the rear seats were implemented because the game has missions where you have to transport prisoners from one place to another . and while many versions of the batmobile feature a cockpit well toward the rear of the vehicle , the team at rocksteady went a different way since you can eject from the car , it made more sense for the driver to be at the front so you could fly forward and clear of the vehicle . these elements defined the core of the car , and from there it was about refinement . we just added in the little details to make it more batmobile like , ball says . the fins , the bat symbol on the front grill , and other details like that finished it off in terms of the look . particular attention was paid to the vehicle s rear after all , it s the place you ll be looking at the most when you re playing . arkham knight s batmobile sports a massive thruster that s visible whether you re in pursuit or battle mode . it s an anchor that helps tie the look together , and makes it feel like you re driving the batmobile , not just some boring old supercar . it was inspired by the similar afterburner on the batmobile from the adam west series . in fact , much of the design was inspired by past versions of the car . while nolan s tumbler helped introduce an element of realism to the batmobile , pulling from military vehicles and other real world cars , rocksteady instead looked primarily at in universe stuff as a source of ideas . the flared wheels from tim burton s film , the thruster from the campy tv show , and even the rugged shape of the tumbler all came together to create this car . the design is like a history lesson in batman transportation . the only time the team really looked at real world cars was when it came to sound they traveled to los angeles in order to record some high end v engines , to really give the batmobile that added punch . it s got a very distinctive grunt , says ball . he adds that his favorite version of the car is the one from the burton movies , and it s not just because of how it looked it s the way it took what he d seen in the comics and brought it to life . it was the first time really you d seen the beauty of the batmobile on the cinema screen , he explains . for many players , arkham knight s batmobile serves a similar role it ll be the first , and perhaps only , time they ll be able to drive the iconic vehicle . there have been a few games with batmobiles in them , ball says , but they were quite a while ago . probably before a lot of people were born . 