 nearly a month after spacex s falcon rocket disintegrated en route to the international space station , ceo elon musk announced what brought the vehicle down a faulty steel strut , just feet long and inch thick . it was one of thousands of struts holding down the helium pressure valves inside the rocket s liquid oxygen tank when it snapped , it released too much helium , causing the tank and then the rocket to burst . even the smallest oversight can be catastrophic in spaceflight . fortunately , no astronauts were aboard the doomed vehicle only food , water , and cargo were lost . but astronauts will be aboard that same rocket very soon . spacex and boeing are currently developing crew transportation modules that will ferry us astronauts to and from the iss . it s part of nasa s commercial crew program , aimed at stimulating the private spaceflight sector , and it s scheduled to begin in . for every flights , we might have one where we re going to have a bad day . this is the first time the space agency has entrusted the lives of its astronaut fleet to private companies . it s a new model of space exploration with new methods for ensuring safety . nasa is holding these private companies to similar if not higher safety standards as it did for its shuttle missions , but the level of oversight the space agency has during the vehicles development process is minimal . instead , spacex and boeing must meet a few hundred predefined safety requirements and demonstrate they can keep the astronauts alive if the rocket that s carrying them falls apart . nasa doesn t get much say in what the vehicles look like or how they work . and even with all the requirements , nasa isn t demanding percent reliability from spacex and boeing . for every hundred missions , how many missions could you analytically show are going to be safe and return the crew safely to earth ? asks phil mcalister , director of commercial spaceflight development at nasa . the number we ve come up with is for every flights , we might have one where we re going to have a bad day . fewer restrictions nasa s space shuttle atlantis launches from florida . nasa bill ingalls nasa has always used outside contractors to help design and build its vehicles . the space shuttle was built by rockwell international , and lockheed martin manufactured its external tank . the various parts of nasa s next big rocket , the space launch system , are being built by boeing , alliant techsystems , and lockheed . the main difference between those projects and the commercial crew program , however , is the level of oversight . nasa was in direct control of the space shuttle s design specifications , giving contractors between , and , requirements that needed to be met . nasa personnel were also deeply rooted in the manufacturing process , overseeing every level of production and ordering changes if necessary . outside contractors may have built the vehicles , but nasa owned the final product . the vehicles ultimately belong to spacex and boeing not nasawith the capsules used for the commercial crew program , the cst , and dragon v now called crew dragon , nearly all of the vehicles logistics are up to the companies spacex and boeing only have to meet design requirements ampnbsplaid out by nasa in the commercial crew contracts . mcalister says the requirements aren t too rigid and mostly revolve around safety and performance . the contracts call for a reliable abort system for the crew and ways to manually override in flight software but they don t specify how these systems should work . it gives the companies a lot of flexibility to design their own systems the way they want , says mcalister . with commercial crew , we were able to do away with lower level requirements , allowing companies to innovate and come up with their own unique solutions . this also allows spacex and boeing to work at their own speeds , says mcalister , since they don t have to constantly check in with nasa to make sure they are meeting an intimidating list of criteria . nasa does provide the companies with a few space agency liaisons , who work with the companies engineers in whatever capacity is needed . the space agency also requires complete insight into the companies designs . if there s a meeting that s important or test data that s important , we have full access to that , says mcalister . yet despite this heavy integration and daily communication , the vehicles ultimately belong to spacex and boeing not nasa . the commercial crew program s lack of oversight has also led to trouble at times . in january , the aerospace safety advisory panel which evaluates nasa s safety performance said nasa hadn t given them enough information on the program s safety logistics . nasa s communication with asap has improved since then , but the organization still has some concerns , said vice admiral joseph dyer , the panel s chair . ampnbsp our faith in the execution of the problem is vested in the quality of the leadership , dyer told the verge . as long as a few key personnel , including nasa s associate administrator for human exploration bill gerstenmaier , are involved in the program , dyer feels confident about safety . but he finds it alarming that he must trust in personality and reputation , instead of a clear and transparent data record , he said . boeing is currently developing the cst to transport astronauts to space . boeing aborts and redundanciesthe commercial crew program requires companies to meet certain milestones , much in the way students are required to pass certain standardized tests . how the companies pass is up to them . for spacex and boeing , this means coming up with redundancies for example , the companies are putting three different computer systems into their vehicles in case the first two computers fail during a mission . and even if all three go offline , astronauts have backup controls . but the main systems that will guarantee the crews safety are the capsule s abort procedures . as we learned from spacex in june , a small steel rod can bring down a ton plus rocket during liftoff . ampnbspnasa wants to know that if something like that happens again , the astronauts can escape safely . to ensure this , spacex is incorporating an in flight abort system . small engines embedded in the walls of the crew dragon dubbed super draco can carry the capsule away from a failing rocket before the vehicle reaches space . then , the crew dragon s parachutes kick in and gently land the capsule back on earth . unlike past abort tower systems , this provides astronauts with escape capability all the way to orbit , says phil larson , a spokesperson for spacex . spacex successfully conducted its pad abort maneuver in may . spacex youtube boeing says it has a similar in flight escape system . if the spacecraft is failing , boeing s system automatically detects the failure and a rocketdyne rs engine can push the capsule to safety . then its parachutes will deploy , ampnbspsays chris ferguson , director of crew and mission operations at boeing . he says the in flight abort can be initiated any time up until main engine cutoff . and there are also plans for trouble before the launch begins . these systems , called pad aborts , carry the crew away from the launchpad if a rocket engine malfunctions . the same engines used in the in flight escape systems will carry their respective capsules to safety . though the safety systems are similar , they won t undergo the same tests . spacex already demonstrated its pad abort system in may it plans to test its in flight escape system in . boeing , on the other hand , won t test its pad abort system until february and the company hasn t announced any plans for testing its in flight abort system before its capsule s first flight with people aboard . ampnbspthat s because boeing is relying more heavily on computer modeling , says nasa . spacex is able to do more physical testing , because the company already has access to a similar version of the crew dragon . probabilistic risk assessmentnasa anticipates that there will be fatalities . the contracts with boeing and spacex specify that the capsules keep crews safe for . percent of iss missions . this means that nasa believes that one of every missions will go catastrophically wrong . this morbid calculation is known as the probabilistic risk assessment , or a pra . it s used to evaluate risks associated with complex technology , and is meant to predict three big things all possible system failures , how likely it is the failures will occur , and finally , their consequences which include , yes , death . to make a pra , the companies take into account past rates of failure , vehicle reliability , and flight range , among other data points . it sort of simulates what the actual flight experience will be if you flew it over and over again , says nasa s mcalister . the companies must demonstrate that their capsules will keep crews safe for . percent of the iss missionspras are actually pretty controversial . they don t take human errors into account , for instance . and naturally , it s impossible to consider every possible catastrophic scenario , experts say . but they are useful tools for determining the strengths and weaknesses of a launch vehicle . but even with those limitations , the commercial space flight s pra is better than its predecessors . the space shuttle had a in chance of losing crew members so the new capsules are theoretically three times safer . the specter of the columbia and challenger disasters hangs over the safety systems it s partly why the new abort capabilities exist . it s also why the capsules are smaller that makes it easier to avoid orbital debris in space , ferguson says . we can never lose sight of the fact that we lost different people on shuttle , says ferguson . even though it was a tremendous technological achievement , i wouldn t qualify it as an unadulterated success . though it s tempting to compare the commercial crew program to the space shuttle program , it s too soon to really do so . spacex will do an uncrewed test of its dragon capsule in , and boeing will test its cst in april . crewed flights are slated for though nasa administrator charles bolden says it s possible that ampnbspthe first flights may be delayed if congress doesn t give the space agency the funding it needs for the program . but even the first successful flights won t be enough to tell whether the program s a success . after all , what we re looking for is reliability , and that requires not one , but many launches . the real test , of course , is when one of these launches fails . that s when we ll find out exactly how good the safety systems are . correction pm et an earlier version of this story suggested the first uncrewed testing of the crew dragon will happen in april . no dates have been specified , and the article has been updated . 