 in a place called hell , michigan , i met the team that developed and built the all new sixth generation chevrolet camaro . hell this hell , anyway isn t as bad as it sounds . it helped that i was on the rustic hills of the acre hell creek ranch , surrounded by snarling pony cars and people who knew how to talk about them . it also helped that i knew i d soon be behind the wheel . but behind the wheel is a funny concept , because if you re under a certain age , you re liable to have spent more time driving a camaro in a video game than in the real world . even gm engineers have started taking cues from consoles the car s lead development engineer , aaron link , says that he played forza motorsport to freshen up on the ins and outs of the notorious n rburgring track as he readied the new , lighter camaro for its shakedown . link told me the game was an ideal primer to beef up on his memory of the nordschleife s perilous turns , but it wasn t until he experienced the reality of driving the camaro on the german tarmac that the car came to life . you don t get the vibration , he said . you don t get the hydraulic feel . but the thing you miss the most is the elevation . he described the sensation of rip roaring downhill on the track s , foot descent in the camaro ss with a devilish smile . this car is really rewarding , he said . as one of the main characters in an ever present rivalry with the ford mustang that spans nearly half a century , of course this camaro ss needs to be really rewarding . the rivalry is filled with people who aren t concerned with electrification yet , with self driving , with the claims that kids don t want cars anymore . they re car people , and the only way to win that fight is by making a good car . the new camaro makes general motors executives giddy , at least . before they gave me the keys or key fob , more precisely , mark reuss , gm s evp in charge of global product development , arrived on site in his own camaro to testify on its behalf . there is no punishment in driving a camaro , he said . he harkened the new car back to the glory days of general motors , which presumably pre dates the births of many of its current customers and the car s more recent fame as transformers bumblebee . but even as gm tries to appeal to a new generation of car lovers , some tried and true camaro signatures are here the dual tailpipe design , the angular hood , the fierce face , the inflated wheel wells . after its introduction , the camaro soon became a drag racing darling and an indy pace car . and later , when the camaro evolved into iroc z form , it earned its cred as the ideal accompaniment to any hair band soundtrack . think back to fast times at ridgemont high , in which the ultimate stoner spicoli totals the high school football star s camaro z to capture the flavor of that era s long hair don t care vibe . from the outside , this latest camaro hasn t gone through major plastic surgery from the outgoing fifth generation , which was highly praised and managed to stay fresh through its lifespan with the track ready z model that came out last year . instead , the major transformation on the new camaro takes place inside in the parts we see , scroll through , and fiddle with , but also in parts that are beyond the driver s eye . it s built on a new platform that has trimmed at least pounds of fat versus the model on all six available configurations . weight saving is an old stock car racing trick that also happens to improve fuel economy , achieved from a cocktail of aluminum , high strength steel , and engineering trickery . reuss says gm invested million computational hours on structural development divided among a team of over engineers . on the . liter turbo model , gm claims it achieved miles per gallon , a notable benchmark for a muscle car . whether you can call a liter four a muscle car is another discussion for another time . by far the best tool for the twisty roads of hell is the six speed manual ssin a series of short jaunts through hell which is more wooded than you might think i worked my way through the models and engines , leading up to the big one , the ss . the v was nowhere to be found , though we had a chance to drive it earlier this year . the morning started off in the most modest offering , an automatic , white liter that churned horsepower camaro s first turbocharged engine . despite the obvious misgivings of putting a tiny turbo where a musclebound v normally belongs , gm boasts that this base model still outperforms its ancestors from the s , charging to the quarter mile in seconds and from to mph in . seconds . i didn t have a chance to drive the four , but even on the v , camaro s most striking aspect is its visceral feel behind the wheel the weight savings is definitely noticeable . by far the best tool for the twisty roads of hell is the six speed manual transmission ss and its . liter v , which launches from to mph in . seconds . seconds in the automatic and can brush up against , depending on options . this is the model that sends us to the body tingling boundaries of gravity , introduces us to the concept of g force , and reminds us why horsepower is a good thing . and what makes it even more satisfying is that hungry growl from the dual mode exhaust system , which uses electronically controlled valves to bypass the muffler and pump up the volume when you mash the throttle . it s all there the sound , the fury , the smell , the feel . the feel that s the real reason to drive this camaro . there s nimble cornering and responsive braking power here that defies camaro s reputation that is to say , it can do much more than go fast in a straight line . you can pick your poison with several driving modes snow and ice , touring , sport , and , on the ss , track mode . the real speed demons may want to hold out for the big performance numbers that will undoubtedly be attached to the upcoming zl and z models , but the ss is still awfully fast . there s a certain satisfaction in seeing the g force indicatorsbut for perhaps the first time in the camaro s history , this car is as much about technology as it is performance or , depending on the engine , the appearance of performance . chevy has recently overhauled its entire product lineup with standard technology like android auto and apple carplay , lte , and wi fi in all models . the camaro s improved inch color touchscreen is more intuitive than before , but the optional inch screen and head up display is even better , and easier on the eye . and there s a certain satisfaction in seeing the g force indicators that chevy provides for performance obsessed drivers . there s also a standard rear vision camera , which is helpful to avoid the camaro s infamous blind spots a by product of its hunkered , beefy exterior design . meanwhile , a nifty feature that lets you adjust temperature directly from the air vents saves on distracting screen real estate . while much has changed in the car world since the dawn of american muscle , it s clear from a short trip to hell and back that the battle between the camaros , the mustangs , and the challengers of the world rages on it just looks a little different than it used to . sure , we re probably going to see hybrids and possibly even full electrics permeate this most american car segment in our lifetimes and yes , it s easy to be bearish on a bunch of cars that grew up around drag racing and the stench of gasoline . but when you re behind the wheel of the ss or even the six ! it s easy to understand why gm sounds so bullish . more cars transportation videos