 past the towers of downtown miami and over biscayne bay sits the city of miami beach . perched on the tip of a narrow barrier island , miami beach is a resort community of just under , people , though its population swells with a steady stream of tourists . through the wall of hotels that line its shore is the city s central draw the wide , white stretch of miami beach s beach . the beach is the centerpiece of the city s promise of escape escape from cold winters or college classes or family , where you can drink goblets of bright green liquor and cruise down ocean drive in a rented tangerine lamborghini before retiring to the warm sand . to the casual observer , the beach may look like the only natural bit of the city , a fringe of shore reaching out from under the glass and pastel skyline . but this would be false the beach is every bit as artificial as the towers and turquoise pools . for years the sea has been eating away at the shore , and the city has spent millions of dollars pumping up sand from the seafloor to replace it , only to have it wash away again . every handful of sand on miami beach was placed there by someone . that sand is washing away ever faster . the sea around miami is rising a third of an inch a year , and it s accelerating . the region is far from alone in its predicament , or in its response to an eroding coast it s becoming hard to find a populated beach in the united states that doesn t require regular infusions of sand , says rob young , director of the program for the study of developed shorelines at western carolina university . virginia beach , north carolina s outer banks , new york s long island , new jersey s cape may , and countless other coastal cities are trapped in the same cycle , a cycle whose pace will become harder to maintain as the ocean rises . there isn t a natural grain of sand on the beach in northern new jersey there is no miami beach unless we build it , young says . the real endangered species on the coast of the us isn t the piping plover or the loggerhead sea turtle . it s an unengineered beach . the sea has been slowly cutting a divot into the shore in front of miami beach s iconic fontainebleau hotel , encroaching nearly to the promenade . patching it would normally be a small job . but miami beach has a problem , one more cities will soon face it has run out of sand in the ocean nearby . the beach is the tattered edge of the land . it s made of debris , which we call sand when it s too small to think about discretely , though exactly what it consists of varies . it could be pulverized coral , like in the maldives , or crushed clamshells , like shark bay , australia , or discarded glass , like around fort bragg , california . often it s rock that has been crushed by glaciers or eroded off mountains and washed down rivers to the sea . beaches made from black basalt or purple garnet have a certain novelty value , but the ideal beach , the one you see on ads for airlines and beer , is sugary and white . it s likely calcium carbonate or quartz . coastal engineers talk about beach behavior , as if dealing with an unruly animal rather than a geologic feature . waves sort sand grains to a depth where they no longer move them , so some beaches change with the seasons , as winter storms suck sand offshore , leaving only cobblestones , and smaller waves push it back in the summer . one thing all beaches have in common is that they re always shifting , wave by wave over years or overnight , with a storm . for much of the th century , people tried to hold beaches in place by building groins lines of rock or wood pylons protruding from the shore . but groins robbed downdrift beaches of sand that would have come their way , creating new erosion problems . some came to be called spite groins . seawalls made things worse , further blocking the natural movement of sand and forcing waves back onto the shore , scouring away the beach . by the s , there was very little beach left on miami beach or shore at the jersey shore . so a new response became popular add sand . that job largely fell to the us army corps of engineers . dredges floated offshore , extending scoops or hoses tipped with cutter heads into the seafloor and piping sand back onto the eroding beach . nourishment , as the practice is called , maintained the beach , but it was also an admission that there would never be a permanent solution to fixing the shore in place . once you start nourishing a beach , you can never stop . its equilibrium state lies elsewhere , and wave after wave will eat away at the shore , and you ll keep having to find new sand to replace it . sand seems like an infinite resource , but it isn t . you can t put just any kind of sand on a beach . forget about the thousands of miles of dunes in the sahara and gobi rounded by wind , those grains are too smooth . sand made by crushing rock is too jagged . stones worn down by rivers and waves over millennia is ideal , but even then , it has to be the right type . if the grains are too small , they wash away quickly too large , and the beach becomes a steep bank . if they re the wrong density or wrong shape say , plate like shards of broken shells they ll float in the water , causing clouds . if the sand is too dark it will trap heat , and can shift the gender of sea turtles born there . you want to match the native sand as close as you can , says kevin bodge , a coastal engineering consultant . that sand was there for a reason . once you start nourishing a beach , you can never stoptremendous amounts of ocean sand gets used for land reclamation and construction . countries use it to extend their borders , like singapore and china , which has built seven new islands in the south china sea . billions of tons of sand gets poured into concrete . a united nations report on sand shortages found that up to billion tons of sand and gravel are mined each year , more than twice the amount moved by all the rivers in the world , which the report notes makes humankind the largest of the planet s transforming agents with respect to aggregates . the united states has lined its coasts with over a billion cubic yards of sand , at a cost of . billion , according to a database maintained by andy coburn at western carolina university s program for the study of developed shorelines . all that sand inevitably washes back into the sea . sometimes waves bring it back , but for the most part , it s lost to us if it s sucked out past a certain depth , it s scattered along the continental shelf , too dispersed to be gathered back . with sea levels rising , demand for beach sand is only going to grow . about percent of the coast in the lower states is already eroding , according to the usgs . every single coastal erosion problem we have right now is only going to get worse , not better , young says . it s only going to erode faster , not slower , require more sand , not less . gradually now , but soon overwhelmingly , every coastline is going to want to move inland . young foresees a future of rising costs and conflict over diminishing sand . if you want to invest , buy a dredge . no state requires more sand than florida , which sits in the middle of hurricane alley and has the longest coastline after alaska . half of the miles of beaches monitored by the state s department of environmental protection are designated as critically eroding , from daytona beach to the kennedy space center on cape canaveral to the shore in front of mar a lago , the palm beach estate of president elect donald trump . on july st , , the army corps released a plan for patching eroding sections of miami beach . miami dade s sand resources had been exhausted , the corps wrote , and some of the best alternatives lay to the north , offshore of martin and st . lucie counties . though the shoals were in federal waters and the northern counties had no greater right to them than anyone else , they viewed the sand as theirs , and with the corps announcement began the latest skirmish in what local officials call the sand wars . state senator joe negron , whose district includes parts of martin and st . lucie , swore that miami dade wouldn t get a single grain . frannie hutchinson , a st . lucie commissioner , demanded the corps take its shovels and buckets and go home . she filed public comments on the corps proposal , saying that it failed to address sea level rise and would rob st . lucie of needed sand . the county erosion chair for years , hutchinson says that she cringes every time she sweeps dirt out of her house . do you know how much sand is in there ? you can t replace sand . there was a sense , in council meetings and public statements , that miami beach was reaping what it sowed , and that with the sea rising , it was every county for itself . they ve squandered their sand , they ve overdeveloped , they ve depleted their resources and now they want to come and take ours , says sarah heard , a martin county commissioner . we need to protect that offshore site , we need to guard it very carefully . we don t know exactly how sea level rise is going to impact us , but we know it s accelerating rapidly , we know there s going to be inundation . they ve squandered their sand . heard is a republican , but laments her party s denial of climate change . last year , the florida center for investigative reporting found that the state s governor , rick scott , forbid state officials from using the term in emails or reports . jacqui thurlow lippisch , another martin county commissioner who objected to the corps plan , is also a republican , and also clear eyed about what rising seas will do to her community . just as there are proverbially no atheists in foxholes , it s increasingly difficult to be a local politician in coastal florida and deny the sea is rising . yet what to do about it at a local level is a conundrum . right now , the answer is to keep piling on more sand . thurlow lippisch describes nourishment as a loop her town is trapped in the most expensive property is on the beach , she says , and letting it fall into the sea would rob her county of percent of its tax base , making it impossible to fund schools , run buses , and provide lunches for children in need . though she wonders whether she s doing the right thing , she continues to fight for the sand that her community will eventually have to put on its shore . we all have to look ourselves in the mirror and ask , is this a sustainable life ? what are we doing here ? but right now , we re in it , we re doing it . as the northern counties lobbed angry missives at the corps , one alternative kept coming up the bahamas . the nearest bahamian islands are just miles east of miami . the sand grains there aren t rock , but orbs of calcium carbonate called aragonite , which some scientists believe is formed by bacteria as deep ocean water moves into the warm , shallow banks of the caribbean . the exact process that produces the sand is poorly understood , says lisa robbins , an oceanographer who studies it , and occurs in only a few other places in the world , such as the arabian gulf . one thing is clear it s premium stuff . they re not only mysterious , they re gorgeous , and wonderful to step on , robbins says of the grains , which she likens to little pearls . the sand is so white that when coastal engineer kevin bodge brought in a barge s worth in the early s for fisher island , a wealthy community willing to pay for it , the customs official looked on incredulously . it was , bodge recalls , the height of the miami vice thing , so we had to clear customs , and it came in on a barge and when the sun hit that thing coming over the horizon in the early morning light , it was the most incredible pile of gleaming white powder i ve ever seen . the customs agent just looked at me and said , you gotta be kidding me . the bahamian government had been ambivalent about selling sand to nourish foreign beaches , says anthony myers , whose company holds a lease on a shoal near bimini why let tourists visit bahamian sand beaches elsewhere ? but in , it relented . i ve helped them understand the science , myers says . if you don t sell this , you re just watching your money disappear into the chasms of the ocean . it was the most incredible pile of gleaming white powder i ve ever seen . myers sells sand for plastics , agriculture , and other purposes , but to his great frustration , he has been unable to get his sand on florida s beaches . the federal government often pays half the cost of beach nourishment , with states and cities splitting the rest . but an amendment to the water resources development act prohibits federal funds from going toward foreign sand if domestic sources are available , which means anyone who wants bahamian aragonite would have to pay the tab themselves . his consultant on the mainland , jayson meyers no relation , shares his frustration . sitting in a concrete and glass tower in downtown miami , meyers pulled out a plastic vial of bahamian sand from his leather briefcase and placed it on the table . it was white as chalk . he s shown it to mayors and councilmembers and any number of officials , and he says everyone wants some , but until they can get federal assistance , or decide to pay for it themselves , there s nothing to be done . it s great that they want it , he said , laughing bitterly . it doesn t do shit for getting it on the beach . that may change eventually in september the house passed an amendment proposed by florida representative lois frankel that would allow federal funds to go toward foreign sand , and miami beach is planning a small test project next year . but in the meantime , spurned by its neighbors and unable to buy sand abroad , miami beach turned inland , to a mine a hundred miles north . the sand from the northern counties was too dark and full of shells anyway , says an official with the county . they ll be back , says heard , the martin county commissioner . and they ll receive spirited opposition next time they try it . the mine is called witherspoon and sits amid flat fields of pasture and scrub near the southwest shore of lake okeechobee . the water table is so high there that you strike it as soon as you dig , so in effect the mine is a pond , with a gray dredge floating in the middle sucking up sand from the bottom . on that late september day , the pond was still , mirroring the bright blue sky and high clouds , masking its foot depth . the workers call it simply the pit . in a shed on the pit s shore , jacob dampier scooped a small mound of sand onto a metal plate . with a spackling blade , deft and intent , sweating in the staggering heat , he cut it into four equal segments , squared their sides , leveled the top , and quartered them again . one brick he slid onto a scale , weighing out grams , and slipped it into a ziploc bag . he pulled out a booklet , munsell s soil color , basically the pantone chart for dirt , and found a match value seven , chroma one , eggshell white . sometimes it s a little gray , sometimes it has an orange tint , dampier said . it depends where you are in the pit . but if it s white , they love it . and you see how white that is ? it ll blind ya . for years dampier has tested sand of an astonishing range and specificity chunky sand for asphalt , finer sand for concrete , finest for masonry and glass . there s a strict standard for volleyball courts , approved by an expert in ontario , canada , and a whole menu for golf courses one blend for bunkers another for topdressing another , dyed green , for divot repair . since june , the mine had been running day and night producing sand for miami beach . white drifts lay beneath the tower where a machine sorts slurry from the dredge to fit exacting recipes of grain size . tall hourglass cones lined the pit , and a dune stretched along the road where trucks sat idling , waiting to be waved out by a man standing under a rainbow beach umbrella . from here , three hundred trucks would drive , tons of sand to the parking lot of the fontainebleau that day , and do it again the next , until over , tons have been placed on the shore . in all , it s projected to cost just under million to patch , feet of miami beach s waterfront . sand prices have risen sharply since , to an average of about a cubic yard , according to coburn s database . mined sand , sorted to bespoke criteria and requiring convoys of trucks , is more expensive still . laurel reichold , the corps engineer managing the project , says at a cubic yard , it costs twice what dredged sand would have . yellow all terrain trucks complete the final leg of the journey , ferrying sand from the parking lot to the beach , escorted by men on atvs wearing goggles and bandanas pulled over their faces . they turn onto a peninsula of fresh beach jutting out from the eroded shore and dump the sand into the sea . bulldozers follow , grading the sand down to a gentle slope . the new beach , uniform and flat , is disorienting to be on , without markers for perspective or scale . but once the trucks leave and the waves get to work , it will seem as natural as the rest of the shore , covered in sunbathers and umbrellas . it s gorgeous , said elizabeth wheaton , the city s environment and sustainability director , picking up a handful of sand and letting it run through her fingers . you just want to make snow angels in it . miami beach has already begun to flood at high tide , and saltwater is pushing into the region s aquifer . the city , like all south florida , is doomed , says hal wanless , chair of the geological sciences department at the university of miami . the state s bedrock of porous limestone means that walls won t stop the water it ll just seep up from below . evidence of just how radically changes in sea level can reshape florida s coast is everywhere , written in the sand . one of the sand deposits the corps was eyeing offshore of martin county was a beach about , years ago , when the sea was feet lower . the witherspoon mine was a beach , years ago , when the sea was feet higher . a recent study of antarctic ice melt predicted that if carbon emissions aren t curtailed , by the end of the century the sea could rise by just over six feet , the high end of noaa s forecast , and the average elevation of miami dade county . in years it could rise as high as feet . well before then , the witherspoon mine would become a beach once again . the city , like all south florida , is doomed . the inertia of the climate system means that even if carbon emissions were halted tomorrow , the sea would continue to rise for centuries . with a republican party in denial about climate change , and a president elect who once called it a hoax perpetrated by china , we will likely lock in higher and faster rates of rise in the years to come . for cities on the coast it will be a slow catastrophe , involving myriad difficult decisions whether to build infrastructure in an attempt to keep the water out , or whether to retreat from the coast , and if so , how to retreat without upending lives , economies , communities . one of the first decisions cities will face , one they re already facing , is what to do about a shore that s falling into the sea . it will probably always be worth it for miami beach to go to absurd lengths in order to maintain its shore , right up until the moment the city sinks beneath the sea . mayor philip levine , one of the first florida politicians to raise the alarm about climate change , has spent million building pumps and raising roads and plans to spend hundreds of millions more . but florida has no income tax , so if cities are going to pay for the infrastructure needed to adapt , property values need to keep rising and tourists need to keep coming . without a beach , why come to miami beach ? the irony is , in miami beach and south florida , the way to deal with rising sea levels is to build more condos , says peter zalewski , who tracks development through his site condo vultures . just under , new units are planned or currently being built in miami dade county , a region that already has more assets vulnerable to rising seas than anywhere in the world after guangzhou , china . as long as florida is trying to build its way out of climate change , the beach will need to be maintained , as a lure and a defense . you can have buildings or you can have beaches , but you can t have both . it won t be worth it for other cities , however , especially if the federal government stops helping cover the cost of nourishment . the army corps mandate , reichold says , is to protect property on the coast , and while recreation revenue is factored into the corps cost benefit analysis , that wouldn t preclude building seawalls instead of nourishment if sand gets too expensive . cities will face a choice retreat , or build walls to keep the water out , destroying the beach . you can have buildings or you can have beaches , but you can t have both , says orrin pilkey , founder of the program for the study of developed shorelines . he thinks buildings will win that calculation , and there will be a rush to build seawalls . it happened on a small scale after hurricane sandy , as billionaires erected metal plates and piled up boulders to defend their hamptons mansions . as the water rises , more and more of the coast will become armored , the sand will wash away , and the shoreline will resemble a fortress of concrete and rock . the beaches that remain would be amusement parks maintained at great expense , in cities like miami beach , myrtle beach , or virginia beach , perpetually rebuilt with sand from farther and farther out on the continental shelf , or inland from a once and future coast . in late october , geologists from five east coast states gathered at a lab in palisades , new york , on the cliffs of the hudson river . they were there to mark the opening of what is essentially a library of sand . for the two previous summers , a ship , the ms thunderforce , had sailed from miami to boston , taking samples of the ocean floor , and now those samples had arrived at columbia s lamont doherty earth observatory . the survey was commissioned by the bureau of ocean energy management , which handles resources in federal waters , farther than most states have traditionally gone for sand . but as states have begun to run low on sand nearby , they ve started turning to boem for help , says jeff reidenauer , the bureau s marine minerals branch chief . with rising seas and stronger storms , it s only a matter of time before states along the eastern seaboard are scrambling for sand to repair their shores , and the bureau wanted to know where to go . the survey began in the aftermath of hurricane sandy and goes by the apt acronym of asap , for atlantic sand assessment project . in the lab , long tubes of sediment taken from the ocean floor lay displayed on tables . researchers use the cores as time capsules , testing the stripes of clay and sand laid down over thousands of years to figure out what the planet was doing at the time . the people gathered in the lab that day , however , were mostly interested in the sand itself its grain size , mineral type , how much of it there was and where . the cores from the thunderforce filled rack after rack inside a refrigerated warehouse adjoining the lab . each plastic case was labeled by state , almost a wall for each massachusetts , new york , new jersey , north carolina , georgia , florida cores in all , with hundreds more on the way . the shore crumbled as matthew passedthe library was opening just in time . three weeks before , a low pressure disturbance that began off the coast of africa reached the caribbean , strengthened unusually rapidly , and slammed into haiti as hurricane matthew , category . it was headed for a direct hit on southeast florida but bent to the east , skimming the coast , and flooding north carolina . the storm sent powerful waves into the coast as it passed , washing away large sections of the shore in georgia and south carolina . in florida waves washed over more than miles of dunes . beaches in st . lucie county retreated dozens of feet , turning into cliffs . brevard county had to rush sand onto the beach to protect homes left teetering over the sea . jacksonville , in the middle of putting over , tons of sand on its beach , saw just as much wash away overnight . near st . augustine , waves punched through a dune and created a new inlet joining the matanzas river with the atlantic , while to the south , waves washed away dunes and concrete armor and chewed through a mile and a half of highway a a . senator bill nelson promised the highway would be rebuilt and a new beach installed to protect it . the damage is still being assessed , and where the sand to replace it will come from is unclear . maybe it will be brought from a prehistoric beach by convoys of trucks , or from a bahamian shoal , or maybe the counties will fall into another sand war . or maybe it will come from one of the new deposits deep out on the continental shelf , mapped , catalogued , and archived in a walk in refrigerator on the hudson river . back at miami beach , work has paused for the winter . sections of the new shore crumbled as matthew passed but were soon repaired . art basel begins in a few weeks , and the completed beach in front of the fontainebleau is ready to receive the dealers and collectors and partiers who will soon descend . work will resume in the spring , with hundreds of trucks ferrying sand from the middle of the state to the shore , patching holes in a beach to postpone the day when it will inevitably vanish . editor michael zelenko and elizabeth lopatto