 although the overwhelming majority of pc gamers run windows , it would be fair to say that their relationship with microsoft has been fraught throughout the years . the disastrous games for windows live initiative was a tone deaf attempt to turn online gaming on windows vista into an xbox like experience . windows , meanwhile , brought an unfriendly interface and a half hearted app store pricing model , which was met with a collective shrug by countless gamers worldwide who stuck with windows . valve ceo gabe newell told the verge that windows was like this giant sadness that just hurts everybody in the pc business . minecraft creator notch said , i d rather have minecraft not run on windows at all than play along with microsoft s attempt to sell games itself . now , microsoft is making a fresh push into pc gaming with windows , and it comes at an interesting time for the company s xbox ambitions . following the troubled launch of windows , microsoft proceeded to torpedo xbox s reputation by making its new console less powerful than the playstation , more expensive due to a mandatory kinect bundle of dubious value , and more focused on entertainment features to the detriment of gaming . it was a tough time for the team , a tough time for what we were trying to do with xbox , says microsoft s xbox chief phil spencer in an interview with the verge . because a lot of the original ideas around xbox one didn t meet the expectations that xbox fans have of what we should do with our product . but after taking over from don mattrick , spencer s gamer focused approach has started to pay off after hard decisions like unbundling kinect microsoft s e keynote last month was universally well received . so it s on this tentative surge of momentum that microsoft is putting the xbox brand at the heart of windows , with an expansive new xbox app and a long list of gaming features . we re taking the xbox team and really thinking about it as the gaming team in microsoft , says spencer . where xbox is our gaming brand and it s less solely about the console itself and more about the gaming ecosystem all up whether you re playing on a pc , whether you re playing on your phone , whether you re playing on your console . but , quite understandably , pc gamers might prove a hard bunch to convince . every windows installation includes the xbox app , a major attempt by microsoft to put its stamp on the pc gaming experience . it has much in common with the basic xbox one interface in fact , if you have an xbox one , almost everything you see will be pulled from there . your friends list , software library , and achievements are accessible through the app , as are features like messaging and party chat . the middle of the app is dominated by an activity feed that shows what you and your friends have been up to in chronological order . you re also able to connect to your xbox one directly , control it from your pc , and stream games straight to your computer s monitor . this is a cool feature that seems easy to set up , but i ve been unable to get it to work the xbox app crashes every time i try to start a game . other verge colleagues have had better luck . it s a shame , because i ve gotten used to decoupling my wii u and playstation from the tv by beaming them to secondary screens . the xbox app is only really useful if you own an xboxall of these features are potentially neat for xbox one owners , but the problem is that the vast majority of pc gamers don t own an xbox one and at this point , the xbox app is only really useful if you do . here s an example i own a steam copy of ori and the blind forest , a game that launched this year on xbox one and pc with considerable backing from microsoft . if i play ori in windows , there are some things i can do through the xbox app pressing win g or the xbox home button on my controller to take screenshots or record footage , for instance . but attempting to share those images or videos from the xbox app brings up an error message that the game hasn t been recognized . try making a capture from a newer game , says the optimistic pop up . so the xbox app only really works best , or at all , if you buy most of your games through microsoft . but right now , the company isn t making much of an effort to make that a possibility . there is a store button in the xbox app , but all it does is launch the windows era store and jump to the games section . xbox live enabled games didn t exactly take off on windows as of today the store is populated with little more than mobile ports and microsoft s new , social versions of games like minesweeper and mahjong . the one big windows game to hit the store today is a new version of minecraft , ironically enough given notch s prior statements on the windows store . but microsoft can do things like that when it buys a studio for billion . xbox head phil spencerthe problem with trying to own a slice of the pc ecosystem is that there s a de facto ruler already steam . the pc s open nature is one of its biggest strengths spencer correctly points out that minecraft s success came down to a dude just creates a java app , throws it up with a paypal link , and all of a sudden it becomes massive . but in practice , most pc gamers are so entrenched in their steam libraries that almost anything else is an unwelcome distraction . you d be hard pressed to find anyone who enjoys firing up ea s origin or ubisoft s uplay just to launch games from each publisher . but microsoft believes the xbox ecosystem has something unique to add to windows . back in the day with games for windows live when it was out , really there was a sentiment inside the xbox group that if we could only get those windows people to play games on the console , that would help us sell more xboxes , says spencer . i love selling more xboxes . but more than selling more xboxes , i love having people have fun on xbox live . i look at the opportunity on windows to connect the ecosystems . five years from now i want steam to be incredibly popular and successful . for existing steam users who don t care about the xbox one , it s unlikely that microsoft will be able to propel its xbox on windows initiative beyond an occasionally opened annoyance . but it may be able to get a foothold through the tried and true method of exclusive content . microsoft has indicated that it ll bring upcoming xbox one titles like fable legends , gears of war ultimate edition , and gigantic to windows , with features like cross platform multiplayer and the integration into the xbox app that steam games will miss out on . looking at that lineup , though , it s hard not to get the feeling that microsoft s gaming ambitions remain centered around selling xbox consoles . why no halo guardians ? why no gears of war ? why no forza motorsport ? microsoft doesn t seem too invested in the concept of a pc gaming store , let alone the prospect of taking on steam . steam is massive and they ve been incredibly important to the windows gaming ecosystem , says spencer . five years from now i want steam to be incredibly popular and successful . we don t have a strategy that steam somehow takes anything from us . i look at the health of steam as a harbinger of the health of windows gaming . but even if the windows store never takes off , that doesn t mean there s nothing in windows to interest pc gamers . directx will be a big deal when it s adopted fully the latest version of microsoft s gaming api will take better advantage of multi core processors and multiple gpus to offer potentially much stronger performance . amd , which makes the cpu and gpu inside the xbox one and playstation , says its new r gpu could show up to times the theoretical detail under directx than though you won t necessarily need new hardware to see the benefits . i should also note that i haven t had any problems getting existing pc games to run well on windows , which was an issue for many when windows launched . and for console gamers , some of the benefits of windows will also trickle down to the xbox one . spencer says that universal windows apps will finally come to the xbox this fall , and a unified store will follow . shifting the underlying xbox one operating system to windows along with a dramatic ui overhaul should improve performance , too . sometimes we see spinning circles more often than we would like , when we re navigating the xbox , he says . there s a lot of work that we re doing to streamline and we re getting a lot of the usage data of really how an xbox one is being used now to streamline the ui . windows is making the xbox ui faster , which is great . it s also worth noting , of course , that windows is the best designed and most usable version of windows in recent memory , and that if you do anything with your pc beyond gaming you ll probably want to upgrade at some point anyway . it s free , after all . but while windows itself seems likely to succeed , microsoft s gaming strategy remains harder to pin down . for xbox one owners , windows comes with a bunch of neat features and integration . but if you re a pc only gamer , you may get more of a sense that microsoft is trying to sell you an xbox . 