 windows has a lot to live up to . microsoft has made a lot of promises about it . and oddly enough , we ve heard most of them before , with windows . both were designed to acknowledge and embrace mobile and mobile apps , work well on touchscreens as well as laptops , and form the basis of a new phone platform . but there s a big difference between them windows actually does all those things . the story of windows from inside microsoftthe company s latest trick listening to its usersby tom warren windows has a lot to live up to . microsoft has made a lot of promises about it . and oddly enough , we ve heard most of them before , with windows . both were designed to acknowledge and embrace mobile and mobile apps , work well on touchscreens as well as laptops , and form the basis of a new phone platform . but there s a big difference between them windows actually does all those things . three years ago , tablets like the ipad looked like they might be a serious threat to windows . in response , steve ballmer , steven sinofsky , and the rest of microsoft took a big bet on a forward thinking interface that asked its users to forget their old point and click ways and embrace a tiled future . windows and windows phone were related pieces in a bold strategy to move the company into a future of touchscreens and connected apps . that strategy flopped . users roundly rejected the confusing new version of windows , and without them , developers balked . but the ipad hasn t killed off laptops , and consumers haven t shown a big interest in touchscreen pcs yet . another version , . , attempted to stem the bleeding , but it was too late . the market had spoken . like vista before it and windows me before that , windows was the version of windows you skipped . read our full windows review now , a new leadership team for windows under ceo satya nadella and executive vice president terry myerson are trying it all again . but this time around , the goal is much more ambitious if they succeed , windows will be the final iteration of windows the one that will be updated like a service , continuously , in perpetuity . the one that finally makes good on all the promises of a synergistic ecosystem of like minded devices designed to work together . in a series of exclusive interviews with the verge , the team behind windows revealed how they re doing it , why they think it will succeed , and what they re working on next . this is the story of windows from inside microsoft . terry myersondeveloping in the openterry myerson never imagined he d last at microsoft . i thought i was going to stay here a couple of weeks , but found that i really loved the people . it s now years since myerson sold his small company to microsoft , during which time he worked on exchange , windows mobile , and windows phone . now , he s sitting in front of me as the head of windows , just days before the software maker launches windows . it s been two years since myerson was promoted to the top job , and the release is important to him and the company . microsoft needs customers to love and want windows enough to upgrade to it , thereby creating a massive install base to attract developers . the pressure is on . myerson is confident without being arrogant he s more than happy to tease me about my macbook . his forthright manner is mirrored in how he chose to release windows out in the open , bugs and all , even before the company had finished thinking through what it should be . you re putting it out there when it s not done . microsoft now solicits feedback directly from users in a very public way over the past nine months , the company has been testing windows with million windows insiders . anyone can sign up to test , and the results of microsoft s work will go on display today as windows launches to millions of people around the world . it has sometimes been daunting , says myerson . you re putting it out there when it s not done , then you re getting all kinds of feedback and stuff that you know is broken . that feedback has been constant and varied over the last nine months , and it will continue over the months and years ahead . initially , there was a lot of hand wringing around what was that going to be like and were people going to form opinions too early , explains gabe aul , engineering general manager for microsoft s operating systems group . i think we just decided to go for it . aul launched his microsoft career in product support years ago . he went on to help build dr . watson , a debugger that gathers error data when your pc crashes , into basically every product at microsoft . today aul is the face of microsoft s windows testing . he receives microsoft feedback , praise , and abuse on twitter daily , but he remains perfectly cool . even before we start our interview , i start moaning about some windows bugs i have , and he s keen to listen , even emailing me a fix for a problem within seconds . he admits he s passionate about quality after working in product support for years , and it s clear he genuinely cares . while many will joke it support is simply a help desk asking a user to reboot their pc , microsoft has built a whole system to process the feedback it receives for windows . it all gets collected in a database where microsoft engineers can use tools to analyze it visually . if cortana starts breaking in france , microsoft will hear about it , and engineers can detect trends and issues based on pop ups that appear for testers . there was a lot of hand wringing around what was that going to be like . feedback doesn t always come from within the operating system , though . the continuum feature , which lets you switch between desktop and tablet modes in windows , generated a wave of negative responses from social media . that s probably because microsoft initially ripped out all of windows s good touch work , a move that surprised testers , before slowly building it back in . the trash can icon the feedback we got on that thing . . . he cuts short to laugh because windows insiders myself included were really vocal in comments and online forums about the how ugly the first version was . sometimes , windows customers reached out to myerson directly , including one during the time when the windows chief misspoke and the result was that everybody thought windows would be free . there s this kid in bangladesh who somehow got my email address , he runs pirated windows , myerson says . it was a great dialogue . it was more for me a learning experience about how did he pirate windows , and why did he pirate windows . the conversation hasn t changed microsoft s stance , though . windows still isn t free for pirates . the new xbox one app on windows taking feedbackto handle feedback , the windows build team hosts daily flight ops meetings to decide which prerelease versions of windows get released . a flight commander takes control of the team , for that day . he has a red hat that says phone on it , and he has a black hat that says pc on it , aul says . when it s time to talk about phone , he will take the pc hat off and put the phone hat on . that s how we keep the room in check . mikevierling it s real pic . twitter . com dwf ejoqkq gabriel aul gabeaul may , there s also a red outfit hanging on the wall , a symbol of a time when one employee came to the ship room wearing embarrassing matching red shorts and a t shirt he s an ohio state supporter . it became a running joke . now , if a microsoft engineer enters the meeting with a bug that s equally embarrassing , they have to wear something red . to continue with the red theme , aul has a d printed red button that s become something of a microsoft meme among windows fans . aul hits it when a build is ready to be released to the public . it s mostly ceremonial , but it actually does send a trigger to the flighting system , explains aul . the other thing it does , that most people don t know , is it says something inappropriate in a stephen hawking voice because it s got a voice synthesizer in there . aul wouldn t give me any examples , but quotes are sourced from the team or jokes about his tweets . microsoft s willingness to solicit user feedback on early versions is a big change from the past . during the days of vista , microsoft s lawyers ended up at my doorstep because i dared to write about prerelease versions of windows . and while windows had a few public previews , it was largely developed with little consideration to feedback . windows shipped despite user concerns about fullscreen apps and a lack of attention to keyboard and mouse users . microsoft s management seemed to spend more time explaining every new feature in sprawling , technical blog posts instead of understanding why users hated the changes . myerson has a different philosophy it isn t one guy comes down from a mountain with a tablet saying what the right product is , he explains . we just believe the customer feedback shaping the product is how we re going to build clarity and confidence that we have a great product . joe belfiorefrom apps to phonesmicrosoft may have been confident about windows , but the ambitions to push touch computing didn t work out . microsoft has been forced to admit several times that it s aware customer satisfaction rates for mouse and keyboard users are low . microsoft s new start menu isn t as domineering , it s just designed to get them to move to windows . our strategic belief is , if we have a big audience of people then developers will put apps in that store because there will be demand , explains microsoft s joe belfiore . we now have all the devices lined up . i don t expect to see the platform change again . belfiore looks after the customization of windows for pcs , tablets , and phones . he spent years building windows phone , alongside myerson . to many fans , he s the face of microsoft s mobile efforts . microsoft has been constantly resetting and rebuilding its windows phone os . windows phone users couldn t upgrade to windows phone , and it took far too long for windows phone . to arrive with features that should have been there from the beginning . it s knocked developer confidence , to say nothing of crippling its chances at gaining significant marketshare . part of windows s big promise is that the same apps can run across pcs , tablets , phones , and even the xbox one console . as a result , the next phones will have an expansive set of apps from windows to jumpstart the ecosystem . we have one common operating system for all the device types that we are making , explains belfiore . he s also surprisingly blunt when he characterizes windows phone and windows phone , products he was intimately involved in developing . we ve had a couple of , sort of , practice runs with phone and pc , belfiore says , before pivoting to the presumably brighter future with windows , we now have all the devices lined up . i don t expect to see the platform change again , in the same way it has before . that s encouraging to hear , but it doesn t help windows phone right now . microsoft ceo satya nadella revealed recently that the company is restructuring its phone business , scaling it back massively as part of a . billion write off from the nokia phone business acquisition . around , jobs are being cut , and microsoft is planning to make fewer models . we are going to focus on a few great devices and the most notable being that premium consumer category , explains myerson , adding , the direction we will head is the premium branded lineup . i push him on whether that s a similar approach to surface , and he claims the goal is to have one microsoft device family that plays this role in the windows ecosystem . i m not sure if that means a surface phone is in the cards , but it sure sounds like it . the first example of that one microsoft device family will arrive later this year . one s coming . maybe two are coming , but at least one is coming , teases myerson , as he hides an unreleased lumia phone in his pocket . microsoft is rumored to be working on two high end devices that will include a new continuum feature from windows . continuum on phones lets you use the phone as kind of a pc . you can connect up a keyboard , mouse , and monitor and start using windows apps . i think it is the future of the phone , says myerson . belfiore is equally bullish about continuum , but the phone version of windows doesn t ship until later this year . the phone is significantly feature complete , but we ll continue to polish and tweak and iterate the things that still need to work , explains belfiore . we ll put features in right up near the end . but in general , the broad feature set is set . phil spencerwindows and the xbox onewindows is also coming to the xbox in a big way . a new xbox app for windows is a significant addition , and it s one of the best built in apps available right now . you can stream xbox one games to a windows pc and use the xbox controller , and you can chat freely from a pc to an xbox one with or without a headset . it s a great addition for xbox gamers after a rough couple of years . sales have been second to sony s playstation , but it feels like microsoft is recovering from the original unveiling of the xbox one two years ago . the launch of xbox one , it was from a brand and a customer pride standpoint a tough time , says phil spencer , microsoft s head of xbox . a lot of the original ideas around xbox one didn t meet the expectations that xbox fans have of what we should do with our product . spencer , who has worked on products like encarta at microsoft , has spent the last year or so getting the xbox team re centered on its fans and gaming . it s an approach that myerson says inspired the windows insider program . xbox had this passionate focus on their fans and engaging with their fans and listening to their fans , says myerson . something that phil spencer just has at his core is his caring . he lives for those xbox fans . we understand if you re going to go pc to xbox , we need to get keyboard and mouse working . spencer sees windows as a massive opportunity to bring xbox live and a single store to people . today , the xbox store is separate from the windows store , but microsoft is unifying them this fall . that doesn t mean apps will be immediately available on the xbox one , though . getting to one store where all the content is there will happen a little bit later , says spencer , meaning we ll be waiting until next year until we finally see windows apps on xbox one . microsoft s store isn t designed to kill off steam , either . five years from now , i want steam to be incredibly popular and successful . i look at the health of steam as a harbinger of the health of windows gaming . what is coming this year is a windows update for xbox one that brings a refreshed ui , speed , and microsoft s cortana digital assistant . you can imagine scenarios of hey cortana , what are most of my friends playing ? what are most people watching ? says spencer . the next step is being able to help you in game , of really thinking about scenarios like hey cortana , how do i get past this boss ? further out , spencer says that streaming pc games to xbox one is something he wants to enable . we understand if you re going to go pc to xbox , we need to get keyboard and mouse working completely so you could play those games . in terms of where we want to go with our platform , those are absolutely in the scope of things that we want to do . terry myersonthe last windowsmyerson and his team have shifted windows to a windows as a service model , meaning regular updates instead of a major release every few years . it doesn t feel like microsoft really knows exactly how this is going to play out , but the windows release marks a milestone . the company simply can t afford to make the mistakes of windows againbut it s not the kind of milestone we re used to . windows , even at release , is not done . right now , it s all about updates that fix issues and bugs . if you upgrade from windows and windows this week , then you ll start to see those regular updates , and they ll install automatically to keep everyone up to date . myerson is confident in the quality of windows . we look at these quantitative metrics and we think the quality s great , and we re continuing to fix more , he says . we re going to keep fixing . we re committed to listen and respond . every day we re shipping out new updates with more fixes . that listening and responding sums up windows . if there s something wrong this time , then myerson and his team will be listening . this can t and likely won t be another windows or windows vista mess for microsoft . the company simply can t afford to make those mistakes again . our goal is to roll out windows and build a base of millions of happy and engaged windows users , says myerson . happy and engaged is one of those talking points you hear a lot from microsoft . myerson used it nine times in our hour together . but behind the pr approved phrasing is a simple truth it s been a long time since windows users have been either , and microsoft needs to fix that . it s as good a north star as any , especially when your product development cycle is founded on taking user feedback seriously . if microsoft can make people love windows again , then the rest developers and apps is easy . if i ve learned anything from speaking to the team building windows , it s that microsoft is taking user feedback very , very seriously . everything microsoft is making from the xbox to phones to hololens is based on windows . it s not just the foundation of this operating system , it s the future foundation of the company . microsoft doesn t have a plan b for windows , and it s proud of the fact there s no one working on a windows , myerson says , but there s a group of people working on some really cool updates to windows . when windows insiders see those updates , you can be sure microsoft will want to know exactly what they think . photography by david ryderedited by dieter bohn and michael zelenko