 terminator resurrectedon set with arnold for what could be the best terminator in decadesby jacob kastrenakes arnold schwarzenegger is walking up a flight of stairs toward a time machine , located on a large metal platform high above my head . he s banged up , with a bullet hole in the back of his jacket ampnbsp ampnbspa leather jacket , of course and a bright green blob along his right cheek that looks like it s eating through his face . it all looks strange , but then you begin to see it with some movie magic , you can imagine the green mark warping into a gory wound , with bits of muscle and metal stretching out across it . with another stretch of the imagination , the entire room morphs into a futuristic laboratory , occupied by a version of schwarzenegger that s more recognizable than any other the terminator . it s the middle of july , and i m down in new orleans inside an enormous , white nasa warehouse . from the outside , it s nondescript enough that one might assume some strange government research is happening inside . nasa once worked on the space shuttle here , but these days it s regularly rented out by film crews transforming it into other worlds . today that world is a high tech laboratory built for the film terminator genisys . the terminator franchise has been around since james cameron s the terminator back in , but compared to today s franchises say , anything marvel , star wars , or transformers ampnbspterminator films are few and far between . genisys , which comes out this summer , is only the series fifth film , a full three decades after the first installment . compared to today s franchises , terminator films are few and far betweenthat may be because things haven t gone so well without cameron . cameron s terminator , in , duplicated the success of the original by shifting its unique mixture of sci fi , action , horror and yes relationships onto a mostly new set of characters . but from there , the series went downhill . terminator , released in , wasn t a hit with critics or at the box office . the tv show that followed in was cancelled after two seasons . then came s widely panned terminator salvation , which ampnbsproger ebert described as being so filled with action scenes that it may as well have been a video game that you don t get to play and you know how ebert feels about video games . salvation also did poorly at the box office , which is likely why the series rights went up for sale shortly thereafter . ultimately , the franchise ended up in the hands of producers david ellison and dana goldberg , a duo behind a number of recent blockbusters , including star trek into darkness and world war z , which they executive produced . ellison and goldberg recognize that breathing life back into this flagging franchise won t be easy . schwarzenegger is attempting to ampnbspmake a sequel that s actually goodbut the team is committed . that s why schwarzenegger is in this warehouse and back in his old costume . he and everyone else here are attempting to make terminator feel fresh again or , more succinctly , ampnbsptrying make a sequel that s actually good . joining him are emilia clarke , better known as daenerys in game of thrones , and jai courtney , who played bruce willis son in a good day to die hard . clarke and courtney flank schwarzenegger as he walks toward the time machine take after take after take . just about every role has been recast for this movie , with young actors taking over as better looking versions of terminator s classic characters clarke is the increasingly tough sarah connor , and courtney is the hapless kyle reese . only schwarzenegger is returning for the reboot . while some might wonder why he s still here and still playing the powerhouse role at years old , the answer is obvious it s a terminator film . of course he s here . and with schwarzenegger on board , everyone in this weird hangar minutes from the city center is actually excited . they all think this new film is going to succeed , and they re eager to have people forget about the franchise s missteps . even director alan taylor , whose last film was s thor the dark world , points to the first two terminator films as inspiration , politely ignoring the slow train wreck that followed . that voluntary amnesia goes double for schwarzenegger , who isn t just peeved about the quality of salvation , but seems to be annoyed that they made it without him . with genisys , schwarzenegger says , the screenwriters really figured out a way of continuing on the story and kind of ignoring the last one . it s been over a decade since schwarzenegger last touched the franchise during much of the time since , he served as governor of california but when asked , he admits to still feeling protective over the terminator . the trailer for the original terminatorellison and goldberg , the producers , also express a deep commitment to the quality of the franchise . while cameras are being moved around during a break in the action , the two drop by where i m standing , smiling and walking beside one another an inseparable pair . both producers are understandably jumpy about rebooting the series mostly out of excitement , but maybe it s their nerves , as well . they want to update terminator for modern times , allowing it to reflect our new technology and fears . both believe now is the moment to hit the reset button . whenever you remake a movie there has to be a reason for doing it , says ellison , who , with his gently spiked hair , looks like a startup founder unsurprisingly , as he is the son of oracle founder larry ellison . you have to find a way to update it and adjust and deviate , otherwise you re simply just recreating what james cameron did . the original terminator movies were about nuclear war and the opposition of man and machine , all backed by a military ai called skynet bent on exterminating humanity . to ellison , that ai is starting to look less and less fictional technology integrating itself into our lives and sneaking into our pockets is the reality many of us live in . we ve invited skynet into our homes , ellison says . we line up in front of apple stores to buy these things . the singularity is very much in the near future . the bond of man and machine is just around the corner . we ve invited skynet into our homes . we line up in front of apple stores to buy these things . the singularity a term that generally refers to the emergence of hyper intelligent ai or the merging of man and machine is said to be a major theme in this movie . ellison says that we re already moving in that direction with procedures like ocular implants , but even our reliance on smartphones is enough of a symbol for him and goldberg to riff on . terminator was a cautionary tale about the amount that you put your trust into a machine and technology , goldberg says . look at the world we live in . you can sit in a restaurant , and literally , people aren t speaking to one another because everybody is doing this , she says , putting her hands out as though she were firing off a text message . it sort of has skynet written all over it . it was sort of asking for a remake . it s even more pressing now , director alan taylor says , when he comes over during a camera movement . science fiction is fun because it s reaching so far into the future . right now , that stuff is around us all the time . one of the challenges was that now we have a different set of fears than the kind of paranoia used in terminator , taylor says . technology is scary to us in a different way . most people aren t lying awake at night worrying about nuclear threat , but we are unnerved by a lot of how technology is moving into our lives and starting to infuse our lives . we the filmmakers question whether that s a good thing or a bad thing . it s hard to imagine a new terminator film actually getting that thoughtful after all , these movies are really about running away from handsome robots . and with an initial trailer for genisys showing more ludicrous action than in any prior terminator film , it s becoming even harder to see how carefully these ideas will fit in . still , people are thinking about these things on set , and that should leave some hope that they ll make it into the actual picture . and you should hope that the production knows what it s doing , because there s possibly a lot more terminator to come . ellison s sister , megan ellison of annapurna pictures , won a bid for rights to the terminator series back in . she s since passed the rights to her brother david s production house , skydance , which plans to take advantage of the next few years in a big way . genisys , as its name implies , is the start of something a brand new trilogy . assuming that this first one s successful , a second and third film will shoot back to back . their plots are already nailed down , but no details have been released publicly . in concept , this trilogy will coexist with the original set of terminator films thanks to some complicated time travel jiu jitsu . the mechanics sound fairly convoluted , but in short the new trilogy essentially takes place in an alternate terminator universe . schwarzenegger was sent back in time , but then something different happened the timelines split . a straight reboot might have been more elegant , but ellison and goldberg seem to care deeply about preserving the canon that s already been created . they re also huge time travel nerds . both of us have read just about every book you can on theatrical time travel , ellison says . goldberg confirms this . we have no lives . the plots of genisys sequels are already nailed down , but no details have been releasedgenisys will feature a lot of time travel , even beyond this splitting of the timelines . after watching a few more takes with schwarzenegger , a studio representative leads me out through a pair of doors and into a damp tunnel with cement bricks arching overhead . it s the dimly lit set of an empty sewer system , and at the center of it is yet another large platform housing a time machine . this one , meant to exist in the year , is in slight disrepair . beyond the sewer system , in another corner of the warehouse , is a final time machine , a far sleeker and more futuristic model , standing half constructed , having finished filming days ago . in the movie , it ll show up sometime in . on the way back to the original time machine , we pass about a dozen extras standing around in white labs suits , one of whom is smoking a long , silver e cig . it s a ridiculous sight , but it s also another reminder of the growing symbiosis between man and machine . not man and machinery not the large churning factory parts we saw at the end of the first terminator . skynet has manifested itself as an endless host of tiny , personal tools . they know us . and how we reach that point has always been part of what terminator explores . the rest of the day , i m whisked around through prop trailers and past catering tables , getting a look at everything from laser guns to chocolate covered pretzels . just before it s time to leave , schwarzenegger has finally finished walking up all the stairs . he heads over to the side of the warehouse and takes a seat in a tall director s chair . he s cooling off , taking a few minutes to chat as it begins to rain outside , breaking new orleans thick blanket of heat . intimidating as schwarzenegger is , he s remarkably friendly . he still carries himself like a politician and knows how to sound measured even when his passion for the series seems to make that difficult . finally , a reporter asks him whether he thinks this movie will actually be able to win over fans . schwarzenegger , still in costume with that green blob on his cheek , doesn t hesitate . i think actions speak louder than words , he says . when the movie s trailer comes out , i think that right away it will set the record straight . of course , a first trailer is already out there , and reactions are decidedly mixed . it s over the top , it s action packed , and it s deeply nostalgic ampnbspbut maybe that s where , for better or worse , this production hopes to succeed . when you see the first screenings out there , schwarzenegger adds , the buzz will take care of the rest . even if genisys is little more than a ridiculous pastiche of classic scenes that were well made the first time around , that at least means pieces of the movie are worth looking forward to . perhaps that s why schwarzenegger is so confident . i don t think that it s difficult to win the people over , because people are really excited about another terminator , he says . they re ready to see another one . illustrations by henry the worst 