 for students of international conflict , provided plenty to examine . there was civil war in syria , ethnic violence in china , and riots to the point of revolution in ukraine . for those working at duke university amprsquos ward lab , all specialists in predicting conflict , the year looks like a betting sheet , full of predictions that worked and others that didn amprsquot pan out . guerrilla campaigns intensified , proving out the predictionwhen the lab put out their semiannual predictions in july , they gave paraguay a percent chance of insurgency , largely based on reports of marxist rebels . the next month , guerrilla campaigns intensified , proving out the prediction . in the case of china s armed clashes between uighurs and hans , the models showed a percent chance of violence , even as the cause of each individual flare up was concealed by the country s state run media . on the other hand , the unrest in ukraine didn t start raising alarms until the action had already started , so the country was left off the report entirely . according to ward lab amprsquos staff , the purpose of the project isn t to make predictions but to test theories . if a certain theory of geopolitics can predict an uprising in ukraine , then maybe that theory is onto something . and even if these specialists could predict every conflict , it would only be half the battle . it s a success only if it doesn t come at the cost of predicting a lot of incidents that don t occur , says michael d . ward , the lab amprsquos founder and chief investigator , who also runs the blog predictive heuristics . but it suggests that we might be on the right track . if a certain theory of geopolitics can predict an uprising in ukraine , maybe that theory is onto somethingforecasting the future of a country wasn amprsquot always done this way . traditionally , predicting revolution or war has been a secretive project , for the simple reason that any reliable prediction would be too valuable to share . but as predictions lean more on data , they amprsquove actually become harder to keep secret , ushering in a new generation of open source prediction models that butt against the siloed status quo . will this country s government face an acute existential threat in the next six months ? the story of automated conflict prediction starts at the defense advance research projects agency , known as the pentagon amprsquos r ampd wing . in the s , darpa wanted to try out software based approaches to anticipating which governments might collapse in the near future . the cia was already on the case , with section chiefs from every region filing regular forecasts , but darpa wanted to see if a computerized approach could do better . they looked at a simple question will this country s government face an acute existential threat in the next six months ? when cia analysts were put to the test , they averaged roughly percent accuracy , so darpa amprsquos new system set the bar at percent , looking at different countries in asia with populations over half a million . it was dubbed icews , the integrated conflict early warning system , and it succeeded almost immediately , clearing percent with algorithms built on simple regression analysis . statistics don t have to worry about hurt feelingswhy was it so easy to beat the cia s best analysts ? to some extent , the answer has more to do with humans than machines . imagine the agency s indonesia expert , for example . he wants to make accurate predictions , but he s also subject to a range of biases that never show up in the data . he wants his work to be exciting and relevant , earning the attention of his superiors he wants indonesia to be important in the world . predictions are also used to direct resources within the cia , and he may want to attract more of the resources than the indonesia bureau would otherwise receive . by the time all the biases are accounted for , he s doing only slightly better than a coin flip . the statistics , on the other hand , don t have to worry about internal politics or hurt feelings . it s a mirror of the same open vs closed debate in softwareit amprsquos a lesson that conflict prediction has taken to heart , growing more transparent even as the tools become more powerful . icews itself was reclassified and taken back into the secretive corners of the pentagon , but the most exciting projects right now are fully open endeavors that publish their predictions for anyone to see . on the data side , researchers at georgetown university are cataloging every significant political event of the past century into a single database called ampnbspgdelt , and leaving the whole thing open for public research . already , projects have used it to map the syrian civil war and diplomatic gestures between japan and south korea , looking at dynamics that had never been mapped before . and then , of course , there amprsquos ward lab , releasing a new sheet of predictions every six months and tweaking its algorithms with every development . it amprsquos a mirror of the same open vs . closed debate in software ampmdash only now , instead of fighting over source code and security audits , it amprsquos a fight over who can see the future the best . of course , the secretive predictors are still alive and well . conflict prediction is a lucrative business for national security consultants , even if it amprsquos harder to check their work . and it amprsquos impossible to know what the pentagon amprsquos working on . they could be beating ward amprsquos predictions each month ampmdash but even if they were , it wouldn amprsquot give them much of an edge over the publicly available information . and just like the cia amprsquos analysts , they amprsquore handicapped by closed sources and institutional biases . as long as public predictions are getting more outside insight , more revisions , and more scrutiny , it amprsquos easy to like their odds . look , it s a messy and complicated world , ward says . i don t think we ll ever get to a place where things are predicted perfectly . in the meantime , the trick is to keep getting better . 