 on the eve of the rube goldberg machine contest college nationals , six teams gather in columbus , ohio s center of science and industry children s museum to set up their machines around the walls of the hangar like space and eye up the competition . the teams have made the trip here by car , their carefully assembled machines , months in the making , broken down and borne by trucks and u haul carriers . team members lean over each other to place a golf ball here and balance a domino there , assembling their delicate contraptions for the next day s judging . inside the whimsical but surprisingly dark world of rube goldberg machinesby brendan o connor on the eve of the rube goldberg machine contest college nationals , six teams gather in columbus , ohio s center of science and industry children s museum to set up their machines around the walls of the hangar like space and eye up the competition . the teams have made the trip here by car , their carefully assembled machines , months in the making , broken down and borne by trucks and u haul carriers . team members lean over each other to place a golf ball here and balance a domino there , assembling their delicate contraptions for the next day s judging . made famous by th century cartoonist and erstwhile engineer rube goldberg , the machines that carry his name accomplish mundane tasks in over elaborate ways ideally with a sense of humor . every year , rube goldberg inc . , the company established by goldberg s son , hosts nationwide competitions at middle school , high school , and collegiate levels with new challenges . this year s task erase a chalkboard . there s no monetary prize on the line , but bragging rights are at stake last year s college nationals winners a team from purdue s society of professional engineers pspe appeared on jimmy kimmel live , and they ve returned to defend their title . they set up quickly , with a few team members tweaking obscure parts of the machine but most just lounging around , checking out the other machines with small smiles , superior without being condescending . they ve been here before . i m here to see the team from penn state members of the undergraduate club society of engineering scientists ses compete . of all the crews in the national championship , the ses team is the least experienced half the team are freshman and none have ever participated in a rube goldberg competition before . making it to the nationals was a long shot , and now they have to face off with veterans . but the ses team , or their machine , are nowhere to be found . fifteen minutes before the museum closes , they finally arrive . their trip was foiled by the machine bearing their machine their truck broke down on the way to columbus from state college , pennsylvania . the transmission fluid in their car was low , and then there was snow and four accidents . they ll have to wait for the morning to set up their machine , test it , and fix anything that might have broken during travel . though in life rube goldberg was known to the world as a cartoonist , he was first an engineer . he graduated from uc berkeley in and took a job in san francisco where he worked on the city s sewer systems . but he didn t last long . a naturally talented artist , goldberg became a sports cartoonist for the san francisco chronicle earning per week . goldberg was earning a salary of over million by today s standardshe moved to new york in by , his cartoons were nationally syndicated . this was an era in which a syndicated cartoonist could make a healthy living according to a short profile published by the new york times in , goldberg was earning a salary upwards of , by over million by today s standards . over the course of his decades long career , goldberg drew cartoons that were variously political and frivolous . he penned three nationally syndicated , weekly comic strips boob mcnutt , mike and ike they look alike , and lala palooza and wrote a single frame cartoon called foolish questions . at the peak of his career , he wrote three editorial page cartoons every week , which appeared in newspapers across the country . goldberg s work made him famous he was named the first president of the national cartoonists society in in , he won the pulitzer prize for a political cartoon satirizing nuclear power . the conservative goldberg was invited to the white house by presidents eisenhower and nixon . goldberg has won as many trophies as even his most prolific trophy inventing machine might devise , reads a short times profile on the occasion of his th birthday . he takes them seriously but not too seriously , like nearly everything else in life . goldberg s pulitzer prize winning cartoonbut goldberg s engineering studies were not entirely wasted no cartoons left as indelible an impact on popular culture as his mechanical chain reaction illustrations . goldberg drew his cockamamie inventions intermittently from the beginning of his career he drew the first , automatic weight reducing machine , in , and in marcel duchamp published some of goldberg s designs in new york dada . but the majority of these cartoons come from a bi weekly series he drew for the magazine collier s weekly from to called the inventions of professor lucifer g . butts . professor butts the g stood for gorgonzola was a parody of a berkeley engineering professor who had once asked his students to design a machine that could weigh the world . goldberg , one of those students , found this to be a preposterous task . the machines were symbols of man s capacity for exerting maximum effort to accomplish minimal results . the surrealism of goldberg s cartoon inventions in one , someone has sent professor butts a mail bomb , which he uses to build a device that will blow up inflatable armbands to go swimming is meant to entertain , but it also reveals a dark skepticism of the era in which they were made . the machines were symbols , goldberg wrote , of man s capacity for exerting maximum effort to accomplish minimal results . the early th century was a time of great technological upheaval inventions of unprecedented complexity were introduced to the world as novelties and quickly became ubiquitous . charlie chaplin and the billows feeding machine from s modern timesit was also the era of increasing automation , and increasing concern about automation , exemplified in charlie chaplin s masterpiece modern times . one of the film s dystopian curiosities , the billows feeding machine , invented by mr . j . widdecombe billows , has a distinctly rube goldbergian quality to it ampnbspthis is likely no coincidence , as goldberg and chaplin were friends . the billows feeding machine will eliminate the lunch hour , increase your production , and decrease your overhead , the film s narrator announces . don t stop for lunch be ahead of your competitor . a factory worker is strapped into the feeding machine by his neck the device malfunctions spectacularly . many of professor butts inventions blurred the distinction between man and machine , incorporating people and animals into the mechanical process . in idea for blowing up water wings , a giant razor is used to cut a dog s hair , who then catches a cold and sneezes , which fills up the inflatable arm bands . if razor kills spaniel , then you will sink and never know that professor butts has failed for the first time in his life , the caption reads . automatic suicide device for unlucky stock speculators includes a toy glider hitting the head of a dwarf , who triggers the next step by jumping up and down in pain . the things may look impossibly foolish , but at the same time they are quite logical , goldberg said of his inventions . for instance , when i have a goat crying in one of my cartoons , i have to give a satisfactory reason for having him cry . so i have someone take a tin can away from him . the machines built in rube goldberg s name today he never actually built one himself are largely whimsical things any social commentary subsumed by the gee whiz impulse toward engineering for engineering s sake nowhere is this better displayed than in the gate opening machine from s ampnbspthe goonies . they seem to have taken on a new life , too , in our internet era five years ago , the band ok go released a music video featuring a rube goldberg machine that has since been viewed nearly million times joseph herscher , an artist from new zealand , builds rube goldberg machines and posts them to youtube where they re viewed millions of times and a video of a machine built within the game minecraft has been viewed a little over million times . i think the internet gave rube a whole new meaning , a whole new life , jennifer george , rube goldberg s granddaughter told me . any rube goldberg machine worth its salt goes viral . to qualify for the rube goldberg machine contest college nationals , teams must first compete at regionals . the rules are simple machines must be composed of a minimum of steps and a maximum of , and they must complete their run in under two minutes . teams are permitted to use no more than two air compressors , power cords , or water hoses . elements of the machine may not travel beyond its square foot footprint , and machines can be no more than feet tall . the earliest iteration of the rube goldberg machine contest took place for a few years in the early s between two engineering fraternities at purdue . the trophy from that competition ended up with the theta tau fraternity until , when a pledge named lonnie oxley , who was tasked with dusting it off , was inspired to bring the event back to life . reviving the competition took some work the most critical thing , oxley told me over the phone , was getting a second machine . wouldn t be much of a contest with just one machine . the second year , the competition was sponsored by pepsi the task was to pour the soda into a cup . one of the teams , oxley said , built a sign advertising pepsi into their machine . this year , purdue s regional competition was sponsored by general motors and nucor steel . in the late s , rube goldberg s son , george w . george , created a company called rube goldberg , inc . to manage registrations , trademarks , and licenses . eight years ago , jennifer george , rube s granddaughter , took over the family business and decided to grow it from a hodgepodge of events and trinkets to a full fledged enterprise . my father , he was happy to just give the plant enough water so it didn t die , jennifer told me . i am intent on fertilizing this plant , and putting it in the sun , and making sure it s watered every day . somebody asked me last year , where do you see yourself in years ? i said , waiting in line for the rube goldberg roller coaster . that s how i see this thing . i think it s giant . the relevance and appeal of rube goldberg machines today , george told me , is in what it reveals about how technology and the way we live with it has changed . this is a very complex machine , george said , holding up her phone . but is it a rube goldberg ? no . she added , when your phone doesn t work can you fix it ? rube goldberg machines remind us of a time when we could see how the machines around us worked you could pop the hood of your car and theoretically at least fix it , or learn how to . now , you pop the hood of your car and there s a computer inside . a week before the nationals , i visited penn state to meet the society of engineering scientists team and see their machine . the penn state ses team has previously participated in regional rube goldberg machine contests , but they ve never qualified for nationals before . last year , the team didn t compete at all this year s team is full of novices , and they re scrappy . they picked up tricks from watching videos of purdue machines from years past , and they built their machine in an empty office of a labyrinthine engineering building . an engineer is supposed to look at a complicated problem and come up with a simple solution , said freshman rebecca terosky , the team s wide eyed co captain . this , she said , referring to rube goldberg machines , is the opposite of what an engineer is supposed to do . you re using everyday materials , making it whimsical . you don t feel like you re working , you feel like you re playing with toys . on my visit , the team was building a key component that involved a ball falling off a table onto a button , which triggered a wind up car . the members of ses were relaxed someone would hammer in a step and then stop to talk about a chemistry quiz or gossip about a professor with a massage chair in his office before debating the best way to cut foam . the team has a sponsor , however , who is more serious minded about the competition an engineer and penn state alumnus named glen chatfield . chatfield offered the team funds for supplies and travel with the stipulation that they had to take a measured , analytical approach to designing and building their machine . our sponsor wanted to see math in addition to guess and check , terosky said . if someone s giving you money , you want to make them proud . speaking over the phone , chatfield sounded as much like a businessman as an engineer . chatfield said that the kind of cobble it together , craftsman approach to building rube goldberg machines was outdated . the more modern approach is more process oriented , he said . engineering s all about numbers what are the numbers , what do the numbers mean . any product that you design that s done in that brutal way is just not competitive in the marketplace . and that s not the skill that you want your engineers to really have . humor can be a design objective , chatfield told me . but , i mean , how do you quantify humor ? the ses team devised a machine that illustrates a school calendar . the team broke into four groups , each responsible for designing and building separate sections that roughly correspond to the seasons and come together to navigate the viewer through the school year . holidays and changes in the weather are dramatized a santa dumps presents down a chimney for christmas water , signifying spring rain , pours through a tap into a bucket . much to everyone s surprise including their own ses took first place at regionals . we did not expect to win , terosky said . we were just hoping not to embarrass ourselves . by winning , they qualified for nationals by qualifying for nationals , they found themselves facing a new set of problems . our machine is not very durable , terosky said . the drive to the hotel where regionals took place was only minutes , and even in that time parts broke . before making a basic frame , we had to recognize that this has to come apart and go somewhere else . this is a real engineering problem , when you re making airplanes or amusement park rides . it s the most applicable to the real world of engineering , the biggest challenge of the whole competition , she conceded . by saturday morning , the day of the nationals , ses has set up and tested their machine . the space begins to fill up with a crowd of three or four hundred people , many of them children . a cherry picker in the middle of the room is rigged with a camera during the judging process , video of the machines is streamed and projected onto an overwhelmingly large screen over the stage , where , afterwards , awards are presented . ses are set up right next to last year s champions from purdue . rube goldberg machines are fickle by design , and one errant step can derail the best laid machine . the champions first test run of the day fails almost immediately . first question , someone from pspe asks . is it plugged in ? it s not . someone jumps up , plugs it in , and the machine ampnbspruns without issue , telling the story of rube looking for a comic he d drawn , and lost . the machine moves through steps in less than a minute , suggesting a desperate search by rube as he upends his house looking for the comic . at one point , a ball drops , and a mechanized dog springs out of his house to grab it . the machine finishes the cartoon was in a cupboard and dexys midnight runners come on , eileen plays . the name of the machine , i learn , is eileen . i feel like everyone involved in rube goldberg nowadays is really looking to push the limits in terms of engineering feats , junior and team president jordan vallejo told me when i spoke to her on the phone before the competition . she was on the team last year , too , and appeared with them on jimmy kimmel . it s becoming harder to make these machines humorous and playful , but it s important to try , she said . a lot of people think of engineering as a very serious career . which it is ! but it s important to take things lightly , to laugh , to learn from mistakes . on the other side of ses sits the iowa state team . the eye is drawn to this machine in a way that it is not with the others , which are spiky and chaotic and sort of hard to look at . when iowa state arrived the night before , other teams stopped and stared even the champions from purdue sat up a little bit straighter . the machine is detailed and precise , like the others , but without appearing precarious or spindly . as they assembled it , rube goldberg s granddaughter , jennifer george , raised her eyebrows . i ll be interested to see if it works , she said . it s becoming harder to make these machines humorous and playful , but it s important to try . on saturday morning , iowa state is having difficulties . their machine is designed to resemble a big screen television , divided into boxes that contain iconic scenes from movies that the contraption will enact , one after another a movie marathon machine , for watching a dozen movies in three minutes . to everyone s frustration , the truck from the dark knight won t flip . the machine was built , feet above sea level lower than columbus in an uninsulated shed colder than columbus . the team says the condition changes are preventing the air compression device meant to flip the truck from generating sufficient force . after a half dozen incremental pressure increases , the truck is flipping properly but then , something starts smoking . it s an effect , one team member jokes while another scrambles up a ladder to fan away the haze . it s a really good effect . late in the morning , judging begins . surrounded by a crowd of the teams families , visitors , and lots of children , the judges move counterclockwise around the room . before each run , teams have three minutes to introduce and narrate the scenarios their machines depict crews are judged here on their showmanship and storytelling ability . a team from penn state s harrisburg campus is decked out in star wars and star trek costumes as they present their machine , out of this world tale of an outer space pinball . it s hard to follow what is happening in this machine many of the steps are small , move too quickly , or are hidden behind other , more prominent elements . apparently , buried somewhere in the machine , there is a miniature gauss cannon , which one of the judges will later describe as basically a railgun , it s pretty cool . the university of wisconsin barron county s machine is a saccharine , barely functioning tribute to a retiring engineering professor . then come the purdue champions . pspe s experience as engineers and storytellers is evident their speaker is comfortable describing eileen to the growing crowd . during deliberations , one judge would describe the machine itself as the year s most rube goldberg ian . the mechanized dog fetching a dropped ball is a big hit . ses follows purdue . terosky is nervous as she describes their machine , but she is funny and entertaining the calendar machine , working its way through the year in a matter of seconds , doesn t have a narrative story , exactly , so much as an amusing description of one event after another . the machine s first run is perfect the machine doesn t stop once an intervention is necessary on the second run , however i m trying not to be disappointed , just because other people are , terosky tells me . gotta keep morale up . the crowd , which includes or elementary school aged children , cheers when an eraser finally wipes the board clean . after ses , the judges and crowd turn to iowa state . its first run on saturday morning in front of the judges is the first time that the team has tried to run the machine from start to finish . steps start triggering out of order and then the whole thing which , it turns out , is essentially a very long and elaborate marble run sets off all at once . one iowa state team member has to get up and move the marble along with his finger , ushering it through one scene after another . it comes as no surprise when pspe repeats as champions , taking home both the first place prize as well as the prize for funniest step . second place goes to another team from purdue , the american society of mechanical engineers , whose machine a haunted classroom subverts the task by pouring slime over a chalkboard . penn state ses , with their rickety , mostly cardboard machine , takes third . iowa state is awarded best design , even though it didn t really work that well , and it wasn t really a rube goldberg machine , jennifer george said as she presented the award . a year after her father died in , jennifer george attended the rube goldberg competition for the first time . showing up as rube s granddaughter , you re kind of like this strange mascot , she told me . it s like being mother to many , many children . what she saw there upset her . some of those machines were so spectacularly beautiful , but beautiful in a way that a car is a beautiful machine , george recalled . the winning machine was basically a glorified marble run , she said , repeating her criticism of iowa s machine . a beautiful , precision marble run . but it was not a rube goldberg machine . there was nothing about it that was a rube goldberg machine . a week after the competition , i spoke to iowa state senior brendan favo , who designed his school s mechanical movie watching contraption . had our machine worked , we would have been in contention , he said . we were trying to make a machine that was interesting visually , to push what rube goldberg means . maybe maybe not . the team worked on their device every saturday and sunday from the beginning of january up until the competition , with some weeknights thrown in as well . i hate to tell you this , but i don t really know why i did it , favo told me when i asked why he d spent three long months working on the machine . at no time while doing it did i question why it was fun . but there s no great explanation why i built the machine . he added , i just saw it as an opportunity to build something . almost a century old , rube goldberg machines retain their appeal there s something in our brains that likes to see cause and effect played out , to see it in a way that we can understand , joseph herscher , the brooklyn based artist , told me . herscher has judged at the past three college national competitions but was absent this year . most of the technology we live with is designed to be invisible , he said . a computer is the ultimate example it s so advanced , so sophisticated , and yet it s not interesting to watch it run whatsoever . when we watch the movements of a rube goldberg machine , it s our world that we re seeing , and it makes us appreciate our world . you don t see that nowadays . meanwhile , most of goldberg s comics seem dated the jokes don t make sense or are lame , and cultural references fall flat . but some feel as relevant ever , and maybe that s because the technical absurdities that the cartoonist parodied are still very real . our modern era is riddled with machines doing ever less consequential tasks in ever more complex ways . the machines are digital , not mechanical , but the difference between the maximalism of the rube goldberg machine and the minimalism of the iphone is perhaps not so great after all . there are apps that seemingly accomplish the simplest thing hailing a cab in the simplest way a push of a button . but that simple task is the work of thousands of lines of code , hundreds of developers , a billion dollars , and drivers that have gone into making that button do what it does . the mechanisms of our world are not necessarily any more efficient than they ve ever been they re just more obscure , hidden in the invisible digital distance behind our screens . and just like in goldberg s cartoons , there are living things human beings , even caught up in the machine , carrying out their tasks in chain reaction , their movements as sure as gravity itself . all rube goldberg cartoons are copyright heirs of rube goldberg , video by john lagomarsino , ryan manning , and jimmy sheltonillustrations by hallie batemanedited by michael zelenko