 as he traveled the world last year as part of a user research project , michael ducker noticed a problem . ducker , a senior product manager at twitter , was part of a team that visited brazil , india , and indonesia to learn about how people use mobile devices around the world . twitter is courting new users aggressively , and like most tech companies it signs them up with a combination of an email address and password . the problems with passwords are well known they can be hard for us to keep track of , easy for hackers to figure out , and never anything but tedious to type out on your mobile device s tiny keyboard . but in his travels , ducker and his team began to understand the other half of the problem in signing up new users the farther he traveled from america , the less likely it was that anyone he met had an email address . in developing countries , people are more likely to identify themselves via their mobile devices . instead of email addresses , they have cell phones and no way to easily sign up for twitter or other services . but that s all about to change if twitter has its way and developers decide they can trust it again phone numbers will become the primary way we log into our mobile applications , and we ll all have fewer passwords to remember . the further you travel from america , the less likely anyone is to have an email address today at flight , its first developer conference in four years , twitter is unveiling a suite of developer tools aimed at re making mobile applications . and while many of the details are of interest only to developers , twitter is positioning the tool set called fabric as a new start . fabric is actually the next evolution of twitter itself , says kevin weil , vice president of product for revenue at the company . after fabric , as the platform grows , you won t think about twitter as just the consumer app . you ll think about twitter as a broader mobile services company . so fabric is a really big step in that direction for us . introducing digitsfor most people , the most visible part of the new twitter will be digits , the company s password replacement effort . starting soon , developers will be able to use digits to sign up users to their apps . the process has three steps a login screen with an option to sign up via mobile device a screen to enter your phone number , and a screen to enter the confirmation code twitter sends you via sms . the process will look familiar to anyone who has signed up for whatsapp or , more recently , yo . the confirmation code expires after you use it once , so the next time you need to log in to the app , you ll be sent a fresh code . like vine , twitter s video sharing app , digits will operate as a brand unto itself . it has a home at digits . com , where you can manage other apps access to your phone number , or delete your account . for developers , it s a more secure way to bring on users around the world . and for twitter , it s a way to help eliminate passwords . most people use the same passwords repeatedly , and use passwords that are relatively easy to guess . and many buzzy new apps aren t backed by strong security practices . twitter says it is bringing everything it has learned about security since its founding to digits . passwords just suck , ducker says . i go to dinner parties and people say , oh , you work in tech ? can you get rid of the password ? and we re finally getting rid of the password , for the vast majority of use cases . phone numbers aren t perfectly secure it is possible , though not easy , to clone a phone number . but for most people , logging in with a phone number is probably more secure than using an email address and a password . and because the login codes created through digits expire after a single use , there s less danger in hackers obtaining a cache of login information and using it maliciously , as seems to happen every other week . eventually , digits will support two factor authentication for apps , sending users a secondary pin code to use in combination with the expiring codes . a way to diversify twittermuch of twitter fabric was first reported last month by the information . but contrary to that report , registering a number with digits does not create a shadow twitter account . twitter says there is almost no connection between fabric and the consumer app whatsoever . fabric is not primarily a way to attract more users to twitter , they say it s a way to diversify twitter , growing its nascent business of selling tools to mobile developers from a company that was born on cellphones . it s not the only social network to have this idea facebook started doing something similar last year after acquiring the developer service parse . in addition to digits , twitter will also announce new features for mopub , twitter s lucrative advertising platform , and crashlytics , which offers developers free services for beta testing and crash reporting . crashlytics will offer a native development kit for android , let developers troubleshoot problems at the system level and a tool for distributing beta versions of software to testers via an emailed link . and digits is part of a larger module called twitterkit , a new set of apis for twitter that , among other features , enables the same system level sign on for android that twitter already has on ios . log in to your android device with twitter and you ll be able to sign into any other app that has enabled twitter logins . twitter still pays for all those sms messageseverything twitter is announcing today will be free to developers , raising the question of how the company benefits . the company will pay carriers for every sms it sends through digits . the basic idea is that if a critical mass of developers adopts twitter s tools , the company will eventually be able to sell them services to complement the free ones . if you do that , you re providing a very powerful platform for developers , and there s lot of benefits that come down the road from that , weil says . can twitter be trusted ? first , though , twitter has to convince developers to embrace it . the company s relationships with the developers who build on its platform has been strained since , when it unveiled new rules of the road whose primary effect has been to discourage the development of third party twitter clients . a handful remain , but they seem perpetually at risk of disappearing . the developer marco arment , writing this week , said he would never trust twitter again we re just innocent bystanders getting hit whenever this fundamentally insecure , jealous , unstable company changes direction , which happens every few years , wrote arment , who most recently developed overcast , an app for listening to podcasts . twitter will never , and should never , have any credibility with developers again . our api was so open that we allowed people to compete with us . twitter , for its part , says what happened in has little bearing on its platform strategy today . the two situations are completely different so different , in fact , that it doesn t even really make sense to conflate them , honestly , weil says . he named a few companies that have made millions of dollars developing on twitter s platform , including tweetdeck , hootsuite , and the social media monitoring company radian , which sold to salesforce for million . the changes in were intended only to ensure twitter had control over its core service , he says . our api was so open that we allowed people to compete with us , and so there were changes we had to make . if the old twitter developer relationship was about working in tandem to develop a new kind of media company the new relationship is more about using what twitter has learned since then to help developers do just about anything else . today , more than developers are expected at the bill graham civic auditorium in san francisco to hear about what twitter has to say to them . but it may be even more interesting to hear what those developers have to say back to twitter . 