 for techies scanning the headlines over the past few months , one name has become an increasingly common occurrence carl icahn , the legendary vulture capitalist , who first made a name for himself during the leveraged buyout boom of the s , which pillaged profitable corporations for personal profit . these days icahn proudly wears the moniker activist investor , and has been using his billions to shake things up at technology firms like netflix , dell , ebay and apple . why has one of the original barbarians at the gate returned to stir up trouble in tech ? right now , tech companies are overflowing with cash and are extremely well valued compared to other sectors , explains joshua brown , a veteran stock trader turned money manager . icahn is the one guy with enough money of his own to grab these companies by the lapel and say , listen motherfucker , i amprsquom not going away until you give me what i want . amprsquo icahn is the one guy with enough money of his own to grab these companies by the lapel . what exactly does he want ? that depends on the situation . with apple , he is eager to loosen the purse strings on its massive stockpile of overseas cash . with dell , he was fighting to prevent the company from going private unless it paid a higher premium to shareholders . he wanted netflix to sell itself to the highest bidder and he hopes ebay will take his advice and spin out paypal into a separate company . in every case he amprsquos looking for a major shakeup that will unlock value for shareholders , himself included . to understand icahn amprsquos seemingly unending appetite for high level corporate confrontations , you need to go back to his roots . in the s , a class of high profile investors rose out of the world of leveraged buyouts lbos . typically this meant they were finding companies with strong balance sheets , borrowing heavily against that cash flow to buy up stock , then attempting a forced takeover of said company . companies took to buying back the shares icahn controlled at a premiuminvestors like icahn would sell junk bonds for percent or more of the funds they needed to acquire a stock position large enough to wrest control of board seats . from there it was a matter of unlocking value at the company , typically by selling off assets , spinning off valuable divisions , or shedding employee overhead . when the stock rose on these moves , the raiders would sell out , pocketing a nifty profit , and sometimes saddling the company they had invaded with much of the debt built up to acquire its stock in the first place . companies took to buying back the shares icahn controlled at a premium , a practice known as greenmailing , rather than trying to battle him in the boardroom . this obviously raised many eyebrows in both government and finance as a ruthless and unsustainable business practice . it was a particularly heated topic after icahn amprsquos takeover of twa , the legendary airline founded by howard hughes . he used cheap debt to finance the takeover and a few years later took the company private . it then became his piggybank , providing the cash icahn used as collateral in a number of big deals . icahn eventually sold off twa amprsquos most valuable routes , saddled the company with million in obligations , and pocketed a hefty profit for himself on the way out . when the company went bankrupt in , it was viewed by many , especially in the former twa hub of st . louis , as the raping and pillage of a corporate icon . nbcu photo bank via getty images the mantra of the raiders was , amplsquogreed is good . amprsquo in researching the story i chatted with my own father , who worked at a company called papercraft in the s . he remembers with grim humor the era of leveraged buyouts . a lot of corporations back then put more emphasis on rewarding the community and employees than maximizing shareholder value , he said . the mantra of the raiders was , amplsquogreed is good . amprsquo the new owners made drastic cuts and improved the bottom line . but often they also weighed the company down with debt based on wild predictions about how they could transform its potential . papercraft went bankrupt six years after the buyout , and ampnbspthe junk bonds issued to buy it became worthless . the carl icahn of today is simultaneously a gentler and more frightening opponent for one simple reason he no longer needs any debt to buy his way into multibillion dollar firms . over the last decade , through a series of successful moves , icahn has become the sole force behind icahn enterprises lp , a diversified holding company that puts him in command of roughly billion in capital . as essentially the wealthiest individual hedge fund manager of all time , he is in an extremely rare position , explains brown . nobody can tell him what to do or what not to do . nobody can tell him what to do or what not to do . interestingly , in the age of social media , icahn has discovered that he doesn amprsquot necessarily need to put huge mountains of cash to work in order to get his way . his modus operandi hasn amprsquot changed much since the s , says paul kedrosky , an investor and author of the popular finance blog , infectious greed . but he amprsquos learned that he can use the megaphone of twitter to do a lot of the heavy lifting . all it took was a single tweet from icahn to send the value of apple shares up percent , or roughly billion . few people see icahn amprsquos moves as anything like the predatory raids of the s . while corporations in my father amprsquos time might not have moved fully into the modern era , today amprsquos technology giants have few employees relative to their size , accountants sizing up every tax loophole , and plenty of fat around the middle . tech companies have gotten away for far too long with far too much cash on their balance sheets , says kedrosky . i applaud carl for forcing people to think hard about why they are carrying so much , and for pushing them to return some of it to investors . apple shares rose percent on a tweet from icahnof course it s not all benevolent bullying . the older , more rapacious icahn and his newer , milder self mingle together in his recent demand that ebay spin off paypal . he did this after building up a roughly percent stake , arguing that each individual company would be worth more as a standalone business than they are under the safe corporate roof . it amprsquos not the first time someone has suggested this play , as paypal has consistently outgrown its parent company and contributed a wider margin to its profits . spinning it out would no doubt create a handsome reward for current shareholders , but probably weaken ebay in the long run . it amprsquos a classic icahn move ampmdash one that on paper could be justified as shareholder activism , ampmdash but often has little upside for the company , its employees , and its longer term stakeholders . of course there are numerous occasions where icahn applied pressure but failed to force a change in management or strategy . in some cases he lost money on these outings , but just as often he has profited , as the media coverage around his takeover bids prompted a dramatic run up in the share price . in a recent example , netflix refused to bend to his will , yet icahn earned at least million because of the rise in its stock . he has a great eye for companies with upside , says brown . a lot of times , even when he gets nothing he asks for , he wins . 