 this was supposed to be the year virtual reality broke out . the oculus rift and htc vive , the first two high end consumer devices on the market , arrived this spring to critical praise and preorders that sold out within minutes . then they plateaued . despite some great experiences , months of near total unavailability dulled the post release buzz for both headsets , particularly the rift . neither the rift or the vive ecosystems produced a killer app that was big enough to push vr out of the margins , especially given the high cost of a headset and gaming pc . while degree video has at least gotten a toehold in popular culture , the dream of sophisticated vr gaming which arguably resurrected virtual reality in the first place remains far away for most people . but there are three months left in the year , and one thing that could change that playstation vr . playstation vr is sony s attempt at bringing virtual reality to its playstation console , starting next week . arriving right in time for the holidays , it s being positioned as a relatively cheap , unintimidating gaming headset , designed for a device that might already be sitting in your living room . the rift and vive had to be judged on a sort of abstract scale of quality on whether they were good ambassadors for the medium of vr , and good harbingers of things to come . the question for playstation vr is simpler if you re one of the millions of people who own a playstation , should you get one ? playstation vr was initially announced as something called project morpheus in , and despite some visual tweaks , the core design hasn t changed . where oculus goes for an understated , late gibsonian cyberpunk aesthetic and the vive is aggressively industrial , sony s design has the clean white curves of a s science fiction spaceship interior , setting off a black front panel and rubber face mask . the external playstation camera tracks it with a matrix of glowing blue lights six lining the headset s edges , two on the back , and one right in the middle of the front panel . the shape echoes sony s old hmz personal viewer , but without the futile effort at making a headset seem small and sleek . playstation vr is unapologetically eye catching , and whether that s a good or bad thing is a matter of personal taste . playstation vr is unapologetically eye catchinglooks aside , playstation vr is ridiculously comfortable . your average virtual reality headset is strapped on like a ski mask , which ensures a snug fit but can also squeeze your face unpleasantly . psvr , by contrast , has a padded plastic ring that rests on your head a bit like a hard hat . to put it on , you ll push a button to loosen the sides , stretch it over your upper skull , and fine tune the tightness with a dial on the back . the screen is anchored to the front of the ring , where it almost floats in front of your face . another button lets you adjust the focus by sliding the screen in and out , which also means it fits easily over glasses . psvr still asks you to clamp something around your head , and it s certainly possible to give yourself a headache by putting it on wrong . but its weight is distributed much more evenly than other headsets , so it s not constantly pushing down on your forehead and cheekbones . at grams , it s the heaviest of the vr headsets , but it feels like the lightest . the design also neatly solves a few of vr s subtler problems . i didn t come out of sessions with telltale mask lines around my eyes , just a small dent at my hairline . i d still worry about smudging makeup , but far less than with any other headset . and since the face mask is made of rubber sheets instead of foam , it s not going to be soaking up dirt or sweat . that rubber also blocks out light incredibly well , neatly closing the gaps between your face and the screen . the only major downside is that it starts slipping out of place if you look straight up or rapidly shake your head , something that becomes an issue with gaze controlled arcade games like playstation vr worlds danger ball . the thing that s going to draw a lot of people to playstation vr , though , is the price . well , that s technically the price , although it s also a bit of a sneaky move on sony s part . this base system doesn t contain the playstation s tracking camera , which is mandatory for psvr , or the two move controllers , which are highly encouraged . the reasoning is that since both these products were already on the market , some users will already have them . but unless you were a really big fan of johann sebastian joust or some other game that used one of sony s niche peripherals , you should consider the psvr bundle which comes with two move controllers and a camera your default choice . even at nearly , psvr is still cheaper than the rift and viveto make things more complicated , you ll also have to decide whether to buy the more powerful playstation pro console when it comes out in november . the pro is supposed to improve the frame rate and image quality of psvr , but we haven t been able to test the performance for ourselves and sony is still promising that psvr will work fine with the playstation and playstation slim . even at nearly , psvr is still cheaper than the rift and vive , which respectively cost and plus the cost of a pc . that s partly because sony isn t pushing for the highest specs on the market . where the rift and vive incorporate two separate screens with a resolution of x pixels per eye , playstation vr has a single screen that offers x pixels per eye , comparable to the second oculus rift development kit . on paper , this is the system s biggest technical limitation . it s grainier than its two big competitors , which still look a little fuzzy in their own right , and dark colors can appear muddy . but screen resolution isn t the only factor in how good something looks . sony likes to tout the psvr s high screen refresh rate as a way to compensate for its lower resolution . and games are in fact quite smooth , with very little juddering or latency which , far more than pixel density , was the big problem with the rift dk . the field of view feels comparable to the current rift and vive , and bright , cartoonish games like job simulator look very similar on any high end headset . compared to the awkward dangling headset jack on the htc vive , this feels convenient and naturalplaystation vr isn t just competing against tethered headsets . with samsung s gear vr on its third generation and google s first daydream headset launching in november , mobile vr is an increasingly viable option and a cheaper one , if you already own a phone that supports it . but it s not in the same class as psvr . mobile headsets don t have things like positional tracking , which can help cut down on motion sickness and open up new gameplay options , and they can t touch psvr s comfort levels or graphical performance . they re not necessarily a worse category of virtual reality , but they re a very different one . psvr also includes some interesting touches that aren t present on any major headset , tethered or untethered . midway down the cable , for example , there s an inline remote with buttons for power , volume , and toggling a built in microphone . headphones aren t built directly into the hardware , but the remote has a jack for either sony s included earbuds or your own wired set . compared to the awkward dangling headset jack on the htc vive , this feels convenient and natural , although i accidentally yanked my earbuds out a couple of times by kneeling in vr and catching the cord on my leg . you can pair wireless headphones with the playstation for stereo sound , but sony says you can only get d audio directly through the jack . for every thoughtful design decision , though , there s a reminder that playstation vr isn t a totally novel gaming system , but a patchwork of various weird sony experiments that may have finally found their purpose . it s a new headset inspired by a personal d theater from , paired with a set of motion controllers that were released in , plus a camera peripheral that s been around in some form since . for now , the motion controllers are the system s biggest shortcomingon one hand , sony deserves credit for seeing the potential in all these things . on the other , it s saddled playstation vr with the worst motion controls of any major headset . the playstation move controllers are painfully limited compared to either oculus touch or the htc vive remotes , simply because their interface is a bad fit for vr . they re pimpled with four miniscule face buttons that are almost pointless for anything but menu selections , with inlaid , difficult to find options buttons along the sides . the only useful elements are a single trigger and one large , awkwardly positioned button at the top . the move was originally paired with a second , smaller peripheral bearing an analog stick and directional pads without it , navigating menus including the main ps interface involves dragging your controller like the world s clumsiest mouse . they can also be frustratingly inconsistent . in the leisurely job simulator , i had almost no problems using them . but during the frantic rail shooter until dawn rush of blood , where precision was a matter of virtual life or death , i had to repeatedly reorient them after they drifted out of place . since i haven t had a chance to fully review the oculus touch motion controllers , i can t make a final call on how much of this is a weakness of the move specifically or of camera based tracking in general , but move has enough shortcomings to put it on the bottom of the pile no matter what . if the first generation of psvr does well , sony will almost certainly have to follow up with something better , but for now , the motion controllers are the system s biggest shortcoming . even setting psvr up in the first place is a bit more complicated than its unintimidating heritage suggests . instead of plugging directly into the playstation , the headset uses a separate processor box that helps mix d audio and supply video to both psvr and tv . you connect the box to a power outlet and your tv s hdmi port , then connect it to your ps via a micro usb and hdmi cable . the camera goes into a dedicated port on the console , and finally , the headset connects to the other side of the box . this can create a bit of a rat s nest around your console , and it leaves precious little space for juicing up your move and dualshock controllers , unless you buy a separate charging dock . it s not quite as involved as the htc vive s room scale setup , but it s several more steps than the oculus rift requires . playstation vr fits into a popular , user friendly systemunlike with the rift or vive , though , the setup is nearly impossible to screw up . there s no third party pc software to install or drivers to track down , just a few screens that guide you through setup and make any necessary updates . once you re in , you ll see the ordinary playstation vr interface , as though viewed on a big screen tv in front of you . in some ways , this feels like a letdown you have to launch a game to experience psvr s full impact . but it s immediately easy to understand , and after a while , any decent electronic interface tends to fade into the background , even in vr . overall , what s great about playstation vr is that it fits into a popular , user friendly system . but that also sets certain expectations that other headsets don t have . oculus and htc can ask people to set up precisely calibrated personal holodecks without a second thought , because pc gaming is already a somewhat solitary activity that goes hand in hand with ridiculous hardware setups . playstation vr s natural habitat is an all purpose entertainment space that you might share with any number of people , including ones who couldn t care less about vr . like the playstation itself , psvr feels best as something you can kick back and enjoy without rearranging your living room into a vr cave . psvr s camera is supposed to track a headset up to feet away , over an area about feet wide . in my new york apartment , that s more than enough , especially because the system s standing experiences rarely require moving more than a couple of feet . but if you ve got a particularly big living room , you might need to move your couch or camera for seated games . the camera stand that my review unit came with was also a little too easy to knock out of place . to its credit , though , the playstation vr s cable is long enough to easily accommodate a good sized space between seat and tv , and when it s working , the camera seems to track head motion about as well as the oculus rift . for some people , psvr s main use case may not be true virtual reality , but playing traditional games in relative privacy . opening a non vr game in psvr will launch it normally on your tv or monitor , and on a floating screen inside the headset . to be clear , psvr doesn t let you use the playstation for two things at once one person can t watch netflix while another plays games , for example . but after the first time setup , i was able to play without a second screen turned on or plugged in at all . besides the allure of having a big personal theater , this opens the door to things like playing a violent game without your kids watching , or letting a housemate use your shared tv with another console or set top box . conversely , if you like gaming around other people even if that just means sitting down to play while your partner reads beside you then shutting out the world with a vr game isn t necessarily a welcome change . even if someone can see what you re doing via the mirrored screen , you can t tell if they re in the room , which is an uncomfortable and alienating experience . there are a couple of local multiplayer games like keep talking and nobody explodes , in which one player wears a headset and the other coaches them through a bomb defusal from outside vr . but there s no getting around the fact that headsets can be isolating , and it s more jarring than usual here because of how social the regular console gaming experience usually is . sony is promising around launch titles for playstation vr , with a couple of dozen more coming by the end of the year . it s a relatively even mix of gamepad based games and ones that can use either the move or dualshock , plus a few that are move only . for all the move s problems , there s something inherently cool about motion controls that work even moderately well , and some titles use them to great effect . the adventure game wayward sky takes place mostly in the third person , as you point at different parts of the world to direct your character . at key moments , it slips into a first person view and lets you mime simple but satisfying tasks , like putting together a machine or aiming a fire hose . sony s struck gold with a little clutch of trance y abstract gamesrock band and guitar hero studio harmonix , meanwhile , has put together a psychedelic painting program where your art pulses to the beat of a playlist the closest thing psvr has to a pure creative tool . sony s minigame the london heist is a guy ritchie influenced shooter that would probably be better on the rift or vive , but is fun enough to transcend its clumsy controls . you can technically play these with a gamepad , and the dualshock has limited motion tracking capabilities of its own thanks to a light bar on the back . but unless you re determined to avoid buying the move , there s no reason to do so . by and large , though , the most exciting playstation vr titles i ve seen are gamepad focused and sometimes not even exclusive to vr . at launch , the system is short on the big narrative games you ll find in playstation s non vr catalog , although resident evil is coming to psvr next year . but sony s struck gold with a little clutch of trance y abstract games that are simultaneously relaxing and challenging . that includes a vr enabled remake of musical shooter rez , a tetris style puzzler called superhypercube , and thumper , a hypnotic rhythm game with sinister undertones . these aren t enough to anchor psvr in the long term , but they help establish a unique aesthetic for the system , while appealing to a broader audience than a stereotypical aaa action game . all this adds up to a system that is , more than anything else , good enough . there s no one game that justifies buying playstation vr , and no technical breakthrough that will revolutionize how you experience the medium . but it offers a balanced , interesting launch catalog and a headset that s a joy to wear , with weak points that hurt the system but don t cripple it . it effectively costs more than an actual playstation console , but for many people , it s still within the range of a holiday splurge or a generous gift . and it s got the backing of a company that , even if it s being cautious with vr , seems in it for the long haul . in the long run , would a psvr dominated landscape be a win for vr ? for now , it s the lowest common denominator of tethered headsets , and a world in which all games had to work on it could discourage risky creative experiments on more capable and interesting hardware . playstation vr is just ambitious enough for sony to test the waters for a larger foray into vr its limited camera setup doesn t lend itself to the impressive physical worldbuilding that i ve seen in htc vive games , and sony isn t as visibly committed as oculus to pushing bold , difficult vr only projects . things that could have been great as full length games , like the london heist or batman arkham vr , peter out just as things get exciting . until vr proves itself an economically viable medium , we ll probably get a lot more of them . at the same time , holding out for total perfection is the wrong move . i don t want playstation vr to become the only headset that people build for it s just not ambitious enough . but even this early in the game , sony is providing a home for interesting , low key experiences that highlight some of the medium s strengths . more than any single piece of cutting edge technology , the key to making vr succeed is just getting more people to use vr . and with playstation vr , sony has just made that a lot easier . good stuff ridiculously comfortable accessible and relatively affordable some good , low key launch titlesbad stuff substandard motion controls piecemeal system can be confusing needs more risky , ambitious vr experiments editor nilay patel 