 for years , bitcoin has been the silk road s biggest strength . escrow wallets let money change hands safely and easily , bitcoin tumblers let users keep drug transactions at arm s length , and , for a while at least , it kept everyone off the radar of law enforcement . in return , the silk road gave bitcoin its first major infusion of die hard users , a base that would drive the currency higher and higher . the so called prosecution futures are coming duebut now , as ross ulbricht defends himself against charges of running the silk road and profiting from drug transactions , bitcoin may be the single biggest problem for his defense . the same features that made silk road possible have now turned against him , and casual observers are realizing that bitcoin isn t as anonymous as they thought . the public bitcoin ledger details ulbricht s enormous financial holdings and a wealth of potentially incriminating transactions . now that his wallet address has been discovered , the perfect anonymity tool has turned into the perfect source of evidence . skeptics sometimes called the currency prosecution futures , and now it looks like some of those futures are coming due . the problem is coming into focus because of new details about ulbricht s defense strategy , made clear in yesterday s opening statement . the defense is admitting from the outset that ulbricht created the silk road and ran it for the early months , a bold tactic that many are concerned may backfire . instead of claiming a full mistaken identity , the defense is simply claiming ulbricht didn t profit from the drug trade that happened on the silk road , having already handed off the site to an unnamed accomplice . as lead defense attorney joshua dratel put it in his opening statement yesterday , the real dread pirate roberts is still out there . bitcoin is insanely traceable . as a result , all the prosecution has to do is prove ulbricht was profiting off the silk road s drug transactions something that bitcoin s public blockchain makes it easy to do . every bitcoin transaction is publicly recorded in the collective blockchain , giving researchers an easy view of how much is in any account at a given time . bitcoin is insanely traceable , says nicholas weaver , a researcher at uc berkeley s international computer science institute . the silk road bitcoins are well known , not just the ones seized but the entire cloud of bitcoins . add in the known purchases from law enforcement , and it becomes downright trivial to create the history cluster that is silk road . this kind of tracing has become a popular subject for bitcoin minded academics , and with access to the silk road s server logs , there should be plenty of evidence connecting silk road transactions to ulbricht s personal wallet , which was seized as part of the initial raid . that s not the same as convincing a jury , but it s likely to cause serious problems for ulbricht s defense in the very near future . blockchain problems have also cropped up in the defense s treatment of the million found in ulbricht s bitcoin wallet . the defense is claiming it was simply currency trading revenue , created by the astronomical rise in the value of bitcoin over the period in question but the blockchain makes it easy to check that claim . prosecutors can easily see all the transactions that wallet made . making the claim that this was revenue from trading is a very dangerous claim to make , says weaver . the defense attorney better hope ulbricht really was a brilliant bitcoin trader , because that defense is easy to shred otherwise . if ulbricht really did control , bitcoin in , that money would show up in the wallets he controlled at the time . if the money can t be found , it suggests the currency trading story isn t much more than hot air . the defense attorney better hope ulbricht really was a brilliant bitcoin trader , because that defense is easy to shred otherwise . ironically , it would have been much easier to conceal these assets in the traditional financial system . conventional money laundering is still an enormous headache for prosecutors , and subpoenaing the transaction records for an offshore bank is much harder than simply checking the blockchain . even earlier cryptocurrencies like liberty reserve would have made it harder to trace money as it flowed through the system . it also would have been harder to seize . as long as law enforcement doesn t know about a given stash , that money can also be used to pay associates under the table , an extremely common tactic for evading organized crime prosecutions . but as far as we can tell , ulbricht didn t get any of those benefits . police seized ulbricht s bitcoin wallet along with his laptop , and he s since filed a forfeiture motion admitting that all the bitcoins were his . it might be the simplest million seizure the fbi has ever made . all these issues stem from a misunderstanding of bitcoin itself . the service isn t technically anonymous it s pseudonymous . each wallet has a hard and persistent identity and a wealth of data associated with that identity . if you don t know who s behind a given wallet , that looks a lot like anonymity , but once a person is tied to a given wallet , their financial activity becomes instantly and painfully public . that feature has been important in the past , most notably in the aftermath of the mt . gox theft , but it s never played out as publicly as it did in the ulbricht case . it s a realization that s already sending shockwaves through the bitcoin world . the exchange rate has plummeted in the hours since ulbricht s defense attorney spoke , falling under for the first time in more than a year . it s hard to say for sure that the drop is connected , and in the long term , it may well be good news for the currency , driving out criminal activity in favor of more innovative uses . still , as the currency s most infamous customer stands trial , the world is less sure of bitcoin than its ever been . 