 late on friday night , intel snuck out the news that it s bailing on the smartphone market . despite being the world s best known processor maker , intel was only a bit player in the mobile space dominated by qualcomm , apple , and samsung , and it finally chose to cut its losses and cancel its next planned chip , broxton . this followed downbeat quarterly earnings , , job cuts , and a major restructuring at a company that s had a very busy april . intel is still one of the giants of the global tech industry , but it s no longer as healthy and sprightly as it used to be . the bane of intel s existence for the past decade or so has been the transition to mobile computing . it wasn t supposed to be that way . having secured a commanding lead as the premier provider of desktop pc processors , intel had a clear eyed strategy for extending its dominance into the mobile realm . a series of ignominious failures has left intel reelingwith the help of microsoft in , intel inaugurated the category of ultra mobile pcs umpcs , which were the stylus and touch friendly precursors to today s ultra versatile tablets . they combined low voltage celeron and pentium m chips with windows vista , and like everything else touched by vista , they flopped . unattainable pricing and inadequate battery life consigned the umpc to the status of a historical footnote . the same fate befell intel s mobile internet device mid initiative , which saw the chipmaker pushing and incentivizing its hardware partners to build mini internet tablets like the nokia n . pervasive problems with affordability , battery life , clunky design , and ill suited software prevented mids from ever becoming a mass market success . on the software front , intel recognized the need for a tailored operating system to make the most of mobile pcs and sought to develop its own linux variant titled moblin . moblin never convinced anyone outside of intel , and was eventually merged with nokia s maemo to produce meego , which in turn merged with samsung s bada and is now known as tizen . well , it s only barely known , even by owners of its most successful product , the gear s smartwatch . the series of post moblin software mergers has been merely the consolidation of repeated mobile failures . read more intel spent more than billion to catch up in mobile , then it gave upintel s ventures into mobile hardware and software development show that even a great idea is only as good as its execution . the mids and umpcs of yesteryear were aimed at the same usage scenarios as the phablets and pro tablets of today but they were compromised and premature , and therefore rejected by the market . this has cost intel dearly , with the company lavishing billions on developing suitable processors and modems to put into its various mobile undertakings . the multibillion dollar mobile costs have spiraled in recent years a loss of . billion in was followed by a loss of . billion in which eventually forced intel to combine its mobile and pc earnings reports in order to disguise its unproductive spending . the tragedy of intel s mobile failure is that the company foresaw all the threats to its business and acted to preempt them . it just didn t do so very well . that being said , intel s the victim of its bad decision making almost as much as its poor execution . favoring wimax over lte was a historically bad decisionone of the fateful choices that intel made around was to commit itself to wimax as the g standard of the future . qualcomm went the other way , prioritizing lte instead , and now the latter has a significant lead in designing and integrating lte modems , while the former is scrambling and struggling to catch up . the total defeat of wimax almost wiped out sprint , its biggest us purveyor and advocate , and it put intel on the backfoot in adopting the true g standard of the future , which turned out to be lte . at this point , even if intel were to double its already vast spending , bridging the gap of years of research , development , and experience would be practically impossible . in spite of its unhappy mobile history , intel persisted in trying to compete because it knew how central mobile devices were becoming to our lives . last year , its atom processors even looked like they had a shot at denting qualcomm s market dominance , thanks in large part to the qualcomm snapdragon chip s power and heat issues . there was a small opening , but this year s snapdragon is an absolute beast that conclusively shuts the door on any further intel incursions . read more intel sees itself as a communications and connectivity company the top three smartphone vendors apple , samsung , and huawei each produce their own processors . at mobile world congress this year , xiaomi , another large scale smartphone maker , co branded its launch event with qualcomm . and global names like lg , htc , and sony basically only shop at the snapdragon aisle for their flagship phones . intel s most loyal hardware partner is asus , which makes a habit of announcing interesting new devices at computex in june and not shipping them until the end of the year . the most feted intel atom powered smartphone to date is probably the zenfone , a distinction that speaks for itself . without any unique advantages to its atom cpu line and no captive market like it has on the desktop , intel is right to bow out of the smartphone processor race . it s a merciless competition that has already ousted big names like nvidia and texas instruments , and intel will be better off figuring out different parts of the mobile computing world where it can participate profitably . ceo brian krzanich put the cloud and data center first atop a list of intel s new priorities in a recent blog post , reiterating the idea that the company will transition to facilitating connectivity as its main area of competence . discrete intel lte modems will still be around , and the company seems to think it can recapture its mobile competitiveness by being a leader in the adoption of the incoming g wireless standards . to that end , intel doesn t intend to kill off atom entirely , and still plans to offer a chip for tablets later this year , codenamed apollo lake . even moore s law is hitting a wallto its credit , intel has always operated under the assumption that mobile computing will eventually supplant the desktop and consign the old pc boxes to niche use status . we email on our phones , ideate on our phablets , and write and create on our tablets as steven sinofsky , former boss of windows , recently articulated with respect to the ipad pro . the primary form of personal computer is changing , which is why ultrabooks and hybrid laptops are so prominent in intel s marketing and development efforts . the low power core m , intel told me last year , was the most important variant of the skylake processor family , and the company s ongoing mission is to move with its users to more portable form factors . intel remains a diverse and strongly profitable company . there will always be pc gamers and video producers looking for the latest and fastest cpu . but while the core business that s kept intel going for so many years isn t disappearing , its importance and primacy are being steadily eroded by the insatiable growth of mobile computing . even moore s law , the intel co founder s prediction about the constant growth of processing power in chips , is hitting a wall now . intel s desktop cpus are being pushed further back on the roadmap while some of its mobile ones are being deleted entirely . it s an uncertain future for what used to be one of the most assured companies in tech . 