 an exploding phone seems like a freak accident , but the same chemical properties that make batteries work also make them likely to catch fire . samsung is learning this the hard way , as it becomes the latest company to recall a device in this case , its new galaxy note phone because the batteries could be dangerous . when batteries explode , it s often the failure of manufacturers to make sure no explosion will happen . exploding batteries can be the consequence of overeager companies pushing technology to the limit . as our screens gets bigger and phones more powerful , they need more energy , but most of us are unwilling to give up battery life or charging speed . we ve already achieved almost percent of the maximum battery life theoretically possible from the lithium ion battery , according to lynden archer , a materials scientist at cornell university , so manufacturers are pushing the limits more and more to eke out only a little bit more energy . there s been a bit of an arms race where every manufacturer of a smartphone wants to get the highest battery life , he says . this trend in the field is producing more and more of a tendency for overcharging so all these models of failure are becoming more commonplace . samsung blames the galaxy note recall on the fact that , in some devices , two parts of the battery that should not have touched came together . but there are many common ways for rechargeable lithium ion batteries to break , and this usually happens because we keep demanding more from the devices . lithium ion batteries are the type used in almost all smartphones and electronics . engineers use lithium because it s light and can hold a lot of energy . as we reported earlier , samsung has stressed that reports of problematic batteries account for less than . percent of the entire volume sold but there s no doubt that this global recall is more than just a minor snafu for the consumer electronics giant . the note launched just a few weeks ago and was met with mostly positive reviews , including our own . more importantly , samsung managed to make waves in the smartphone market weeks before apple launched its highly anticipated new iphone . now , samsung s successful launch has been marred by exploding batteries . to understand what makes a battery safe , it s helpful to know how they work . there are two electrodes , or electrical conductors , on opposite sides . one electrode holds positively charged ions and is called the cathode . the cathode is filled with lithium and that is where the fuel is stored . the opposite electrode holds negatively charged ions and is called the anode . during charging , lithium ions move from the cathode to the anode . when the battery is in use , the lithium moves in the opposite direction . in between are ampnbspchemicals called electrolytes that conduct the current by helping ions move more easily between the two sides . but even though ions need to move from side to side , the anode and the cathode themselves should never touch because they ll redirect energy to the electrolytes . to prevent this from happening , battery makers insert separators in between . batteries can fail when they re charged too much or too fastthat s what went wrong with the galaxy note the separators were flawed and let the two electrodes touch . this is considered the worst possible failure because it will most certainly lead to fire and possibly even an explosion , says archer . when the electrodes come into contact , all the energy being pumped into the battery goes directly to the electrolytes in the middle instead of in the electrodes on the side . electrolytes aren t very stable to begin with and the quick movement they facilitate also leads to instability . when there s a lot of heat whether through the two electrodes touching , or something as simple as it being too hot outside ampnbspit can make the electrolyte react with the other chemicals and create gas in a way that releases even more heat . each time the chemicals react , the gases release more and more heat at a faster and faster rate . this creates an uncontrolled positive feedback loop called thermal runaway , which can end in a fire . this is why many phones shut down automatically when it s hot . but there are other ways that batteries become explosive . they can also fail when they re charged too much , or too fast . overcharging is like filling up a bucket with too much water . it doesn t matter how slowly you go because if you pour in too much , the bucket will overflow . in the case of batteries , overcharging happens when too much lithium goes into the anode . this isn t something you risk from keeping your phone plugged in all night ampnbspmost batteries are designed to automatically prevent overcharging . rather , it s a manufacturer defect that can happen when the circuitry that prevents this from happening is faulty . the battery is like a rubber band , says dan steingart , a materials scientist at princeton university . when you re charging the battery , you re stretching the rubber band when you re using it , you re releasing ampnbspit . just like a rubber band can break if you stretch it too much , putting too much energy into one side will ruin the battery . some scientists are developing a kind of electrolyte that won t burst into flamesthen there s the problem of going too fast . this means trying to drive too much current into the battery , which is a danger for the so called fast charging technology . though they weren t the issue here , samsung does offer fast charging tech . if the charger is incompatible with the battery for any reason , the battery can also short out . this can be avoided by making sure the charger and the battery are meant to work together . charging too much or too fast can lead to a problem called plating . think of the battery like two egg crates . lithium ions need to shuttle between the spaces in the two egg plates to be safely deposited inside , says steingart . if you charge the battery slowly , the lithium has time to find its spot in the egg crate as it goes back and forth . but go too quickly or have too much , and lithium will just deposit itself on the outside of the egg crate and then onto itself . then , each time you recharge , the lithium builds on itself and forms needle like structures called dendrites that can internally short out the battery . the last common source of failure happens when companies try to make batteries store more power by increasing voltage . voltage is a way to measure force . think of voltage like the height of a waterfall , while current is like the amount of water flowing . the higher the voltage , the more power there is in the battery , so manufacturers try to pump this up by adding elements like nickel to the lithium . but again ampnbsp the higher the voltage is , the more likely the electrolytes are to combine in a way that makes them catch fire . some scientists are trying to develop a kind of electrolyte that won t burst into flames as easily . these electrolytes , called ionic liquids , need a lot more heat to form flammable gas , says surya moganty , a chemical engineer who is the chief technology officer of nohms technology . these are often much safer , but there can be challenges with battery life , he says . until we get there though , most of us are stuck with lithium ion batteries . the very fact that these work is an engineering marvel , says steingart , but that doesn t take away from the instability of the devices . anything that can hold this much energy and you can potentially get all the energy out in a couple minutes you should treat like a potential bomb regardless of what it s made out of , he adds . battery tech is continually advancing , but not at the rate of our desire for faster charging and longer battery life and it s up to the manufacturers to remember this , and protect us from what we want . this story was originally published on september , and has been updated to include video . 