 when sprint retires an aging network early next month , it will effectively be shutting off affordable internet access for thousands of americans , ampnbspa lawsuit filed yesterday alleges . the suit revolves around wimax , a g candidate in competition with lte . last year , sprint announced it would be ampnbspshuttering its wimax network in favor of the lte standard . but tied to wimax are nonprofits behind two projects , mobile beacon and mobile citizen . the nonprofits provide affordable broadband access to low income areas and educational institutions across the country , and they say sprint has made it impossible to switch to lte . the lawsuit claims problems started when sprint took overthe nonprofits suing the company have spectrum airwaves , essentially that were granted to them by the fcc for educational uses . in , the nonprofits cut a deal with the telecom clearwire , which provided service through wimax . the nonprofits leased part of their spectrum to clearwire so the company could build out its coverage . in exchange , the nonprofits received cash payments , access to a network , and equipment usually mobile hotspots that could be resold to schools , libraries , low income social programs , and other nonprofit institutions at a discounted rate . but sprint fully acquired clearwire in , and according to the lawsuit , problems came soon after . sprint has allegedly put up technical roadblocks that have made the switch to lte unfeasible , potentially blocking low income institutions from migrating to the new standard and depriving the poor of their only means of internet access . sprint announced last year that it would shut down its wimax network on november th of this year . when it made the announcement , the company allegedly sought new contract terms to switch the nonprofits over to lte ahead of the planned shutoff date . the nonprofits have maintained that sprint is straying from the terms of the deal it inherited from clearwire , and which it s bound to uphold . the dispute wore on toward the deadline , and in march , a temporary bridge agreement was made that would migrate percent of the nonprofits accounts to the new network . but mobile citizen and mobile beacon say the switch was a disaster for the programs that participated . sprint , they say , began to unfairly throttle internet traffic for users , capping schools data , for example , at gb , far below what they need to operate . after users met that threshold , sprint allegedly slowed speeds to kbps , or about half of what the fcc recommends for basic web browsing . according to mobile beacon and mobile citizen , sprint doesn t offer such low quality service to any of its customers and , they say , it s bound by contract to offer them the best available service . the nonprofits also allege that sprint said equipment was out of stock when organizations needed it , and that it hasn t adequately provided the technical support necessary for the affordable access programs to work . some customers who made the switch were left with such a headache that they had to search for service elsewhere , or end their low cost internet programs entirely , says katherine messier , managing director of mobile beacon . the nonprofits say the shutdown will affect , americansmessier points to examples like libraries , which provide hotspots through an affordable access program that may be in danger . other programs that made the switch have canceled their service entirely . it s really a crisis for them , she says . ed garcia , library director at rhode island s cranston public library , says the library partnered with mobile beacon to buy affordable hotspots , and uses them for events , like digital literacy classes and remote library card sign ups . but the library couldn t make the migration to lte , he says , because sprint didn t have available hotspots . now , the library is waiting to see if their network access is shut off entirely . i just think that it s another instance of a corporation just looking at their bottom line and not thinking about the people that can t afford access to the internet , he says . when the wimax network goes dark after november th , it will affect what the projects calculate are , people across the country . yesterday , the nonprofits sued for an injunction to keep the wimax network running , and are seeking an order to force sprint to put them on the lte network under the terms they say they re entitled to . a spokesperson for sprint confirmed there was a dispute over contract terms , but denies that it s caused problems for mobile beacon and mobile citizen . the spokesperson told the verge that some percent of those on the wimax network have completed the transition to lte ahead of the deadline , and says that the company engages in throttling of data only devices for network management , but that it has tried to negotiate data usage terms with the nonprofits . we have no illusions that a big legal battle with sprint is going to be fun . messier doesn t dispute that sprint needs to manage its network , but says the nonprofits aren t being treated at the same level of other customers , as the contract stipulates . we re not asking for special treatment , but we re asking that they get the same treatment and that they re not getting a lower class of service and put into the slow lane in another fashion . she says discussions with sprint are continuing , but that pursuing legal action was necessary as the deadline approaches . sprint declined to discuss details of the contract on the record , citing confidentiality . but the plaintiffs in the suit did not have the same qualms . john schwartz , the president of voqal , which runs the nonprofit organizations behind mobile citizen , says the contract was meant to be binding for years , pending some benchmarks . sprint , he argues , has attempted to retroactively force a new , unfair plan on the nonprofits . if the wimax network goes dark now , the organizations behind mobile beacon and mobile citizen will be destroyed , he says , with many customers losing their one available means of internet access in the process . we have no illusions that a big legal battle with sprint is going to be fun . as for the plan if the injunction fails and the network is shut down that is going to be a real mess , schwartz says . 