 the tiny girl in the cloud city is shivering . her patched dress and leggings are stiff in the snow flecked wind that s blowing over her temporary shelter , located at the base of a floating stone bridge . moving with the slight staccato of a stop motion clay figurine , she looks real enough to touch , strangely convincing for a cartoon character who only exists inside a virtual reality headset . this is allumette , the orphan girl that vr film studio ampnbsppenrose ampnbsphopes will win audiences hearts at this week s tribeca film festival . allumette , which premieres today in full , was first previewed ampnbspat the sundance film festival earlier this year . even half finished , it was one of the most artistically complex works we saw at the show , a miniature animated film that could be walked through like a diorama . now , it s a roughly minute experience loosely based on hans christian andersen s the little match girl . as allumette whose name translates to match in french tries to keep warm on a winter night , the story flashes back through vignettes from her life , leading to a somber conclusion that anyone who read the source material will probably foresee . using an htc vive or oculus rift headset , participants can also move around several feet of real world space , looking inside buildings and seeing what other people in the city are doing . spoilers for allumette ahead . while virtual reality has become increasingly popular in the last few years , many of the experiences made for it have been simple and short , designed for cheap headsets that don t track body motion and use the limited processing power of mobile phones . for penrose founder eugene chung , these small experiments are comparable to ampnbspthe arrival of a train at la ciotat station a minute long , non narrative film that engrossed audiences in . allumette , he hopes , is moving us closer to vr s version of ampnbspthe great train robbery , a later breakthrough in narrative cinema . we learned a lot by having the full structured story , where you have a true beginning , middle , and end where there s a story arc and the character goes through a certain set of experiences , says chung . i guess we re always wondering does that work in vr ? released last year , ampnbsppenrose s first feature was a short vr experience called ampnbspthe rose and i , inspired by the little prince . ampnbspthe rose and i has a story of sorts , but allumette has a much more formal three act narrative that expands andersen s original tale . the little match girl doesn t have choices being made by people . it s just the little match girl getting frozen to death , right ? says chung . allumette s story ampnbspbegins with the titular character arriving with her mother on a floating ship , but when the ship catches fire , her mother sacrifices herself to save allumette and many of the townspeople from harm . finally , allumette makes her own sacrifice , giving up her last match to help an old man . the ideas that are in there were from some deeply personal experiences . the ideas that are in there were from some deeply personal experiences , says chung . since sundance , he s been gratified by the response to penrose s latest work . one of the times we screened it recently , i remember taking the headset off and the person was in tears , he says . you can get people to laugh in vr you can get people to become afraid in vr . i would say fear is kind of the easiest emotion to evoke . but can you evoke an emotional response ? can you really connect to these creatures that are this big ? he asks , using two fingers to indicate allumette s small form . i think we get impressed by people s honest reactions , and their emotional response to it . one of the other big changes since sundance , though , is that high end vr is no longer found only in trade shows , art galleries , and limited public tours . since the rift and vive both launched in the last few weeks , developers have started releasing complex and substantive virtual reality games and experiences , with more on the way . few of these can match the meticulous beauty of allumette its designers boast that each fluffy cloud was individually created using a vr based art tool . but the games have proven that people can spend hours at a time in headsets , suggesting that we may already be ready for longer and more involved experiences . a gritty vr sci fi game ampnbspmight not have the light artistry of an animated short from penrose or the similarly focused oculus story studio , but it can be narratively complex in its own way . still , there are clear moments of epiphany watching allumette . among other things , it features the most effective example i ve seen of someone using vr s interactive elements here , the ability to peer inside objects to see hidden details for dramatic tension . when allumette s ship catches fire , it s possible to see the danger long before she does by sticking your face inside the hull , undercutting an apparently innocent scene . and however it uses vr , allumette is also a widely appealing piece of fiction , told without text or dialogue . our belief is that augmented and virtual reality will eventually be the next major computing platform , and right now the most obvious first step is toward the gaming demographic , says chung . but he hopes allumette is something you want to show everybody , whether it s your grandmother , your child , or anyone around the world . while allumette s own story appears over by the end of her short , penrose doesn t think it s done with the floating city , and chung won t call even the version of allumette i see finished . ampnbsp we ve always thought of ourselves as creating worlds , not just the stories and characters within them , he later elaborates . the story s sort of the beginning , sort of that first step into it . at the very end of the short , participants are given their own matchstick in the form of a motion controller , allowing them to run their hands over the city s contours and feel vibrations in response . it s an interesting move past the visual , and a hint at how vr could change in the future a future that nobody , at penrose or anywhere else , can begin to predict . 