 one night in , the new york gallery boo hooray hosted an exhibit of infamous b movie director ed wood s trash paperback novels . woods wrote the books in mere days and sold them to pornographic publishers under a variety of pseudonyms . at the time , his novels of suburban iniquity and cross dressing contract killers were disposable dreck . today , they re carefully preserved in cornell university s rare books collection . a press release emphasized the difficulty of tracking down wood s digitization defying work the paperbacks are truly rare , even in an age of mass searchable used book engines , and google ferocity . boo hooray s curators went to great lengths tracking down wood s novels , but their jobs could have been harder , if not impossible , if wood had been writing today . like many prolific pulp authors , he might have been selling ebooks through kindle or another self publishing platform . but while paper books might be harder to distribute , they have one huge advantage over ebooks as long as an archivist or collector can keep them from falling apart , they ll be as readable in a century as they will in a year . keeping ebooks in the historical record is harder . how do you preserve something that can t be locked in an archive , sold in a secondhand bookstore , or even converted to a new format without first navigating an arcane copyright system ? so far major publishers have done little more than flirt with digital only releases . clifford lynch , director of the coalition for networked information and a strong proponent of ebook preservation , sees this as a temporary calm . i believe that that is going to change , and probably change pretty suddenly and pretty soon , he says . when it does , libraries will have to figure out a way to keep them on shelves after publishers have changed formats , stopped licensing them , or closed up shop altogether . the idea of a copy no longer makes sensefor years , archival work was aided by the first sale doctrine if someone bought a copy of a book , movie , or album , they were free to resell it , rent it out , or keep it forever . digital media upset this model . the very idea of a copy no longer makes sense technically , just syncing a file to a kindle makes a new copy , let alone lending it to someone else . in , an appeals court decision effectively shut down any digital version of the first sale doctrine . vernor v . autodesk established that you couldn t buy a piece of software , only at best acquire a permanent and non transferable license to it . for libraries and mass market publishers , this has proved a point of contention . if you look at the whole history of public libraries and ebooks , it s been very ugly , frankly , says lynch . penguin froze its ebook lending program in , citing new concerns about the security of our digital editions . the same year , harpercollins instituted a loan cap for each license . libraries often end up getting temporary access to ebooks in a particular format , while publishers worry that a single library ebook will end up being shared as widely as a pirated one . it wasn t until last year that all six now five major publishers got on board , and ebooks are still wrapped in complicated and clunky drm systems . rare books at harvard s houghton library flickr discoursemarker public libraries , which often just want large numbers of popular books and don t deal in preservation , can compromise on licensing . research libraries , where books are kept for the historical record , are a different story . in academia , library archivists can make sure ebooks survive by brokering deals with publishers and third party storage services like portico , which hold scholarly literature in a kind of escrow . publishers allow portico to keep future proof copies of a book or journal in its database , and libraries buy access to its services . in the event of a trigger , which could include the work going out of circulation or the publisher ceasing operations altogether , portico releases the material to its members . but the more adversarial relationship between libraries and mass market publishers , as well as libraries relatively weak bargaining position , makes a non academic version of portico a non starter . you re speaking to an institution that is in its birth pangs . as long as publishers keep selling physical books along with ebooks , the latter can safely be ephemeral . but amazon has already begun to experiment with exclusive digital only pieces from high profile authors like amy tan and chuck palahniuk . and in , alongside the release of the kindle , stephen king published an exclusive digital novella about a mysterious pink kindle that connects its reader to parallel dimensions . where authors get the freedom to experiment with new formats and pricing models , amazon has the power to quietly revise or delete books without notice in one bizarrely poetic incident , it temporarily removed copies of from users kindle libraries . earlier this year , stephen king pulled his book rage from print , but it remained available if somewhat pricey in the used market . if he chose to do the same for the amazon exclusive essay where he wrote about that decision , you d have to hope it was republished elsewhere and hold tight to your kindle in the meantime . while publishers and libraries work through these issues , there s one entity that can theoretically get around almost any restrictions the library of congress , tasked with preserving historically meaningful media long after its commercial value is gone . whenever an author or publisher wants to officially register a copyright for a print book or ebook , they submit two copies to the us copyright office , and the library of congress can pick noteworthy titles to store . it also has its own relationships with publishers , which are willing to work with it in exchange for metadata like dewey decimal classification and subject headings . yet the library of congress is only beginning to address these problems . card catalog , library of congress flickr paulo ordoveza you re speaking to an institution that is in its birth pangs , says library of congress project manager carl fleischhauer of digital preservation . he and lynch are both preoccupied with technical questions as well as legal ones . the library of congress works with publishers to get drm free files that can be migrated to different formats over time , a luxury that rules against breaking copy protection can make dicey . it also works on developing tools to prevent content from being degraded or corrupted , including a piece of software called bagit , which wraps content into self contained , folder like digital bags complete with a manifest listing everything that should be preserved . as troublesome as preserving text only files can be , it s relatively straightforward compared to what ebooks could one day become interactive pieces of media that blur the line between website , game , and database . even mathematical symbols have turned out to be hard to format correctly . culturally , we still seem to have this sort of dichotomy in our heads , says lynch , between ebooks and other digital artifacts like websites and games . we re having a terrible time intellectually , as well as technically , understanding what preservation means for this latter menagerie of things in the digital world . think about your ability to buy a physical book , read it , put it in the attic for years , or give it to a grandchild . setting aside the problems of complicated multimedia projects , self published pulp ebooks from places like smashwords or kindle are particularly vulnerable . the age of vanity press books , says lynch , is giving way to one where leaving big publishers behind is a hard nosed business decision , but archival work hasn t caught up and books can slip under libraries radar especially if they re not written by authors who are already well known . self published books are harder to collect in bulk than ones put out by major publishing houses , and it s doubtful that all smaller authors will take the time to send preservation copies of their books to the copyright office . even if they do , the files could just end up as casualties of the library of congress culling process . most of those casualties will not be great . many of them will be trash , rarely purchased and quickly forgotten . but today s niche fiction and even patently offensive mistakes are tomorrow s historical record , and they may be in the greatest danger . genres that were considered juvenile or unimportant in their day pulp science fiction , romance novels , comic books have since proved to have lasting literary value or cultural importance . libraries , mostly research libraries , missed these things when they first came out , lynch says . they just dismissed them . later , they filled out their shelves with secondhand copies from collectors . but no one will be able to donate their favorite ebooks to a library or send them to a used bookstore . there s no market in seeking rare copies of items that a buyer could duplicate endlessly but never distribute . one of the things that is interesting about digital is that it s hard to be a collector , says lynch . think about your ability to buy a physical book , read it , put it in the attic for years , or give it to a grandchild . as opposed to getting something on your kindle and hopefully having it still available in years , and being able to give it to anyone . kindles and copyright , it turns out , may be killing the collector . and even if you never look for a yellowed copy of orgy of the dead or suburbia confidential in some library archive , it s a loss for all of us . 