 kindred thinks the path to smarter software is by giving it a physical body ask geordie rose and suzanne gildert , co founders of the startup kindred , about their company s philosophy , and they ll describe a bold vision of the future machines with human level intelligence . rose says these will be perhaps the most transformative inventions in history and they aren t far away . more intriguing than this prediction is kindred s proposed path for achieving it . unlike some of the most cash flush corporations in silicon valley , kindred is focusing not on chatbots or game playing programs , but on automating physical robots . gildert , a physicist who conceived kindred in while working with rose at quantum computing company d wave , thinks giving ai a physical body is the only way to make real progress toward a true thinking machine . if you want to build intelligence that conceptually thinks in the same way a human does it needs to have a similar sensory motor as humans do , gildert says . the trick to achieving this , she thinks , is to train robots by having them collaborate with humans in the physical world . rose , who co founded d wave in , stepped back from his role as chief technology officer to work on kindred with gildert . kindred wants to train robots by having them collaborate with humans in the physical worldthe first step toward their new shared goal is an industrial warehouse robot called the orb . it s a robotic arm that sits inside a hexagonal glass encasement , equipped with a bevy of sensors to help it see , feel , and even hear its surroundings . the arm is operated using a mix of human control and automated software . because so many warehouse workers today spend a significant amount of time sorting products and scanning barcodes , kindred developed a robotic arm that can do some elements automatically . meanwhile , humans step in when needed to manually operate the robot to perform tasks that are difficult for machines , like gripping a single product from a cluster of different items . workers can even operate the arm remotely using an off the shelf htc vive headset and virtual reality motion controllers . it turns out that vr is great for gathering data on depth and other information humans intuitively use to grasp objects . kindred is now focused on getting its finished orb into warehouses , where it can begin learning at an accelerated pace by sorting vastly different products and observing human operators . because the company gathers data every time a human uses the orb , engineers are able to improve its software over time using techniques such as reinforcement learning , which improves software through repetition . down the line , the orb should slowly take over more responsibility and , ideally , learn to perform new tasks . but kindred s ultimate goal is much more ambitious . it may sound counterintuitive , but rose and gildert think warehouses are the perfect place to start on the path toward human level artificial intelligence . because the us shipping marketplace is already rife with single purpose robots , thanks in part to amazon , there are plenty of opportunities for humans to train ai . finding , handling , and sorting products while maneuvering in a fast moving environment is a data gold mine for building robots that can operate in the real world . rose and gildert believe the next generation of ai won t be in the form of a disembodied voice living in our phones . rather , they believe the greatest strides will come from programs running inside a physical robot can gain knowledge about the world and itself from the ground up , like a human infant does from birth . chris hayes , a kindred vr pilot and software engineer , operates the orb remotely using a vive headset in the company s san francisco office . kindred s is working toward what s known as artificial general intelligence , or software capable of performing any task a human being can do . artificial general intelligence , or agi , is sometimes referred to as strong or full ai because it exists in contrast to ai programs , like deepmind s alphago system , with very specific applications . other more conventional forms of weak or narrow ai include the underlying software behind netflix and amazon recommendations , snapchat camera effects that rely on facial recognition , and google s fast and accurate language translations . these algorithms are developed by applying deep learning techniques to large scale neural networks until they can , say , differentiate between an image of a dog and a cat . they perform one task , or perhaps many in some cases , far better than humans can . but they are extremely limited and don t learn or adapt the way humans do . the software that recognizes a sunset can t predict whether you ll like a netflix movie or translate a sentence into japanese . right now , you can t ask alphago to face off in chess it doesn t know the rules and wouldn t know how to begin learning them . kindred thinks our physical body is intrinsic to the secrets of human cognitionthis is the fundamental challenge of agi how to create an intelligent system , the kind we know only from science fiction , that can truly learn on its own without needing to be fed thousands of examples and trained over the course of weeks or months . the biggest names in ai research , like deepmind , are focused on game playing because it seems to be the most viable path forward . after all , if you can teach software to play pong , perhaps it can take the lessons learned and apply them to breakout ? this applied knowledge approach , which mimics the way a human player can quickly intuit the rules of a new game , has proven promising . for instance , alphago master , deepmind s latest go system that just bested world champion ke jie , now effectively teaches itself how to play better . one of the things we re most excited about is not just that it can play go better , but we hope that this ll actually lead to technologies that are more generally applicable to other challenging domains , deepmind co founder and ceo demis hassabis said at the event last week . google owned deepmind is focusing on game playing systems , like alphago , to make progress toward a general purpose strong ai . yet for kindred s founders , the quest to crack the secret of human cognition can t be separated from our physical bodies . our founding belief was that in order to make real progress toward the original objectives of ai , you needed to start by grounding your ideas in the physical world , rose says . and that means robots , and robots with sensors that can look around , touch , hear the world that surrounds them . this body first approach to ai is based on a theory called embodied cognition , which suggests that the interplay between our brain , body , and the physical world is what produces elements of consciousness and the ability to reason . a fun exercise here is thinking about how many common metaphors have physical underpinnings , like thinking of affection as warmth or something inconceivable as being over your head . without understanding how the brain developed to control the body and guide functions like locomotion and visual processing , the theory goes , we may never be able to reproduce it artificially . the body first approach to ai is based on a theory called embodied cognitionother than kindred , work on ai and embodied cognition mostly happens in the research divisions of large tech companies and academia . for example , pieter abbeel , who leads development on the berkeley robot for the elimination of tedious tasks brett , aims to create robots that can learn much like young children do . by giving its robot sensory abilities and motor functions and then using ai training techniques , the brett team devised a way for it to acquire knowledge and physical skills much faster than with standard programming and with the flexibility to keep learning . much like how babies are constantly adjusting their behavior when attempting something new , brett also approaches unique problems , fails at first , and then adjusts over repeated attempts and under new constraints . abbeel s team even uses children s toys to test brett s aptitude for problem solving . openai , the nonprofit funded by spacex and tesla ceo elon musk , is working on both general purpose game playing algorithms and robotics , under the notion that both avenues are complementary . helping the team is abbeel , who is on leave from berkeley to help openai make progress fusing ai learnings with modern robotics . the interesting thing about robotics is that it forces us to deal with the actual data we would want an intelligent agent to deal with , says josh tobin , a graduate student at berkeley who works on robotics at openai . applying ai to real world tasks like picking up objects and stacking blocks involves tackling a whole suite of new problems , tobin says , like managing unfamiliar textures and replicating minute motor movements . solving them is necessary if we re to ever deploy intelligent robots beyond factory floors . wojciech zaremba , who leads openai s robotics work , says that a holy grail of sorts would be a general purpose robot powered by ai that can learn a new task scrambling eggs , for instance by watching someone do it just once . this is why openai is working on teaching robots new skills that are first demonstrated by a human in a simulated vr environment , much like a video game , where it s much easier and less costly to produce and collect data . you could imagine that , as a final outcome , if it s doable , you have files online of recordings of various tasks , zaremba says . and then if you want the robot to replicate this behavior , you just download the file . kindred s orb is designed to automate the task of picking up and sorting products with help from human operators . when i first operated the orb , on an april afternoon in kindred s san francisco warehouse space , a group of six or so engineers were scattered about testing the robotic arms with various pink colored bins of products vitamin bottles , soft plastic cylinders of lysol cleaning wipes , rolls of paper towels . the orb is designed to help sort these objects in a large heap inside its glass container , while the arm sits affixed to the roof of the container . first , an operator wearing a vr headset moves the arm to a desired object , lowers the gripper , and adjusts the two clamps until a firm grip is established . then the human can simply let go . kindred has already automated the process of lifting the object in the air , scanning the barcode , and sorting it into the necessary bin . using the orb resembles operating a video game version of a toy claw machine in any gigantic warehouse , people have to walk around and pick up things , says george babu , kindred s chief product officer . the most efficient way to do that is to pick up a whole bunch of different things at the same time . those go to someplace where you have them separated . our robot does that job in the middle . the idea is that warehouse workers can dump a bunch of products into the orb , while a remote operator works with the robot to sort them . amazon is working on something similar , and the company now holds an annual picking challenge to spur development in industrial robotics that are capable of handling and sorting physical items . kindred is quick to recognize amazon s prowess in this department . in the fulfillment world , amazon uses a different set of approaches than all of the other fulfillment provisioners . they have the scale , the scope , and the know how to implement end to end systems that are very effective at what they do , rose says . but he thinks amazon is likely to keep this technology to itself . the advancements that amazon makes toward doing this job well don t benefit all of their competitors . kindred has entirely automated the process of scanning barcodes and sorting items with the orb . gripping , however , is performed by human operators . kindred s system , on the other hand , is designed to integrate into existing warehouse tools . last month , kindred finished its first deployable devices , and it created more demand than we anticipated , according to jim liefer , kindred s chief operating officer , though he won t disclose any initial customers . i was surprised when using the orb , with a vive headset , by just how much it resembles a video game . think of a toy claw machine , where the second the clamp touches down on an object , the automated process takes over and the arm springs to life with an uncanny jerkiness . it makes sense , considering kindred built its depth sensing system using the game engine unity . kindred imagines future versions of the orb being affixed to sliding rails or bipedal roaming robotsmax bennett , kindred s robotics product manager , says that the process is designed so that human warehouse workers can operate multiple orbs simultaneously , gripping objects and letting the software take the reins before cycling to the next setup . kindred imagines future versions of the robotic arm being affixed to sliding overhead rails or maybe even to bipedal robots that roam the floor . there is also a point at which the vive is no longer necessary . nobody s going to want to use a vr headset all day , bennett tells me , suggesting that an xbox controller or even just a computer mouse will do in the future . as for how the orb might impact jobs , babu says there will be need for human labor for quite some time . he s partly right amazon hired , workers in the last year alone , and plans to hire , more this year , mostly in warehouse and other fulfillment roles . but systems like the orb raise the possibility that fewer jobs are needed as the work becomes more a matter of assisting and operating robots . my view is that the humans will all move on to different work in the stream , babu says . still , forrester research predicts that automation will result in million jobs lost over the next decade , with only million new jobs created . the end goals of automation have always been to reduce costs and improve efficiency , and that will inevitably mean the disappearance of certain types of labor . kindred is split between its headquarters in vancouver , a machine learning division in toronto , and its robotics lab in san francisco . kindred is unique in the ai field not just for its robotics focus , but also because it s diving head first into the industrial world with a commercial product . many of the big tech companies working on ai are doing so with huge research organizations , like facebook ai research and google brain . these teams are filled with academics and engineers who work on abstract problems that then help inform real software features that get deployed to millions of consumers . kindred , as a startup , can t afford this approach . day one we said we re going to find a big market . we re going to build a wildly successful product for that initial market , and build a business by executing along that path first with one vertical and then maybe others , rose explains . he adds that his experience with d wave , which raised more than million over the course of more than a decade just to release its first product , inspired him to seek out a different approach to tackling big picture problems . gildert and rose don t want to rely solely on venture capital funding to build kindred you have this quandary that doing it right is going to take a long time , on the order of decades . how do you sustain that organization for that length of time without all the negative side effects of raising a lot of rounds of vc ? rose says . the answer is that you have to create a real business that is cash flow positive very early . kindred has raised million in funding thus far from eclipse , gv , data collective , and a number of other investors . but rose stresses that the company s focus is to become profitable with the orb , and that will help it in its main objective . that objective , since the beginning , is human level ai with a focus on what gildert calls in body cognition , or the type of thought processes that only arise from giving ai a physical shell . intelligence absence a body is not what we think it means , she says . intelligence with a body brings to it a number of constraints that are not there when you think about intelligence in a virtual environment . we certainly don t believe you can build a chatbot without a human like body and expect it to pass for a human . brains evolved to control bodies , rose adds . and all these things that we think about as being the beautiful stuff that comes from cognition , they re all side effects of this . 