 thanks to a brain implant , ian burkhart can use his hand to play video games for the first time since the accident that broke his neck six years ago . the finding , published today in nature , is the first instance of a person living with paralysis regaining the ability to move simply by thinking . burkhart was years old when he dove into unexpectedly shallow waters while vacationing with friends . the impact severely damaged his spinal cord and left him paralyzed from the chest down . but a chip placed in the left side of his brain now lets the year old relay signals from his brain down to his right arm . the technology , which isn t yet available to other patients , has allowed burkhart to grasp cups and even move his fingers independently from each other to play a game that resembles guitar hero . because of burkhart s success , the researchers think the technology might one day help people who are quadriplegic regain some autonomy . i know firsthand what was taken away from me after my injury . i know firsthand what was taken away from me after my injury , burkhart told reporters during a press conference yesterday . so the first time when i was able to open and close my hand , it really gave me that sense of hope for the future . about . million people in the us have some form of paralysis . this means that about out of every americans has trouble moving their arms or legs , which can make living independently difficult . in burkhart s case , the injury to his spine left him unable to walk and move his arm below the bicep . from a neurological standpoint , this means that when he tries to move a finger , the signals that his brain sends down to his hand are blocked . for researchers who study paralysis , that disconnect is hard to fix . that s why some scientists think it might actually be easier to reroute those signals and bypass paralyzing injuries altogether . now , scientists have done just that using an implant the size of a pencil eraser . the system that allows burkhart to move his fingers consists of three main parts the tiny brain chip , a computer , and a sleeve full of electrodes placed on his forearm . when burkhart thinks of a hand motion , the implant detects the signals in his brain and send them to a computer . then , the computer deciphers them and relays the information to the sleeve wrapped around his right arm . from there , the sleeve uses electrical impulses to trigger muscle contractions that allow burkhart to accomplish the hand movement he s thinking of . so , in a way , the computer acts like a translator that relays information from the brain to burkhart s muscles . ohio state university battelle memorial institute perfecting the technology was a years long process that started even before burkhart received the implant . in the very first stages , three years ago , the researchers spent a lot of time imaging burkhart s brain as he visualized performing hand motions that the researchers projected on a screen . during these sessions , the scientists recorded his brain signals and tried to match them to corresponding hand motions . in april , burkhart underwent a three hour long surgery to place the implant in his brain . two months later , he moved his fingers for the first time , although at the time , the movements didn t help him to do much . now , burkhart can pick up a phone and hold spoon in his hand . to practice moving his fingers , burkhart plays frets on fire , a video game that resembles guitar hero but that has been modified for one handed play . it s the first time this has been done and it s a very big step forward in this field . he s not only picking up objects , but he s manipulating the objects . he can switch between a power grasp such as picking up a glass and then he can switch to a fine pinch grasp to pick up a small object such as a stir stick , and actually manipulate that and a few finer motor skills , says chad bouton , a neuroscientist at the feinstein institute for medical research who co authored the study the technology was invented at batelle memorial institute , bouton s previous employer . this is a first it s the first time this has been done and it s a very big step forward in this field . even though burkhart can perform some complex tasks , he still can t spread his fingers to type on a keyboard , for instance , and he has very little control over the force that his fingers currently apply on a given object . that s because the chip in his brain only contains electrodes , which isn t enough to translate precise hand movements . to fix that , the researchers want to increase the number of electrodes to a couple thousand . they would also like to compress the computer to make it fit entirely inside the implant and get rid of the wires by using wireless technology . if they can do all that , people living with paralysis might actually be able to use the system on the go , bouton says . and it might be possible to use the technology to help people regain some motion in their legs as well . we think it can stay in the brain for five years . that said , the system is still experimental . bouton declined to tell the verge how much the current system costs , but it s pretty clear that improving it isn t going to come cheap . there s also some questions surrounding how long the implant might be able to remain inside the brain without being rejected . to be honest there just haven t been enough people that have had it in their brain to know how long truly this will last , says nick anetta , an engineer at battelle memorial institute and another study co author . but we think it can stay in the brain for five years . because of this , the system probably won t be ready for use outside the lab any time soon . but that doesn t mean burkhart is going to be first and last person to use the implant a second patient is scheduled to being the study this summer the researchers say . right now , it s just in the clinical setting , but with enough people working on this and with enough attention , it s something that i will be able to use at my home , burkhart said . this is something that s working i will be able to use my hand again . video by miriam nielsen . 