 when the soviet union officially collapsed in december , , the new york times published a lengthy , obituary style piece about the former superpower , describing it as a nation straddling two continents and two cultures , forever torn and forever fired by the creative clash at the fault line of east and west . the end of the cold war was supposed to temper that divide , as russia gradually integrated with the west . but nearly years later , that fault line now seems as pronounced as ever . russia s annexation of crimea last month raised tensions across the globe , leading to the most direct confrontation between moscow and washington since the cold war . with russian soldiers amassing along the ukraine border ampmdash raising the specter of further incursions ampmdash there are fears that the dispute could lead to a prolonged standoff , with major ramifications for both the west and russia . it s not quite cold war ii , experts say , but it s definitely frosty . this is a whole new ballgame in the post cold war period . what we ve seen in recent weeks is that russia is prepared to disregard the terms of the post cold war settlement , and unilaterally pursue its own interests regardless of the impact on relations with its immediate neighbors ampmdash seemingly in defiance of any reaction from the west , says john laugh , associate fellow at chatham house , a london based think tank . this is a whole new ballgame in the post cold war period . the us and its allies have unilaterally condemned the annexation of crimea as illegal , while russia insists that the peninsula s referendum to secede from ukraine was democratic and fair . us officials have said they have no plans to send troops into russia , and have so far chosen to pressure the kremlin through economic and diplomatic channels . president barack obama and his russian counterpart , vladimir putin , have already exchanged targeted economic sanctions , and russia was excluded from a meeting of the elite g group of countries last month . this week , nasa ampnbspsuspended most of its operations with russia s space agency , citing russia s ongoing violation of ukraine s sovereignty and territorial integrity . western countries have ampnbspsaid they will reinforce troops in eastern europe following russia s annexation , though nato has drastically downsized its military presence in europe since the fall of the berlin wall , when many troops were stationed to ward off potential red army threats . some fear further economic sanctions may only embolden putin , who has already used obama s response to galvanize his domestic supporters . all it can do is raise walls . given the west s unwillingness to resort to military force , all it can do is raise walls around russia in the hope that international isolation will eventually bring about a change of regime , says sergey radchenko , a cold war expert at aberystwyth university in the uk . i think it s a self defeating strategy , because it leaves russia embittered and feeds into domestic nationalism . the effects of targeted sanctions handed down against high ranking russians have already been felt across russia s stock markets and banking sector , though a broader sanctions war would have serious implications for the west , as well . the european union is ampnbspfar and away russia s largest trade partner , and many european countries rely heavily on russian imports of oil and natural gas . according to the energy information administration , europe accounts for percent of russia s oil exports , and percent of its gas exports . further restrictions on finance and trade would have immediate impacts on both parties , and russia has shown it s willing to use energy supplies as political leverage . this month , russian energy giant gazprom announced that it will sharply raise the price of natural gas for ukraine , adding further pressure to an already fragile economy . the us isn t as economically dependent upon russia , though it has a lot at stake diplomatically . russian cooperation is key to maintaining sanctions programs against north korea , and was critical to brokering a chemical weapons disarmament deal with the syrian regime , a kremlin ally . ongoing discord could also complicate matters in afghanistan . us troops there are preparing to withdraw by the end of this year , but russia s aggression has already raised tensions in nearby former soviet states across central asia , and some fear that it could lead to further regional destabilization . president barack obama takes a call from russian president vladimir putin . the white house flickr putin s phone call to obama last week raised hopes of a diplomatic resolution , but the white house remains deeply suspicious , and there are worries that russia may look to meddle further in ukraine or other former soviet states . bringing glory back to russia has been a major talking point during putin s third presidential term , and some suspect that sentiment may be underpinning his expansion into ukraine ampmdash an effort to reclaim territories that he felt belonged to russia all along . western leaders have warned that such actions would carry stiff consequences . if russia were to intervene further in ukraine , i wouldn t hesitate to call it a historic mistake , nato chief anders fogh rasmussen told reporters this week . it would have far reaching consequences for relations between russia and what we as a whole might call the western world . it would be a miscalculation with huge strategic implications . although recent weeks have seen a return to cold war rhetoric from leaders on both sides of the divide , specialists say the current standoff is decidedly different . gone is the overarching threat of nuclear apocalypse , and the crisis is no longer divided along ideological lines of capitalism versus communism . the world is going to feel a somewhat different place as a result of all of this . there s no real ideological conflict , like there was in the cold war , says dmitry gorenburg , russia expert at cna , a us think tank . that was really two camps trying to get allies for each side . . . the main ideology these days seems to be russian nationalism , which doesn t seem to go that far with others . russia , unlike the soviet union , is much more integrated into the world economy , he adds , so it becomes much more difficult to create that kind of division into blocs . but others say the crisis may have already triggered a seismic shift in global order and alliances , carving out even deeper fault lines between russia and the west . how these shifts play out , however , is anyone s guess . a lot of things are going to be up for reevaluation , and it s going to take some getting used to , lough says . but the world is going to feel a somewhat different place as a result of all of this . 