 the newest way to accurately predict poverty comes from satellite images and machine learning . this imaging technique could make it easier for aid organizations to know where and how to spend their money it may also help governments develop better policy . we already know that the more lit up an area is at night , the richer and more developed it is . researchers use this method to estimate poverty in places where we don t have exact data . but night light estimates are rough and don t tell us much about the wealth differences of the very poor . scientists at stanford university fed a computer three data sources night light images , daytime images , and actual survey data to build an algorithm that predicts how rich or poor any given area is . this method , described in a study published today in the journal science , estimates poverty in more detail than we ve had before . daytime imagery creates a fuller pictureit s hard to measure poverty in the developing world . the best way is by looking at economic data like household wealth and assets collected through household surveys . problem is , we don t have these surveys for much of the world because they re expensive , according to study co author neal jean , a doctoral candidate studying machine learning at stanford . the idea is that if we train our models right , they help us predict poverty in areas where we don t have the surveys , he says , which will help out aid orgs that are working on this issue . using night lights to predict poverty provides important information about the economic growth of different countries , says simon franklin , an economics researcher at the london school of economics who was not involved with the study . but they don t show detailed levels of poverty within a country . they don t tell us whether a place is rural and densely populated , or wealthy and sparsely populated . a village near a lake and a village near a forest could both show up as having zero lights at night . but the two have access to different natural resources , and this affects how wealthy they are . in africa , a lot of these places that are the most poor are actually just uniformly dark at night , says jean . so if you use nighttime lights only to try to find these people , since there s no variation in nighttime lights you can t predict any variation in poverty . daytime imagery creates a fuller picture . building the algorithm took a two step process called transfer learning . first , researchers showed a neural network daytime and nighttime images of five african countries uganda , tanzania , nigeria , malawi , and rwanda . using deep learning techniques , they taught it to predict where night lights would be by looking at the daytime images and searching for correlations . the model learned , for example , that if there are a lot of houses in one area , the same area probably has a lot of light at night . if an area only has dirt , it probably won t . by teaching computers which daytime features translate to night light , researchers can make better predictions about which places are poor . because areas like lakes are expected to be dark at night , dark readings from them can be discarded but readings of darkness from roads and villages can be more closely targeted by researchers and governments trying to help poor communities . for the second step , researchers used a different model called a ridge regression model . this model already knows the connection between land features and lights . scientists then gave it one more set of information actual survey data from the demographic health services and world bank living standards measurement study . the model is less useful for measuring poverty within a citythis time the algorithm didn t just learn that houses in a village usually means there is a certain amount of light . by cross checking with survey data , it saw that for example , these houses have a household income of . a day . now , if we see similar houses in a nearby area where there s no survey data , chances are that it has similar wealth . so why not skip the first step and directly teach the algorithm to predict poverty from daytime images and surveys ? the deep learning approach in the first step only works if you have a lot of data . we have all the daytime and nighttime images , so it s easy to teach the computer to make those connections . but there isn t much survey data , so using deep learning to connect daytime images and poverty information wouldn t create a very accurate algorithm . teaching the model to look at nighttime data first and then survey data gives us more information to fine tune the algorithm . imagine that you re trying to teach an algorithm to recognize a picture of a cat . if you show it two pictures of cats and one picture of a bird , it might later identify a dog as a cat because they re about the same size and both furry with four legs . if you show it thousands of pictures of cats and thousands of pictures of different things that are not cats , it will be much better at distinguishing what is a cat and what isn t . this is , essentially , what the researchers did with their satellite data . the next step is training it to work on other countries and better map poverty across the worldto better explain this transfer learning process , jean uses an analogy from the movie cool runnings . the movie is about a jamaican team that wants to compete in the bobsled event , but they don t have ice , so they train for the olympics by practicing on a dirt hill , he says . dirt isn t the same , but they learn transferable skills that they can apply to the actual task , which is competing on ice in a real bobsled . transfer learning is the most accurate way of predicting average household consumption and wealth of villages . crucially , it beats the night lights model alone by anywhere from to percent of the time depending on the specific trial . but there are limitations to the method , says franklin . first he says it s good for looking at differences in poverty between rural and urban areas , and less useful for measuring poverty within a city . there are very rich areas and very poor areas within any given city , but it s harder to tell the difference in urban areas by using daytime imagery alone . alexei abrahams , an economist at the university of california san diego , pointed out that the current study uses an old series of night light images . since , nasa has been recording night lights with a new and more accurate satellite , so further studies should use the better data . another limitation that jean points out is that the network has been trained specifically to look at five african countries . this means the particular model would probably be far less accurate if tasked with predicting poverty in india or china . but this method is cheap and easy to scale , since all the images were from the public domain , so the next step is training it to work on other countries and better map poverty across the world . 