 microsoft is close to buying the developers of minecraft ? the same minecraft that has sold over million copies , created by the outspoken markus notch persson ? the same notch that accused microsoft of trying to ruin the pc as an open platform with windows ? who said he d rather have minecraft not run on windows at all than put it in the windows store ? who canceled an oculus rift version of minecraft the second the vr startup got swallowed up by facebook ? on what planet would notch consider allowing such a thing ? this very planet , if reports are to be believed . indeed , according to bloomberg , it was notch that made the initial approach to microsoft . the deal is said to value mojang , the swedish studio behind minecraft , at over billion , and could be confirmed this week . notch , who did not respond to a request for comment , would reportedly quit as mojang chairman after assisting in the company s transition to microsoft ownership . it would be microsoft ceo satya nadella s first major acquisition since taking over earlier this year . microsoft has a mixed record with video game acquisitionsso what would microsoft want with mojang ? well , minecraft . notch hasn t actively worked on the game s development since , and neither he nor mojang seems interested in pursuing new projects with anywhere near the commercial potential of their current world building blockbuster . mojang s next main project is scrolls , a fantasy card game , and notch has released and occasionally canceled various esoteric titles in the past couple of years . the real question is what microsoft could have in mind for minecraft , an offbeat indie hit that no one could have predicted would become such a world dominating success . the blocky d game is often compared to lego , but microsoft wouldn t be buying a ready to assemble pirate ship it d be more like a huge bucket of random , assorted bricks that the company would need to put together itself . at first glance , the acquisition seems a serious mismatch . to compound the issue , microsoft has a mixed record when it comes to acquiring video game studios . the most famous and lucrative buy was mac focused developer bungie , whose halo games turned into the flagship series for microsoft s xbox consoles . peter molyneux s lionhead studios was bought in and has exclusively released fable games ever since , to varying degrees of success . rare , the british developer that made massive games like goldeneye , donkey kong country , and banjo kazooie for nintendo consoles , has never replicated its success with microsoft after titles like perfect dark zero , kameo , and viva pi ata fizzled out , the studio has been relegated to kinect sports and the xbox s mii like avatar system . notch will be all too aware of this , and wouldn t want to leave mojang or minecraft in unsafe hands . and yet from microsoft s point of view , there can t be that many more people to sell copies of the existing minecraft to . the game is so popular already that there s unlikely to be much more growth in that direction . but minecraft isn t an ordinary game it s a platform , a set of rules , a way of life . own minecraft and you own a huge , young , captive audience . microsoft s muscle and management could be a way to secure the future of minecraft as a game and brand , something that notch personally may not have much interest in doing himself . anyway , my price is two billion dollars . give me two billion dollars , and i ll endorse your crap . markus persson notch december , if the reported billion figure is accurate , it suggests notch may not have chosen microsoft for the money he said after the billion facebook and oculus deal that he d been offered similar amounts already . he also once said my price is two billion dollars . give me two billion dollars , and i ll endorse your crap , however , so . and it follows that if he did approach microsoft first , there must be some assurance that the software giant won t sabotage minecraft . after all , despite notch s views on windows , minecraft turned out to be a huge success on the xbox with over million copies sold , and a new version for xbox one and playstation was released last week . hey , microsoft ! notch said in . you might be a big and scary american company that likes secrets and meetings and such , but i love working with you ! minecraft might just be the stickiest reason yet to use a microsoft accountjust as minecraft is what you make of it the game doesn t hold your hand but allows for limitless expression there are endless possibilities for where it might go in the future . it won t be about selling more xboxes or even more copies of minecraft itself with the company s new focus on cross platform experiences , minecraft might just be the stickiest reason yet for someone to use a microsoft account , whatever system they re playing on . that s something microsoft is in real need of , with flagging consumer interest in its windows mobile products and even xbox to some extent . video games are the single biggest digital life category in a mobile first world , according to xbox boss phil spencer , and there aren t many games that resonate with people s lives as much as minecraft . the potential for new games and product categories based off the ip is also huge , and there have already been cross promotional tie ups like downloadable doctor who content packs . if microsoft insists on staying in the gaming market , mojang is about as useful a purchase as it could make . and with minecraft as the building blocks , the sky could be the limit for microsoft even beyond video games . education is one area where microsoft could help mojang , for example . in the face of encroaching competition in the mobile space , microsoft is desperate to keep kids learning on windows pcs , and to any minecraft fan under , the game is probably the most important thing they do with their computer . minecraft has been pitched as a tool that can actually aid people in various ways , too , from designing urban slums in africa and haiti with the un to teaching kids how to code . it s exactly the kind of thing microsoft would be best placed to extend . it s also worth noting that microsoft keeps much of its cash overseas and would be able to use this to pay for the acquisition , rather than bringing funds back to the us and getting taxed on a similar buyout back home . as for notch , who knows what he d do with the money ? this is the guy that offered to personally fund a sequel to tim schafer s semi obscure platformer psychonauts , though later balked at the cost . with a microsoft nest egg , notch would be much better placed to carry out such video game philanthropy . or , after leaving mojang , he d have more freedom to keep on developing the kinds of unique titles we ve come to expect . or he could buy more ultra rare aphex twin lps . of course , it s more than possible that mojang could be another failed purchase like rare , with a clash of company cultures driving minecraft into the ground . microsoft s efforts to court pc gamers have been disastrous for years , too , with initiatives like games for windows live garnering nothing but resentment among the players and publishers it tried to court . but notch is no fool , and it s more likely that he s leaving minecraft with a steward he trusts at the height of the game s popularity . if microsoft plays it right , this could be a deal that works out well for everyone involved maybe even including minecraft fans . 