 created in to follow the tonight show starring johnny carson , nbc s late night has had just three hosts in as many decades david letterman , conan o brien , and jimmy fallon . as the story goes and it could very well just be a myth , letterman s writers gave o brien a large , plastic pickle when he took over late night in . o brien , in turn , gave it to fallon by way of messenger when he became the host of late night in . so for his january th show , just one week before his bow out from late night , fallon passed the pickle to seth meyers , a saturday night live alum whose own late night tenure is set to begin on february th . as for fallon , he ll be taking over the tonight show on february th . conan o brien had it , then he gave it to me . and then i ve been stuck with it for five yea ampndash i mean , i ve been so blessed to have this thing for five years . so now i would like to present it to you . this is the late night pickle . it s a giant . . . this is the passing of the pickle . hold back the emotion . ampmdash jimmy fallon to seth meyers , january th , both fallon and current tonight show host jay leno will end their respective shows this week before nbc flips the switch on its winter olympics coverage . leno s tonight show run is one marked by tabloid and turmoil ampmdash it s the story of a host who literally can t seem to stop working and network executives who can t make up their minds about whether to keep him around . but this transition is markedly less contentious than before , and not just because both leno and fallon seem to be making a concerted effort to appear together cordially in interviews and make surprise cameos in each other s pre taped sketches . if anything , it isn t even a story about leno and fallon . arguably , it s about lorne michaels , the man behind ampnbspsaturday night live . nbc s the tonight show is a late night dynasty nearly years old , dominated by the memory of johnny carson and his years at the helm . the pm time slot is as close to sacred ground as television gets . the three hosts of late night have all at some point or another been considered heir apparent to the tonight show gig . fallon is still weeks away from his first show , but the drama surrounding his two predecessors is well documented . in short , when carson was set to retire in , nbc s top brass picked jay leno over carson s personal choice david letterman ampmdash which ultimately led to letterman moving to cbs and starting his own franchise . pm is as close to sacred ground as television getsin , o brien hosted for seven months , before different nbc executives got cold feet and brought leno back for his own late night show . o brien ultimately quit when nbc tried to move the tonight show to am in order make way for the jay leno show at the historic pm slot . i cannot participate in what i honestly believe is its destruction , o brien wrote in a open letter . some people will make the argument that with dvrs and the internet , a time slot doesn t matter . but with the tonight show , i believe nothing could matter more . o brien is now at tbs , starting pm . this week , then , is leno s second goodbye ampmdash after more than , shows and ampnbspmore than , jokes about bill clinton . it s still a ratings juggernaut , beaten only occasionally by letterman . there is a slight concern that history could repeat itself ampmdash that the notoriously work obsessed leno will somehow wind up as the tonight show host for a third tenure . in a ampnbsprecent minutes interview about his retirement and about fallon , leno was even called out for having said all of the same things , exactly , about conan . leno isn t the wild card , here ampmdash if anything , he s the predictable constant . who s to say nbc executive won t meddle again , should fallon not come out the gate with good ratings ? that s where lorne michaels comes in . michaels is the executive producer of nbc s other late night dynasty , saturday night live , which he created in . to this day he maintains a very hands on role in every aspect of the show , from sketch selection to casting . the show is well known as a launching pad for comedians and writers that later move on to tv and film , and michaels gets a lot of credit for his involvement . for two decades , michaels has been slowly extending his empire into the rest of the week . in , after letterman left late night for cbs , michaels took on the am slot and hand picked conan o brien ampmdash a former snl scribe who was at the time writing for the simpsons . it was an odd choice ampmdash o brien was a writer first and foremost , virtually unknown for being on camera ampmdash and it took three years before he became a critical and commercial success late night would go on to be nominated for an emmy every year from until its final year in . michaels has been slowly extending his late night empirewhen o brien left new york for his ill fated stint at the helm of ampnbspthe tonight show in los angeles , michaels urged nbc executives to pick jimmy fallon , another snl alum ampmdash he d anchored the show s weekend update for four years before pursuing a movie career that went nowhere . again , the choice was met with confusion . producer and late night announcer steve higgins is ampnbspnoted for joking , you loved him on snl . you hated him in the movies . now , you re ambivalent . like o brien , fallon s late night launched with mixed reviews before finding its voice . for the first time , lorne michaels will now take over as executive producer for the pm time slot , ampnbspthe tonight show starring jimmy fallon . the show is also moving back to studio b in nbc s rockefeller center in new york city ampmdash the exact same studio where carson hosted until he moved the show to california in . two floors above , meyers will host the new late night . just down the hall from that is snl and the weekend update desk that both he and fallon spent years behind , honing their craft and preparing for this moment . with snl , lorne michaels has already built an institution on saturday nights . as the executive producer of late night and now the tonight show , he wields influence over the rest of the week . michaels won t be nearly as hands on as he is with his first love , snl . but for as much of the tonight show s drama can be traced to executive meddling , michaels is a buffer between the creatives and the network ampmdash one with a proven track record that both sides respect . each new show has its unique challenges . fallon , a known quantity at am , must now take his iconic friendly demeanor to a broader audience ampmdash something leno was particularly good at . for meyers , it s all but sure to be a rough few months as he finds his voice and learns an entirely new skill set . with fallon , lorne michaels has now shepherded a comedic talent from his snl audition to his seat at weekend update to late night and finally the tonight show . it s very likely the last gig fallon will ever have . there is no job after this , michaels said in ampnbspa recent interview with vulture . you stay on as long as you can and you hope , like carson , that it s your choice when you go . which i think letterman will have as well . that should give fallon plenty of time to find something better to pass on than a large plastic pickle . 