 facebook amprsquos new messenger app is lightning fast and utilitarian ampmdash a vision of the mobile first mentality facebook promised one year ago . in an earnings call two weeks after messenger launched , ceo mark zuckerberg reflected on how the company had historically moved forward by building a lot of features into its core app ampmdash and how things were about to change . we also have a few separate apps that are widely used , such as instagram and messenger , our standalone messaging app , he said . in the future , we expect to develop more of these services to help people share . at the time , zuckerberg amprsquos statement didn amprsquot generate any headlines or much attention , but the verge has learned that he was hinting at the company amprsquos strategy facebook plans to produce a number of slick , standalone apps designed for mobile . when mark says something like this publicly you can imagine that the company is following through on it , said one source . if all goes as planned , facebook is running headfirst into a fragmented future . but that might not be such a bad thing . facebook messenger for android . buried aliveover the years facebook was filled to the brim with photos , weather , classifieds , coupons , comics , games , links , and more . but when the app store launched in , everything changed . the iphone amprsquos endless grid of apps trained us to crave tools that deliver value swiftly and in single serving portions . facebook amprsquos smorgasbord of features made sense on the desktop , but not on mobile , where they feel buried under layer upon layer of interface . the app grew fatter while simpler competitors like instagram unbundled facebook amprsquos core features , manicuring each one for an increasingly mobile world . facebook grew fatter while competitors like instagram ampnbspunbundled their core featurestoday , facebook thinks of instagram internally as its standalone photo app , and messenger as its chat app , sources say , so where else does the company go from here ? fortunately for facebook , it already employs some of the best engineers in the valley and has the cash to acquire smaller competitors . the jury amprsquos out on how facebook plans to handle the ephemeral messaging trend , considering its poke app flopped and snapchat rebuffed its billion acquisition offer , but there are other very viable opportunities for expansion across the spectrum of the average user amprsquos daily activities . mobile fleetmessenger for iphone and android recently underwent complete transformations into faster , more capable messaging apps ampmdash and they hardly have any facebook branding . by focusing the user amprsquos attention on what messenger provides ampmdash speedy , cross platform communication ampmdash facebook amprsquos throwing light on the app amprsquos functionality and not on itself as an all encompassing empire . messenger hit number one in the app store over the holidays , beating out instagram , snapchat , and other chat apps , and it amprsquos currently the most used messaging app in the united states . if facebook models its new apps after messenger , they could be successful . the most potent opportunity for facebook is news . zuckerberg recently said he wanted the site to be the personalized newspaper you flipped to each morning , and facebook amprsquos recent news feed changes put a far greater emphasis on news than ever before . the company says that its data shows that users want fewer memes and more breaking news stories . although that amprsquos been contested , most of facebook amprsquos billion users have never used rss readers or even twitter , which means the company is in prime position to provide the same kind of utility to many users . facebook already does this , except the news is interspersed with photos of friends , which isn t ideal for mobile . sunrise calendar for iphone . as the app store top charts seem to prove , people don amprsquot seem to be looking for an inbox for everything , but instead for sharply focused apps delivering solid value at a moment amprsquos notice . if facebook provided a better packaged and better curated news app than prismatic , pulse , flipboard , circa , and most recently , yahoo news digest , a big portion of its user base might just enjoy it . a report this week by re code amprsquos mike isaac indicates that facebook is indeed planning to launch such an app later this month . facebook has largely ignored the popularity of its events productcalendar could be another opportunity for facebook to embed itself into its users lives . facebook events are perhaps the most popular way to send out birthday party invites ampmdash yet facebook has largely ignored its potential . all the while , free apps like sunrise tastefully bundle facebook events into your google or icloud calendar . a facebook calendar app , like the new messenger , would have to be the best calendar app ampmdash not the best facebook calendar app ampmdash which means no spammy sponsored events or suggested parties . the app could plug into google calendar , like fantastical or sunrise , but provide the best facebook events experience , since that amprsquos what people are using to track of events they amprsquore attending . it amprsquos also worth noting that facebook is still the place most people check to keep up on birthdays ampmdash a sorely undervalued and essential functionality that sunrise duly steals . a third potential gold mine for facebook is mobile search . facebook amprsquos graph search product , which has yet to make its way to mobile , struggles with the real world largely because it amprsquos not always with you . searching for sushi restaurants my friends like isn amprsquot nearly as valuable at a computer as on your phone when you walk out of a movie at pm . foursquare amprsquos repeated emphasis on mobile is further proof that users search for places to eat and drink on their phones , but facebook amprsquos local recommendations search has been a no show . foursquare hasn amprsquot exactly hit it big , but with the help of your friends likes , a facebook mobile search product could potentially be very compelling . facebook graph search on the web . facebook has , of course , already tried this fragmented approach before with apps like facebook camera and poke , but i amprsquove heard from sources over the last year that these apps functioned more as experimental testing beds than anything else . poke was a glorified hackathon project and camera was a misguided hedge against instagram , but both showed facebook is willing to break pieces of its service apart to see if they work . new , separate apps might throw a wrench into facebook amprsquos news feed based ad model , but it amprsquos a sacrifice the company will have to make . it can figure out that part later , just as its free competitors plan on doing . buried no morewhen ampnbspsquare cash launched , i asked product manager brian grassadonia why square didn amprsquot put cash inside of its existing wallet app . he laughed as he explained that doing so could doom cash to a role as a feature and not as a product unto itself . with messenger , facebook has shown that it understands this principle , and it seems clear that it will act on its learnings in . in fact , zuckerberg plans to appear for the first time at ampnbspbarcelona s mobile world congress next month . perhaps with separate apps , it can not only be more agile , but more focused , dumping apps that underperform while pulling resources into apps that catch on without constantly reorganizing its main site . in september zuckerberg compared ten year old facebook to electricity . maybe electricity was cool when it first came out but pretty quickly people stopped talking about it because it amprsquos not the new thing . the real question you want to track at that point is , are fewer people turning on their lights because it amprsquos less cool ? zuckerberg made facebook an indispensable utility on the desktop , and after years chasing the coolest apps in the market , it amprsquos time to see if he can repeat the success on mobile . 