 a week ago , the verge published an article about vulva emojis . the story featured a series of diverse , body positive vulva icons developed by ampnbspflirtmoji it also included an interview with the designers who drew them . unfortunately , the verge has learned that some of the designs presented in the story weren t original . they were actually plagiarized from another artist s work , without her knowledge . erin tobey is a multimedia artist and musician based in indiana . she produced undeniably similar designs years before flirtmoji launched its vulva emoji and that isn t hard to prove . tobey s drawings were part of a kickstarter campaign , and they were featured in a buzzfeed article last year . so , when a friend posted the verge s story on facebook , she recognized them right away . the drawings below are tobey s , while the vector based icons are flirtmoji s ups for spreading vulva love amp sex positivity , but flirtmoji straight up traced my art , no cred . cc arielledross pic . twitter . com g c mvry erin tobey erintobey october , many of the designs are pretty literally quoted from my work , tobey told the verge in an instant message exchange . in fact , one of the reasons tobey was able to identify the art is because one of the vulvas that flirtmoji produced is a reproduction of tobey s own anatomy . i took a photo of my own and illustrated it , she says . because that picture isn t available online , flirtmoji s designers couldn t have worked off the original . many of the designs are pretty literally quoted from my work . finding her art reproduced in this way is irritating , tobey says especially given the way flirtmoji designer jeremy yingling discussed his artistic process in his interview with the verge . millions of pictures of genitals are available online and what a bizarre and beautiful concept that is , he told the verge last week . so , throughout this project , we were harvesting that however possible . there were certainly a lot of google image searches . yingling admits some of the emoji were plagiarized , albeit inadvertently . there was certainly no straight up tracing , yingling said ampnbspin an email but he did draw inspiration from some of tobey s designs . i ll admit that the one in the middle left was pure vagina plagiarism homage . this morning in a phone call , yingling apologized for the similarity between the drawings . i don t feel good about it . in an email to tobey that yingling shared with the verge , the flirtmoji designer explained his process further the bottom yellow one and the top right one look very , very similar to two of our vagina emojis . i see the resemblance , down to some of the little details in the curves . i m obviously absolutely uncomfortable with those similarities and understand it looks like malicious theft of art . however , they re absolutely not traced . i work by looking at my mood board and apparently at your vaginas and doodling in my sketchbook . i scanned that sketchbook back in and refined it along with dozens of other half conceived vaginas . i swapped clits , folds , played endlessly with strokes and colors . there are like , vaginas on one document . in some part of this back and forth process , i lost any concept of attribution or the original source of those particular lines . again , the end result comparison of those two vaginas is problematic for me . they look plagiarized . i suppose by some definition they are . i feel terrible and embarrassed . i m sorry . these emoji have received an excellent response from the media and public and i was feeling very proud of the time i spent researching , investigating , doodling , and looking to artists like you for inspiration . as for the other four vaginas you paired , i don t see the similarity . i certainly understand your suspicion , but i don t see it in these . perhaps there s only so many ways to draw vaginas . we too see the plagiarism and we re calling it that word . yingling also noted that flirtmoji isn t selling the package of five vulva emojis they have released so far , and therefore haven t profited from the designs . the startup does sell other emoji packages , however , so articles that covered them may have helped them obtain more users . then , yingling told tobey that he wanted to resolve the issue by either removing the art , changing it , or attributing two of the icons to her . we too see the plagiarism and we re calling it that word , he said in a second email to tobey . erin tobey tobey understands how sorting out where an artist s inspiration comes from might get complicated , she told yingling in response . but she was displeased with the way he described his design process last week . it was not truthful , she said . tobey also thinks that at least five of the emoji are based off her work not two . from her email to yingling , which she shared with the verge my main beef is that , in your interview on the verge , your thoughts on inspiration came across as disingenuous when i see at least of the designs coming pretty directly from my work . i appreciate , and totally agree with , your feelings about celebrating asymmetrical bodies . the description of your process in seeking these out also feels disingenuous given the above . flirtmoji now plans to remove one of the vulva emoji from its site . we re definitely going to swap out the one that in our opinion is plagiarism , but not without a blog post , public apology to erin , etc , yingling ampnbsptold the verge in an ampnbspemail . the two parties are still talking about potential solutions . on the phone , yingling said that he wanted to get the word out about tobey s art . the only thing we would say is go look at erin s work it s phenomenal . you can find more information about tobey s art on her website . her vulva designs were created in collaboration with debby herbenick and vanessa schick . update pm et flirtmoji s designers have published ampnbspa blog post that reveals more of their thoughts on this issue . in it , they say that if tobey wants the emoji to be taken down , they will do just that . verge video the future of sex