 all the evidence for the million court case against apple is now in , but what we still don t have is someone to represent the some million who purchased ipods during the class action period . that s an important detail that s still being hashed out ahead of next week , when the trial comes to a close and a jury of eight begins its deliberations . despite the lack of a plaintiff , apple presented evidence defending itself from the claims that it harmed consumers when creating the drm system for itunes and the ipod . today , apple s lawyers said they still needed another day to file last minute paperwork over some last pieces of information about a potential plaintiff who has spent the past few days being vetted in order to replace two other plaintiffs who were removed earlier in the trial . last week , evidence emerged they either did not buy the correct devices or bought them outside the time period of the complaint , leaving the case s lawyers scrambling to find a replacement . the jury gets to decide next weekthe entire complaint hinges on exactly why apple hardened its digital rights management software in itunes and ipods nearly a decade ago . according to the suit , which was filed back in , two updates apple made to its itunes and ipod software actively kept other companies from connecting their devices the jukebox software , as well as kept users from playing music from other stores on their ipods . it also claims apple used that system to systematically raise the prices of ipods during that time , making more money in the process . taking a turn to defend itself this week , witnesses for apple , which included two economists and its former vp of marketing and business management , made the case that the company not only improved its products from to , but also managed to reduce prices of those devices in the process . in question are some models of the ipod nano , the ipod classic , the ipod touch , and ipod shuffle . mark donnelly , who worked under apple s marketing chief phil schiller and retired from the company last october , argued that apple was always trying to fit more features into a new models , and consistently discounting older models . he recalled one such time that jeff williams , who is currently apple s senior vice president of operations , ran into him in the middle of apple s campus , and excitedly told him they could double the amount of storage they were planning to include in the upcoming ipod nano , but without spending more . nobody really knew we d done that . jeff said mark , we re getting lots better prices on the flash . we could actually do better we could double the memory of these ipod nanos , donnelly recalled . the only problem is that the company had already finalized the product s launch , and was in the process of assembling millions of them overseas . the pair successfully pitched the idea to increase the memory up to schiller , and apple went about striking the deal on the larger memory , immediately building the higher configurations , then ultimately shipping the original ones to smaller markets at a lower cost , with nobody the wiser . nobody really knew we d done that , donnelly said . we really enjoyed that we were able to pull it off . donnelly also recalled his time as part of an exclusive apple committee that would come together to decide the prices for all the company s new products . where late apple ceo steve jobs once said the company had zero committees because apple functioned like a startup , donnelly painted an entirely different picture , explaining in detail how the company s senior executives and other decision makers would meet together in person , or on the phone to come up with the price for upcoming products , poring over gross margins , product specs , and head to head comparisons with devices made by other companies . earlier in the case , the plaintiffs had brought out planning documents from these meetings to suggest that apple was acutely aware of the competition and its market share , including that of itunes . donnelly said he d looked at the itunes market share from time to time , but that did not elaborate on how it affected how apple priced its products . prior to donnelly , apple called upon two professors from the university of chicago , robert topel and kevin murphy , to poke holes in the damages calculations of the plaintiffs economist roger noll . they said noll hadn t factored in improvements to apple s products in his analysis , and that changes like extra storage , longer battery life , larger screens , and new software features made ipods better over time . murphy also compared apple s integrated system of the ipod and itunes to video game consoles from microsoft , sony , and nintendo , as well as amazon s kindle , saying it was an identical idea . integration is not an all or nothing thing . there are varying levels of integration . some of the game titles will be the same , donnelly said in his comparison to video game consoles . but the actual thing you purchase will only work on that other system . they re malevolent . integration is not an all or nothing thing . there are varying levels of integration . the part of apple s integration that under scrutiny are two security measures that were rolled out a year apart in itunes and apple s ipod software . one verifies the itunes library , whereas the other verifies what s known as the keybag on ipod basically a set of digital keys to unlock songs that have drm . once activated , these security measures did a number of things , from keeping ipods from playing songs that had drm that had been tampered with , to keeping third parties from changing the database of songs with jukebox software apps . i was told to authenticate the third party player and keep them from syncing . rod schultz , a former apple engineer who had built a key aspect of the library checker , said today that he d originally been tasked with the job because the company wanted to keep linux based music players from accessing the itunes library after it had been reverse engineered . i was told that third party players were corrupting apple s database , so i was told to authenticate the third party player and keep them from syncing , schultz said . that became a feature in itunes , and later right on the ipod , though schultz who left the company in to go build drm technology for adobe said he hadn t worked on the version that went onto the ipod . earlier in the trial , apple had argued that such third party players , including one made by realnetworks , attempted to hijack the ipod and created all sorts of issues for users that would damage a user s music library and the performance of their ipod . that s become a point of contention where apple s said it was trying to protect users from buggy software , while the plaintiffs have accused it of shutting out competition . the million in damages apple could be on the hook for is relatively small , but could triple if the jury says the company willfully violated antitrust laws , something that would push it beyond what apple initially won in its patent trial against samsung two years ago . today was the last day of evidence from either side , with the jury set to begin deliberations after closing arguments next week . 