 you wouldn t know it by looking at him , but philip thornhill s life is about to change forever . hundreds of costumed fans have gathered outside the arena here in vienna , waving flags under a late afternoon sun , and singing along to the bubbly europop blaring from huge loudspeakers . backstage , philip can t hear them , but he will soon . in the halls , things are building to a crescendo . a bearded drag queen fans herself furiously in one corridor , pausing only to adjust her black flamenco dress and pose for photos . smiling , musclebound men prance around in the press hall , hoisting signs that read free hugs ! but nobody takes them up on their offer they re too busy setting up cameras and doing sound checks , and prepping for the event that s going to change philip s life . in barely three hours , he and the three other members of the danish boy band anti social media will take the stage at the eurovision song contest , one of the biggest and most ridiculous tv events in the world , and sing their official competition song , the way you are . six months ago , he was just a redheaded year old with a nice voice . by the end of the night , millions of viewers around the world will know his face and his band s music . for the moment , though , all he can do is wait . it s like a roller coaster , you know , when you re going up . philip says , sandwiched on a couch between drummer emil vessing and bassist david vang , both of them struggling to contain their nervous excitement . that sounds terrifying , i tell him . oh yeah ? he replies . i dunno , i like it . where three minutes can at once mean everything and absolutely nothingthe last five months have been one continual ascent for anti social media . their producer , lars chief pedersen , brought them together in january solely to compete in tonight s show just for a chance at those three minutes on the world s stage . if they win enough votes , they ll stay on through saturday night s final , with a shot at bringing the eurovision crown back to denmark , a three time champion . if they don t , they ll hop on a plane and resume their fledgling careers in copenhagen , where the response could be brutal . if we flop and go back to denmark , people go like , boo ! boo ! chief told me last week . they will kill you . what a final round victory would mean for their careers remains less clear , but if it s global fame and longevity they re after , they may actually be better off losing something even chief acknowledges . such is the cruel , twisted logic of eurovision , where three minutes can at once mean everything and absolutely nothing . years of songsas an american who s been living in europe for seven years , there are many things i ve embraced in the name of cultural assimilation espresso , smoking , universal healthcare but eurovision has never been one of them . maybe it s because i never had a flag to get behind maybe it s because soaring ballads don t really move my needle . but for everyone else here , eurovision is an institution . according to the european broadcasting union ebu , which organizes eurovision , more than more than million people tuned in to watch last year s semifinals and finals , putting it on par with the super bowl . what began as an experiment in live broadcasting technology with just seven countries has mutated into an extravagant , multimillion dollar production that now expands well beyond europe s borders . this year s contest includes entries from countries like azerbaijan , israel , and , for the first time , australia . we don t have a super bowl , we don t have a world series . we have eurovision . there are very few events in european culture that bring everyone together , says ewan spence , the gregarious , kilt wearing founder of the eurovision news website ampnbspesc insight . we don t have a super bowl , we don t have a world series . we have eurovision . the event celebrates its th anniversary this year in vienna , continuing the tradition of anointing last year s winner as the host country . its epicenter is at the wiener stadthalle , a , seat indoor arena planted in a working class corner of the city , along an impossibly wide boulevard peppered with sex shops and kebab stands . for nearly two weeks , members of the press and eurovision fan blogs have been camping out in the stadthalle , snapping selfies with their favorite artists and singing along with televised dress rehearsals . russia s buranovskiye babushki in ebu eurovision s history is littered with names that have faded into oblivion for the uninitiated , american idol may seem like the most obvious corollary to what eurovision represents a talent show determined by popular vote but it s much more than that . it s equal parts olympic event and geopolitical summit , mixed in with seizure inducing stage sets and plenty of we are the world evangelism . add in a ampnbspbaroque voting system , garish wardrobes , and often truly terrible songwriting , and the whole thing can seem like a circus of the absurd . but that s what makes it so irresistible to so many . the best way to describe it is miss universe for music , says john kennedy o connor , a eurovision commentator and author of the eurovision song contest the official history . miss universe is nonsense there s no way that miss iceland is objectively more beautiful than miss canada . and that is the beauty of eurovision . there s no way you and i can sit down in a room and say this german song is better than that austrian song . like miss universe , the degree to which theatrics and persona play into it partially explains why so few eurovision winners have been able to translate their sudden fame into mainstream success . the qualities that the contest rewards extravagance , flamboyance , general weirdness often aren t building blocks for global pop stardom russia notably made the finals in with a group of dancing grandmothers . whereas earlier competitions included future stars like abba , celine dion , and julio iglesias , eurovision s more recent history is littered with names that have faded from the global stage and into oblivion . it s like a supernova , says william lee adams , founder of the eurovision blog ampnbspwiwibloggs . you kind of explode in all this glory , but then you re a black hole and disappear . it s a little depressing . at first glance , that s perhaps not surprising . viewers vote for their favorite performance on a single night , not for most likely to succeed , and professional juries , which account for the other half of each country s votes , are often swayed by politics . not every act is looking for the same thing , either . this year s entrants ranged from wide eyed teens looking for their big break israel s year old ampnbspnadav guedj , for example to grizzled , vaping baby boomers grasping at a second act such as montenegro s year old ampnbspknez . what it delivers is instant fame that you can ride for as long as you can milk it . but that still doesn t explain why artists would actually put themselves through this ordeal why they would devote so much time and energy to something that guarantees nothing more than the title eurovision winner . in an age of vine moguls and kardashians , fame has become increasingly up for interpretation , but the celebrity eurovision confers upon its contestants seems to be a particularly ephemeral strain . the months leading up to the event typically entail a whirlwind of media appearances and photo ops , throughout which contestants become packaged and product developed , with compelling backstories and carefully manicured personas that will stay with them well beyond their three minutes onstage . whether that s a blessing or a curse depends on who you ask . i don t think it gives you anything . i don t think it possibly can , o connor says of winning eurovision . what it delivers is instant fame that you can ride for as long as you can milk it , which isn t very long . and nothing else . thomas hanses ebu our goal is not to be forgotten emil from anti social media certainly has no illusions about the challenges that await his post eurovision career , and he s surprisingly blunt about the burden that would come with the crown . it is a curse , says the year old drummer , from behind black ray bans and a denim cap . it s a muggy wednesday in vienna , and he s lounging on a top floor hotel balcony with the rest of anti social media . they re fresh off their first rehearsal at the stadthalle and , just six days away from the biggest performance of their young lives , they seem remarkably relaxed , dropping fart jokes and ragging on each other . i suspect the small pyramid of empty beer cans in the corner of their hotel room may have something to do with it . anti social media seems genetically engineered for eurovision success we ve talked about that a lot , adds david , the six foot something , square jawed bassist who , at , is the closest thing the group has to an elder statesman . our goal is not to be forgotten after this , like all the other contestants . in many ways , anti social media was genetically engineered for eurovision success . their sound and style is unabashedly beatles influenced , and after just three months , they seem to be maturing nicely into their roles . emil is the group s closest ringo proxy , eccentric and outspoken with his hushed tones , year old guitarist nikolaj t th is george . philip , the guitarist and frontman , is far more charismatic than any year old i ve ever met , with sleepy eyes that seem destined for the walls of a pre teen s bedroom . they ve each enjoyed varying levels of individual success as musicians , mostly through playing gigs across denmark with their own bands . but they have aspirations that extend beyond their home country , and they think eurovision could make them happen . you have this huge exposure , philip says . we just look at that as a win no matter what . their sherpa through it all has been chief , a portly , easygoing year old who , from the right angle , looks a little like peter gallagher . chief , as the band calls him , speaks with the casual authority of a guy who s grown familiar with the eurovision game . he created the rap group rockers by choice in the mid s , and is regarded as a founding father of denmark s hip hop scene . anti social media is the third group he s brought to eurovision as a producer , and although he s never gotten close to the title , he s made a habit of backing groups that don t fit the traditional eurovision mold , eschewing the power ballads and duets for distinctly quirkier sounds a rapper in , and an acoustic pop singer he plucked off the streets of copenhagen in . chief has taken a similar tack this year , betting on anti social media s britpop aesthetic to stick out among a field of saccharine duets and anthemic club tracks . compared to the dazzling , high tech stage sets of most contestants this year , their routine is fairly austere coordinated black and white blazers , carefully coiffed hairstyles , and doo wop theatrics . i love run dmc and i love the beach boys , chief says . a lot of people would try to keep those two things separate . nearly everyone made a point of telling me just how non eurovision their song isdifferentiation is key nearly every artist i spoke with in vienna last week made a point of telling me just how non eurovision their song is . boggie , hungary s soft spoken , year old representative , says wars for nothing , her lilting and at times soporific anti war ballad isn t the most popular wave of music , but what really matters to her is the fact that she wrote it herself a dose of authenticity in a sea of pre cooked singles . for lo c , belgium s baby faced hopeful , creative control is the reason why i live . but underpinning all this individuality are somewhat banal messages that generally sound the same . i think it s important to realize , ok , we are different , but inside we are all the same , lo c says . we have blood and we have hearts that are beating . that sounds an awful lot like serbia s entry a year old soul singer named bojana stamenov , whose song includes the lyric finally i can say i m different and it s ok . there are also two different songs titled warrior in this year s field , and they both cover basically the same thematic ground determination , resilience , etc . part of that homogeneity could be attributed to a rule change , implemented in , that allows contestants to sing in any language . that s resulted in mostly english language songs that aim for the broadest possible appeal . but this year s field also seems to have taken a cue from last year s winner the bearded drag queen conchita wurst , who has become as celebrated for what she represents tolerance , gay rights as for her singing . the closest thing this year s contest has to a conchita might be pkn , a veteran finnish punk rock band whose four members have down syndrome or autism . leading up to eurovision , they were widely included among the frontrunners to win the whole thing . the back story is now becoming as important as anything . the back story to many countries and many singers is now becoming as important as anything , o connor says . and i think as a result we ve got a field of rather dull songs this year . anti social media don t have a conchita esque backstory , and neither chief nor the oddsmakers are optimistic about their chances . but that doesn t seem to bother the group very much . they ve already pushed out an ep since winning denmark s national competition in february , and will play shows across the country regardless of how they place . but chief thinks eurovision s platform could and probably should deliver more than just steady work back home . the problem , in his view , is the eurovision stigma . this could be such a huge window , he said last week , splayed out comfortably on a white leather couch backstage . but it seems like no one dares to do it because they also know that if you don t get number one , then you ll forever be banned from anything that s remotely hip . so either it s something for the debutante who couldn t get into the hipster hip zone , or it s the last stop for someone who was big once . and that s kind of tragic for me . but some eurovision enthusiasts disagree . in their view , eurovision provides the audience what happens next is on the artist . you know in mario kart where you ve got that little arrow on the ground that you go over and whoosh , you speed up for two seconds ? spence says . eurovision is that little arrow . you get on it and whoosh . it ll run out very quickly , but what you do with it is up to you . it s part of my path . it s been one year since suzy guerra sang in her first eurovision , and she s still riding that arrow . she didn t win the crown last year in copenhagen . she didn t even get past the semifinals . but the exposure provided was enough to kickstart a second career , and she s embraced it with open arms . a lot of artists , after eurovision , they don t want to be related to eurovision , she says . i don t mind , and actually for me it s mandatory , because it s part of my path . suzy has spent the past year doing the eurovision circuit , performing at corporate events , appearing on catwalks , and trying her hand at tv hosting . before she decided to enter portugal s national contest at the last minute , she was working in the pharmaceutical industry in dubai . now , she s supporting herself entirely on music and appearances and for many ex eurovision singers , that s more than enough . i think there s often a perception that everyone s goal is to become the next abba , says adams , the wiwibloggs founder . but no , people just wanna earn a living by singing , which is a fair enough goal . not everyone wants to be the next abbasuzy s staying power as a musician has yet to be tested , though she s not worried about being tagged with the eurovision label for the rest of her career . she s got a new single in the works , and she says it s going to sound very different from quero ser tua , the track she performed in front of the world last year . if the song is a hit , they won t remember me as a eurovision artist , she says . it s not going to be suzy the eurovision artist , it ll be suzy that sings this song . doing that may be easier said than done . sandie shaw , who became the first brit to win eurovision in , has ampnbspblamed her victory for stunting her career , saying it saddled her with an uncool label and stifled her creative control . gina g . , who represented the uk in , has made similarly disparaging comments about the event , saying it didn t do me any favors afterwards . and british singer songwriter rita ora walked out of an audition to represent the uk in , a decision she now credits with saving her career . it s a double edged thing that s the reason why a lot of the winning songs are never heard of again , o connor says . they thrive in their pond , but then you put them in a completely different ocean and it s a different story . they make no sense anymore . finland s lordi in european broadcasting union they didn t really see what we were about . even eurovision success stories have their caveats . lordi , a finnish metal band that performs in monster costumes , enjoyed a surge in popularity and media coverage following their eurovision victory in , exposing them to entirely new fans , and catapulting them from niche curiosity to international phenomenon . their lead singer , tomi petteri putaansuu stage name mr . lordi , says that alone made eurovision worthwhile , but on the other hand and this is fucking strange there are so many people all around the world , all around finland , around europe , who are using it as a weapon against us . that because we were at eurovision , we could never ever be taken seriously ever again . their popularity also drew a much more mainstream demographic of fans , resulting in cultural collisions that the group wasn t always comfortable with . mr . lordi points to one instance , not long after they won eurovision , when he was heading to the dressing room after a show at an outdoor festival . crowds of fans had gathered behind a fence separating them from the stage , and he stopped to sign some autographs . i have horns on my head , i have open bloody wounds on my face , i am all covered in sweat and shit and fake blood , and i m carrying a bucket of severed limbs , and a fake chainsaw , he told me over the phone this week from his home in rovaniemi , near the arctic circle . and behind the fence there are like people who are screaming and smiling at us , and there were grandmothers and like , five year olds . and i thought , am i the only one here who sees that there s something fucking wrong with this ? are these people blind ? they only saw whoo ! eurovision winners ! , and they didn t really see what we were about . thomas hanses ebu the final countdownlordi s never going to reach abba levels of fame , and chances are that whoever wins this weekend won t either . and in some ways , that doesn t really matter . it certainly hasn t hurt the show s popularity , and it still offers an unmatched , singular platform that will continue to draw talent . but at what point do the glitz and superficiality begin to undermine its stakes ? this is the problem with eurovision there s abba , there s celine dion , and who else ? o connor says . after years , if that s all eurovision can point to , then eurovision has a credibility problem . similar problems have plagued smaller scale talent competitions as well , including the recently cancelled american idol , a cultural juggernaut that made for compelling tv but ultimately produced few enduring pop stars . the contestants have no option but to take this seriouslyit s easy for viewers to laugh eurovision off as a celebration of the ludicrous and the flamboyant , and maybe that s ok . but for the people behind the outrageous costumes and gaudy set designs , they have no option but to take this seriously . music is too important to me to be sarcastic and ironic and something to be laughed about , chief told me . he says he hasn t decided whether he ll make another run at eurovision next year , but listening to him speak , i get the impression that this is it for him . i haven t spent my entire life , to make songs and have people say wow , that s a really red dress , or why are there old ladies and strippers onstage ? anti social media is nearly finished with their three minutes on stage when the skies suddenly open above vienna , and a clap of thunder sends journalists scurrying away from the smoking patio and back into the press room . the scene inside now looks like a human risk board , with bloggers and journalists draped in their national flags , breathlessly watching the broadcast on giant tv screens . the nervous cynicism and everyone s a winner rhetoric i d heard for a week is fading away , replaced with a more primal urge to survive , even for just a few more days . the performances draw to a close around , thus beginning a painfully long minutes of vote counting . the broadcasters fill the time with flashback montages and an inexplicable clip of vienna s tourist attractions , which are shot with a gopro strapped to stuffed cats and dogs . then , a little before pm , our multilingual emcees announce that the votes are in . the countdown begins . albania is the first to make it , followed by armenia , russia , and romania . hungary is the fifth winner announced , and the camera cuts to boggie , who immediately embraces her team in an explosion of joy . the tension mounts as they begin reading off the final five winners , each name triggering a burst of applause in one corner of the press room and a wave of gasps everywhere else . in these waning moments , the show that everyone loves to ridicule suddenly means everything . belgium s ampnbsplo c is the last finalist announced . denmark is not called . hey , it s a competition . what can you do ? at around pm , with the dust settled and journalists now back in front of their computers , anti social media re emerges from the green room and strolls across the press area for a round of interviews with danish tv . philip is leading the way , followed by his bandmates , backup singers , and a small entourage of handlers . his eyes are red and puffy , and he discretely rubs the bridge of his nose with his thumb and forefinger . for the first time all week , he actually seems like a year old . the group pauses in front of the table where i m sitting , and i catch emil s eye . he reaches out over the shoulders of his entourage to shake my hand , and i clumsily offer my condolences . he responds with a smile and a shrug . hey , it s a competition , he says . what can you do ? a few seconds later , the band arrives in front of a tv camera and a danish presenter in a green sequined blazer . they re about to go on air when the band s media handler turns to philip and raises her eyebrows . they both jump up and down twice , like boxers getting ready for a fight , and his shoulders heave with a sigh . then the lights come on , he flashes a smile , and the rest of his career begins . 