 audiences associate the word horror with scary movies or terrifying novels . but over the past half decade , live theater and haunted house exhibits have merged , bringing new life to the genre with interactive , real world experiences that let audiences step through the screen and into their own personal tales of terror . for october , we re introducing the future of fear . we ll talk to the creators of some of the most striking , immersive horror experiences to see how they re inventing a new artistic medium to take the genre in directions it s never gone before . hold on , my agent s about to get naked . i m in the bowels of a dingy warehouse in the boyle heights neighborhood of los angeles , and horror director darren lynn bousman is downright giddy . he s orchestrating a run of the tension experience ascension , his ambitious new immersive horror experience that combines haunted house and escape room elements with interactive theater to put audiences at the center of a story about a creepy , scientology esque organization that might just be a supernatural cult . it s a disturbing , intoxicating piece of entertainment , designed to push your buttons and leave you questioning the divide between fantasy and reality . and as bousman and i watch the show s backstage video surveillance feeds , it turns out that , yes it s also a place where somebody s agent might lose their clothes . the tension experience first kicked off in february as an under the radar alternate reality game dubbed indoctrination . players that found its website slowly learned about an entity called the o . o . a . institute , and as they were pulled into real world meetups , dead drops , and invasive personal interviews , the institute s mythology began to take hold . it was all backstory to the september opening of ascension , with bousman and a cast of actors taking over a , square foot warehouse to create an interactive two hour play , where the direction and storylines are dictated by the way players behave and interact with the other characters . i want to do the game in los angeles . it s a step into a very different world for bousman , who first burst onto the film scene in when he took over the saw franchise . box office success and multiple sequels followed , but the filmmaker became disenchanted as the years wore on . filmmaking became so i don t want to say mundane , but everyone with a camera was making a movie . netflix was over inundated with every fucking thing in the world , and it became hard to make an impact , he says . i wanted to forge my own way . and sleep no more changed me . bousman s introduction to that groundbreaking production , in which audience members walk freely through a re created s hotel and bear witness to a play inspired by macbeth , pushed him in a new creative direction . he took in other immersive productions like the drowned man , delusion , and alone , turning to their creators to understand how the medium worked . four years ago , i did blackout . i met with them , and i was like , i want to make my own . i want to do the game in los angeles . the echoes of that film , in which a banker s world is upended by a real world game that may also be a con to ruin his life , can be seen in tension from the early days of the arg . when i arrived in an abandoned parking lot to experience ascension for myself , i didn t know what to expect , nor did the other nine people in my group . a few hours prior we d all received mysterious emails warning us not to attend , along with a letter from the institute with some basic guidelines for our processing things like wear comfortable , modest undergarments , and clothes we wouldn t mind getting stained or ruined . i ended up happy i paid attention on both counts . was i okay with public nudity including my own ? moments later , i was in a van with a black hood over my head , being driven wildly through the streets of la , then dumped alone outside the unmarked entrance of the o . o . a . institute . inside the impressively detailed waiting room , complete with magazines and inspirational posters , a no nonsense secretary told me to fill out an application that had some more than unnerving questions . was i okay with public nudity , including my own ? who knew i was there , and what was their phone number ? then i was off to a disheveled file room , where an elderly gentleman took my picture before he leaned in and offered a final warning it wasn t too late to turn back . if i wanted out , i just had to say the magic word coward . derrick hinman the tension experience i was the lead character in my own dark , twisted storyit s a fantastic way to set the mood , and to pull participants into the surreal , detailed world that bousman and co writer clint sears have dreamed up . going into too many specifics about what happened to me would ruin the sense of mystery that makes tension so fascinating , but i will say that while there were some typical haunted house activities getting shoved through the dark , being forced to blindly touch unsavory things i wouldn t necessarily call it a horror experience in the traditional sense . it s a psychological one . once i realized the degree to which i could actually interact with the characters i encountered , a weird metamorphosis took place . i not only felt like i was the lead character in my own dark , twisted story , but i increasingly became engaged emotionally . that feeling crescendoed late in the evening , when in one particularly harrowing moment pressed by a mysterious , masked stranger , for reasons i ll keep secret i found myself spontaneously opening up and apologizing for ways in which i d failed friends and family members . it was the kind of scene that i could have theoretically lied my way through , but the events of the evening robbed me of the ability to keep the show s world at arm s length . i was simply there , inescapably present , as the madness of the night swirled around me . a raucous step forward in a new , evolving mediumthe tension experience went beyond what i was expecting mixing fear , empathy , and the sheer visceral thrill of discovery into an unsettling combination that still has me sitting up at night . it isn t just a halloween stunt it s a raucous step forward in a new and evolving storytelling medium that has as much in common with text adventure and video game mechanics as it does with scary movies . the point was driven home when my group reconvened at the end of the show , to discover that our choices and fears had led each of us through radically different scenes , plot points , and dramatic moments . it s a page script , producer gordon bijelonic tells me , and every performer has between six and possible scenes . different keywords can activate a given actor s entrance into the storyline , and if an audience member never hits upon the right words during their conversations in the show , an actor could conceivably just stay in the shadows . he doesn t even show up . he just sits there all night . so that s the good thing . you could come two or three different times , and you re going to have two or three different experiences . derrick hinman the tension experience it s like a real life , walking and talking telltale games adventure , and like those titles it can push unexpected emotional buttons . for bousman , that s precisely the point . the whole reason i wanted to make movies was to get a reaction out of an audience member , to make them feel something . i make people feel every night with this , and i see it , he says , gesturing to the video screens . i see them walking out crying . i see them walking out mad . i see them walking out enraged . and it stays with them , because they re not sitting in a theater watching they are it . they re in the middle . they are a character . and to me , as an artist and a storyteller , that makes me so happy . while tension certainly isn t for everyone , it s impossible to argue that it doesn t accomplish bousman s goals . and while it clearly pulls inspiration from the scarefests and theatrical productions that came before it , its grand ambition is undeniably significant . future productions are planned under the names adrenaline and lust , bijelonic tells me . our goal is to be the cirque de soleil of this world . our goal is to be the cirque de soleil of this world . if anything , it seems like tension is coming along at just the right moment , as the rise of virtual reality and an ever increasing influx of interactive theater productions are bringing the general concept of immersive experiences into the mainstream . whether viewers are losing themselves in virtual worlds , walking into haunted houses or interactive plays , or simply dressing up and taking on fictional personae at comic conventions , they re increasingly interested in moving beyond the passive relationship they ve had with traditional narrative mediums like film and television . this is a richer , more engaged kind of fandom , one that can invoke feverish levels of devotion . and for bousman , that s a two way relationship , with his audience causing the show to evolve and transform even after it s opened . this is the future . it is engaging an audience on a visceral , living , breathing art form level , he says . they are manipulating the story , not us . their choices , who they like , who they respond to who they don t . these things get written out characters die . i think that s what is amazing about this , is that i get to sit back and watch it happen , but the audience is in control . the tension experience ascension is currently running in los angeles . tickets are priced at . 