 when he was a kid , michael butcher s dad took him to an army base where the government had flown in refugees from a natural disaster in asia . it was a time when governments would just do that kind of thing , without worrying about the politics much , he recalled . butcher grew up playing with those kids , developing an empathy towards them . when i saw the events of last summer , the kids dying in the sea , i knew i had to do more than just give to charity , he said . amidst chronic food , shelter and medication shortages , technology was the last concern on everyone s minds except butcher s . i figured i could bring the tech community together , at least in europe , to address this situation in the creative ways i know they are capable of , said butcher , a techcrunch editor at large . in september , butcher set up a facebook group and a twitter feed for ampnbsptechfugees , a new movement to do exactly that . the next day , it had members on facebook . the day after , . today , it s approaching , members . within the first few months , the not for profit organization arranged conferences and hackathons , a way for the tech community to come together and start to think about how it could help . ampnbspit soon attracted speakers from agencies like unhcr , unicef , and the red cross . tech companies came forward to sponsor the events to make them free for attendees . london the first stepthe first conference was held in london in october and attracted over people from london s tech scene . many diverse ideas took flight an ampnbspairbnb for refugees , a group messaging service for refugees without smartphones or internet , and apps to connect refugees to locals for advice and support . the most recent hackathon ampnbsptook place this weekend on the other side of the world in melbourne , australia . in some ways , you can see techfugees events are opening the doors of tech support to ngos and charities , and in the long term , we want these events to result in incubations of those projects at ngos and deployment of technology on the ground , not just cool meetups , said jos phine goube , techfugees chief operating officer . butcher and his team started by conducting research into what projects were out there as part of their techfugeeslive day , where they did ampnbspan eight hour live stream of interviews with technologists working on refugee related tech . they also get feedback through a weekly newsletter about scalable technology related to refugees and refugee agencies , which goes out to over subscribers . the group s model is based on proximity and problem identification . techfugees must stay close to people who have visibility into relevant issues . that might be the big formal ngos but it can also apply to the many informal groups and of course the refugees themselves , ampnbspthe website states . stemming from such interactions , butcher believes the group has identified ways tech can not only address problems related to cell phone connectivity and wifi access , but also education , health , and cultural integration into host countries . seeking volunteers for refugee initiativesat techfugees events , entrepreneurs have sketched out ideas for deploying wifi in the field and a location based app for directing refugees to the nearest centers of help or aid . the meetups work to create new tools , but also help to source volunteers for startups involved with refugee initiatives , such as ampnbspmigreat , an online legal assistant to the asylum application providing immigration advice . ampnbsprefugees on rails and ampnbspkizcode , two startups teaching refugees to code , came to look for people willing to found local chapters and teach coding . mujde esin , founder of kizcode , hails from turkey . growing up , she was deprived of education for years because of ampnbsprudimentary educational infrastructure . after she learnt to code , she got a scholarship and earned a master s degree in the uk . it changed my life , esin said at the london techfugees conference . i would like to change other people s lives and i believe coding is going to change many girls lives in underprivileged communities . refugees can have special privacy needsas each hackathon goes by , it becomes apparent that there are no tailor made solutions for the crisis . while syrians might come armed with smartphones and working knowledge of english , some asylum seekers may arrive ampnbspnot knowing how to operate a cell phone or speak any language other than their native tongues . on the other side of the world , countries are not experiencing similar volumes of refugees , nor do they have the same history of refugee influx . but the australian chapter has pitched in by training hackers through webinars to understand the special needs of refugees , for example what it might mean in term of privacy settings on an app when trying to aid someone fleeing a repressive government . scaling solutions to the refugee crisisas the size and scope of the organization expands , the team is working to create an open sourced database that will track all projects for everyone to see . that way , existing ideas can be built upon and entrepreneurs can avoid duplication . the goal is improved coordination and efficiency across all sectors , be it delivering aid , sharing data , or facilitating emergency response . this is what tech is all about says butcher scaling of a solution . as the organization continues to grow techfugees is looking to launch defined working groups out of local chapters . each chapter will decide on an area of expertise in technology delivered to refugees housing , integration , education . eventually , the techfugees founders want these events to result in the widespread deployment of technology on the ground , but they have to be careful . you can t just deploy an alpha or beta . if you get it wrong , you don t just lose users . a faulty or badly thought out product could turn into a matter of life or death , says butcher . 