 speed and consistency these are the two qualities that tim anderson says he most values in the kitchen . as a former uk masterchef champion and head of a forthcoming japanese soul food fusion restaurant in london , anderson knows what he s talking about . right now , though , he s in a slightly unusual kitchen , watching a pair of outsized robot arms methodically preparing a crab bisque , electric motors gently whining . the robot s movements are unhurried rather than speedy , but you have to admit it s consistent . in fact , anderson says the real problem might be that it s too consistent . this is where the robot is a problem , intuition . an estimated retail price of , the robot is the creation of moley robotics , which first unveiled the bot earlier this year at a tradeshow in germany and is now looking for investment . the bot works by using motion capture technology to record a chef in action in this case , anderson , wearing a pair of sensor lined gloves . these movements are then converted into instructions for the pair of robot arms , which can , in a specially prepared kitchen , cook without any input . users just line up the ingredients , hit the button , and receive their food minutes later . it s only a prototype right now , but the company s founder , computer scientist mark oleynik , wants to start selling it commercially in with an estimated retail price of , including the kitchen . right now though , moley s invention is more automaton than sci fi robot butler there s no machine vision , no artificial intelligence involved that might react to unexpected inputs . if the placement or weight of the ingredients are wrong , then the whole recipe can fall apart . the robot only has a limited set of actions it can perform at the moment , as well . its first recipe the crab bisque was chosen partly because it s a crowd pleaser , says anderson , but also because it s got a lot of movements that have applications for other recipes . tim anderson stands next to the prototype robotic kitchen . stirring , pouring , blending , and labeling are all part of it , he says . if you can make a bisque , you can make a lot of other things , like soups , stews , curries , sauces . anything that goes in a saucepan and gets sweated off we ve got sort of covered now we just have to remix the movements . however , there s still a lot of work to do in this area . chopping , for example , is not part of the demo , and although the robot was able to turn on the stove , handle a blender , stir , pour , and spoon , this still leads a lot prep work for humans to do . rich walker , the managing director of shadow robot company , the firm responsible for supplying the robot s hands , compares processing the motion capture that guides the bot to working in a sound studio . it s like recording the same song multiple times and then stitching the best bits together , smoothing out the transitions . he points to a fleck of garlic on the side of the induction hob . that happens every time , he says . but that means it s working . that means it s reproducing the motion of how tim did it exactly . one of the motion capture gloves used to record tim anderson s movements . without perception or feedback mechanisms , the robot s consistency can become a problem . anderson says that in china , for example , the team had to adapt to regional variations in food quality . at one point the butter wasn t going into the pan , he says . this is the problem , something like the viscosity of butter if it s not sliding off the spatula as it should , the robot has no way of knowing that and dealing with it . moley s engineers say they re exploring how they can incorporate machine vision in the future , but in the next two years as they get ready to launch commercially the focus is on proper motion expansion and food preparation . within a year or so they want the robot to be able to take ingredients out of a fridge itself rather than the user lining them up , but it s a long way from full comprehension . oleynik says this lack of adaptability won t be a problem as long as the robot can get precisely prepared ingredients . no feedback mechanisms means worrying about things like the viscosity of butter i ask oleynik who his customers will be , expecting the answer to be millionaires , but he s insistent that the robot has mass appeal . for , , he says , customers aren t just buying the arms , but a universal kitchen combine that will be able to make any dish they like using the recipes and movements of famous chefs . the kitchen itself can be used by humans when the robot isn t doing its thing , and oleynik says the arms are really just another appliance one that will make life easier for people who want to eat well . this is my vision of the future , and i think if you show some kind of target to people , then they start dreaming and thinking and they want to have it . right now , oleynik is looking for investment . overall , moley robotics wants to raise . million this year , and a further million in before they start selling the robotic arms commercially in . the company says it s in discussions with a fast food chain , an airline catering service , and a property developer in china , with the latter reportedly considering kitting out its luxury homes with robot chefs . however , says oleynik , at the moment there s still more development needed before solid offers materialize . the hands are too heavy , he says , and the arms are too industrial . the whole outfit is , in his opinion , not yet human enough . the finished crab bisque . it s not really the appearance of the robot that s the issue , though , it s the lack of computer smarts . not only does this lead to more work for the user precisely preparing and arranging the ingredients but i wonder if it undercuts one of moley s other selling points that its robot delivers something distinctly human , with the motion capture acting as a conduit for the chef s spirit and skill . even if everything goes to plan , the robot produces exactly the same dish every time . philosophers have already explored the question of the work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction , but what about the work of pudding ? the pair of arms plating up for dinner in moley s test kitchen offer a silent argument in favor of a robot chef . there s something unquestionably fascinating about watching something mechanical mimic everyday movements , and the robot is all the more engaging for being nearly fluid , nearly human . as the arms unceremoniously dump a pile of crab meat into a bowl and begin spooning over the bisque , anderson watches on a little anxiously . after all , it s not just his recipe on display , but his robot translated skills as well . not bad , not bad , not bad , he says , after a spoonful of bisque , passing it over for me to taste . he s right and it s not just not bad , it s good . if i was served it at a restaurant i wouldn t blink an eye . although i might be a bit taken aback if i met the chef . 