 the ces party circuit can help you understand the annual consumer technology extravaganza better than a full day spent prowling convention centers , but that doesn t mean they re actually fun . the strip s evening bashes are venues for hyper focused expressions of brand identity , and they re usually headlined by celebrities with little or no connection to the companies hosting the parties . attend a few events away from the show floor , and you ll find yourself drowning in lukewarm hors d oeuvres and perfunctory , confused concerts . there are better ways to unwind after a day full of keynotes and product demos one of them is sleeping . i knew all of that going into yesterday , and ces still managed to surprise me . i watched one of s biggest hitmakers perform from a few feet away in a beautiful nightclub , but it s not the wednesday night performance i m going to cherish . instead , i m going to remember the hour plus i spent with dan halen , jef leppard , and the other middle aged mercenaries that make up one of new england s premier hair metal cover bands . i m going to remember mullett . so many chromecast audio dongles plugged into empty boxesmy evening began with google s content happy hour at one of the bellagio s nightclubs , a space decorated by dozens of chromecast audio dongles plugged into functionless boxes and a bunch of neon signs advertising the company s entertainment adjacent products . the party kicked off with a lengthy , surprisingly coherent dj set , but it wasn t much more than a huge platter of appetizers preceding the musical main course a headlining set from paterson , new jersey s finest , fetty wap . the crowd started to rush and clump in the middle of the show floor , and i caught a glimpse of blonde dreads and a chain . fetty s set lasted roughly minutes , enough time to run through each one of his singles that hit the top last year . if there s a prototypical kind of cash grab party appearance , this was close to it fetty and monty wandered through each song with the help of meaty backing tracks and crowd noise , and a confetti cannon coated everyone near the stage in sticky , white plastic midway through trap queen . there were a few diehards clustered in front of the stage , but most of the attendees stuck to their drinks and conversations while fetty danced and sang , backdropped by the bellagio s fountains . i couldn t help but think that fetty and google are an odd fit on a philosophical level . google is a company with a finger in every pie , trying to reinvent the world on a dozen different fronts fetty does one thing really , really well , and it s still unclear how he s going to adjust when churning out iterations on the same core concept becomes stale . conceptual congruity doesn t matter much when you re just trying to snag some cultural cachet with a decent party . the two bashes couldn t be more differenta few hours later , i found myself at a restaurant deep within the venetian for a party being co hosted by intel and lenovo . in terms of both aesthetics and atmosphere , the two bashes couldn t have been more different . intel and lenovo s room felt bright and relatively spacious compared to google s dark , cramped nightclub . it was unabashedly product centric booths along the side of the room hosted heavyweight gaming pcs running rocket league , and nervous attendees tiptoed around laptops of varying sizes and shapes with drinks in hand . if there was a dj at the party , he was well hidden either way , the mix leaned on recent , corny classics . an interstitial set climaxed when salt n pepa s push it led into a bass heavy club mix of andy grammer s honey i m good . this wasn t exactly boiler room . of course , the biggest difference had to do with each party s choice of live performers . google gave its crowd minutes of fetty wap intel and lenovo gave theirs a minute opening set of stompy sync rock from x ambassadors you might know renegades . oh , and a crew of and somethings bringing the cover band thunder all the way from shelton , connecticut ? two hours . in a week where everyone is always short on time and running around like chickens with their heads cut off , mullett s performance was remarkably generous , and their setlist was crammed with every goofy s rock song you can imagine . if a song involved giant , glossy manes , lewd gestures , or a live music video , you can bet mullett played it . fetty wap had an impressive year last year , but it s hard for him to compete with a machine that scrapes the best songs from an entire decade . mullett had hits arguably hits better known to the average ces attendee even if they didn t actually write any of them . intel specifically wanted an s cover bandi spoke to the band s tour manager , who confirmed mullett was playing ces for the first time . intel was specifically interested in securing the services of an s cover band for the lenovo event , and tapped mullett through a production company a texas cover band called the spazmatics , which focuses on new wave , was also under consideration . even though they re based in new england , mullett aren t strangers to vegas the band are regulars in the more humble venues of the strip . they re not opening for tiesto anytime soon . they re playing the hard rock on saturday night before heading home . i came into intel and lenovo s party steeling myself for a weird , thoroughly sad affair , and in the moments before mullett s performance , things were at an all time low . greying tech employees in business casual were grinding to jason derulo , their hips coming dangerously close to the expensive electronics around the room hordes of men in blazers and jeans were fist bumping and leering at everything in sight a roadie s ass hung out of his pants like a pale crescent moon while he tuned mullett s drums . it was bleak , so you can imagine my surprise when the band proceeded to drive the crowd which was packed , by the way into a frothing frenzy . there are some good looking girls at this lenovo party , teddy lee ! the room was alive with the glory of hair metal people were throwing up horns , crushing beers with abandon , and generally acting like paid extras in a m tley cr e video c . . at one point during a spirited rendition of pour some sugar on me , a woman stormed the stage , shed her jacket , and invited lead singer ron jovi to engage in some mimed pg sugar pouring . from that point forward , every song featured a few people climbing under the rope to dance in front of the band . the musicians of mullett were technically prodigious , charismatic , and comfortable with rehearsed lechery . there are some good looking girls at this lenovo party , teddy lee ! when i finally managed to scrape myself away from mullett after a ripping take on rick springfield s jessie s girl , i felt like i understood ces in a way i didn t before . you only need to spend a few hours here to grasp the sheer size of the event it s a technological bacchanal , one that can easily swallow you . it took me a little longer to understand the social multitudes ces contains . it has room for social climbing , wining and dining , and the kind of stereotypical networking that ll make anyone roll their eyes . but it also has room for cross country co worker reunions and pure , unabashed fun the kind that s miles away from any sort of social posturing . i felt the pressure that comes with seeing and being seen while watching fetty wap on google s dime . i can t say the same for the hours i spent rocking out with four paunchy experts well versed in whitesnake and the outfield . after taking the temperature of both events , i think i know a little more about the people and companies that help bring ces to life every year . see all of our ces news right here ! h . ces promo a background fa b a border radius px padding px px px font family ff din web condensed , helvetica , sans serif text transform uppercase font weight normal font size px text align center display inline block margin px auto color fff h . ces promo a hover background bf a d color fff text decoration none 