 at public events like conventions , strapping a virtual reality headset onto your face can feel uncomfortably intimate . face masks can get sweaty and grimy , and lenses can fog up with other people s breath . but earlier this week , an anonymous chat transcript suggested that headsets were spreading something even less savory herpes . ocular herpes is going around vr headsets , ones that are used to share with people , wrote an unnamed developer , according to logs posted by youtube game streamer drift r . redacted game studio told us its sic going around . have to clean headsets regularly . when drift r asked for more details , the developer named someone who had gotten it , according to the studio . the news confirmed people s worst fears about sharing headsets , and it lengthened an already long list of vr health concerns , from the undeniable motion sickness to the fanciful forgetting reality . but if a vr developer did end up with ocular herpes , they probably didn t get it from a headset . and the odds that they ll pass it on that way are just as low . herpes simplex is nothing to take lightly , but it s extremely commonas its name suggests , ocular herpes refers to a range of eye conditions generally caused by the same herpes simplex virus that s behind cold sores . it can appear as a rash on the eyelids , or as lesions directly on the eye , causing symptoms like redness , discomfort , blurry vision , and light sensitivity . mild forms clear up within a couple of weeks and can be easily mistaken for ordinary pink eye , but a less common manifestation stromal keratitis can seriously scar the eye and damage vision . as with cold sores , there s no way to completely eradicate the virus , although antiviral medication can keep symptoms at bay . eye herpes is spreading via vr headsets ! you know those big events where people try vr for the first time ? well this dev got herpes from it ! pic . twitter . com ngnqk qifb drift r drift r october , ocular herpes is nothing to take lightly , and there s a huge stigma around the virus in general , especially since it can take the form of a sexually transmitted disease . but whether or not you ve ever touched a vr headset , there s a good chance you re already exposed to it . as of , over half of to year old americans tested positive for hsv , which is behind the bulk of ocular herpes cases . far fewer people have hsv , which usually results in genital herpes . globally , those numbers climb to over two thirds of the world s population . and as high as the overall infection rate is , vr headsets aren t actually a very good vector . herpes is not typically spread through objects , says sonal tuli , chair of the university of florida s department of ophthalmology . the virus has a difficult time surviving outside the body , so it s usually spread through direct bodily contact with an infected person , through something like a kiss . and most visible cases of herpes , she says , are actually flareups of dormant infections that have been around for years , often since childhood caused by a fever or some other external trigger . the odds would be like the odds of transmitting herpes on toilet seats . it s highly unlikely , but not absolutely impossible , that someone could get ocular herpes through a vr headset , says todd margolis , chair of the washington university school of medicine s department of ophthalmology and visual sciences . the odds would be like the odds of transmitting herpes on toilet seats . it s more probable , he says , that the developer in drift r s anecdote was already infected and had simply experienced a reactivation . it is also more likely that he was kissed by somebody at the meeting who had an active cold sore and was shedding infectious virus . sharing virtual reality headsets can certainly carry health risks . in addition to dirt and sweat , headsets could hypothetically play host to lice or harmful bacteria and viruses including the one behind non herpes conjunctivitis . adenovirus is very infectious and unlike herpes , survives quite well on inanimate surfaces like plastic , says margolis . in order to prevent someone with an active case of pink eye from passing it on , exhibitors would need to wipe the headset down , preferably with soap and water margolis says that alcohol is less effective for adenovirus , although it s very good at killing herpes . many vr developers keep antimicrobial wipes or covers around show booths , although there s no standardized hygiene policy . sony gave developers boxes of playstation branded wet wipes , and valve has used protective paper covers on its vive headsets during conventions . the organizers of major meetup group vrla say they ve put strong language about cleaning headsets in their exhibitor manual , and are unaware of any health scares during their shows , although they told the verge they ll be handing out protection to every exhibitor and attendee at the summer expo . as vr health scares go , this is a pretty mild oneso far , though , it s been difficult to isolate the risk of donning a vr headset at a public event from the risks of shaking hands , passing around controllers , trading business cards , or just breathing fetid convention center air . the most famous case of pink eye , recounted on the games site destructoid , appears to have been merely a burst blood vessel . we reached out to drift r for more information about this unlucky , allegedly herpes plagued developer . but he says they wish to remain as anonymous as possible , and so far , we haven t been able to verify the story . the slight possibility of getting any form of herpes might be enough to scare some people off of vr , although treating the virus as a fate worse than death arguably just makes the stigma against it even worse . and this rumor is a good reminder to observe basic hygiene rules around something you put on your face . but as vr health scares go , this one sounds a lot worse than it actually is . 