 net neutrality might be the most contentious problem the federal communications commission has faced in recent history . the past year has been marked by a landmark legal case that struck down the open internet rules , and a series of polarizing proposals for new ones . protestors have driven a record number of comments to the fcc this morning , a group blocked off chairman tom wheeler s driveway to decry the latest series of rules . and now , president barack obama has urged the fcc to take a stand and treat broadband more like a utility than a web portal . obama s loose four point proposal is a boon to most net neutrality supporters he s asking for broadband to be classified as a title ii common carrier , putting it in the same category as telephone service . not only would the plan revive bans on isps blocking content , it would also prevent them from slowing down some services or speeding up others the so called fast lanes that have become a primary point of contention in this debate . it would extend net neutrality protections , in some cases , to the backbone connections between services like netflix and isps , not just isps and consumers . it even asks for the rules to apply to mobile broadband as much as possible , a major shift away from the laissez faire policies in the open internet order . to forestall critics , it allows for what s known as forbearance , a process in which the fcc chooses not to enforce certain parts of title ii . but as obama himself admits , this isn t his call to make . the fcc is currently drafting its net neutrality proposals , and he has no control over how its five commissioners ultimately vote . after taking both houses of congress in the midterm elections , republicans are poised to overrule the fcc and ban net neutrality regulation . in this climate , what can a speech from the president actually do ? obamacare for the internet obama has always said he s in favor of net neutrality , but he notably waited until after the midterm elections to make his support for title ii reclassification known . he s entering the lame duck period of his presidency , where political fallout is more limited although he s going to face harsh criticism from telecommunications companies and conservatives . senator ted cruz r tx has already called the proposal obamacare for the internet , and verizon said it would be a radical reversal of course . but he s throwing weight behind the position of democrats like house democratic leader nancy pelosi d ca , who called for title ii reclassification in september , and standing up in opposition to republicans like cruz and rep . bob latta r oh , one of several members of congress who s tried to stop net neutrality before . it s fair to see this as a preemptive strike in the coming legislative battle , says geoffrey manne , executive director of the international center for law and economics . there s already significant interest on the hill in passing legislation to rein in the fcc on net neutrality , whether as part of a communications act rewrite or a standalone bill . the white house statement certainly makes it harder to get democratic votes behind such an effort , and signals very clearly although this was probably already obvious that the white house would veto a bill that takes title ii off the table . for berin szoka , president of anti reclassification advocacy group techfreedom , this is a major mistake . obama s statement is simply a cynical political ploy , a way of playing to activists on the radical left who have built mailing lists and a political movement on the most absolutist conception of net neutrality , he says . the debate over how to apply rules under title ii will only be politicized even further by obama s inflammatory rhetoric . as such , it could make reaching a congressional agreement on net neutrality and fcc reform both of which have been a topic of debate for years harder . the ball s in their court in a way it hasn t been before . tim karr , strategy director of the pro net neutrality group free press , thinks this might be inevitable . unfortunately , it seems like anything obama says tends to create a level of polarization , he says . republicans are currently planning a multi year overhaul of the fcc s rule making powers , with the goal of getting obama to sign a bill before leaving office . at the helm is senator john thune r sd , who promotes a light regulatory touch that emphatically excludes strengthening net neutrality rules . thune has issued a statement condemning obama s stale thinking , which he says would create legal and economic problems and extend what has needlessly become a politically corrosive policy debate . for now , congress is less important than the fcc , and karr thinks obama s statement is a limited but much needed nudge . the statement puts the onus squarely on the head of chairman wheeler and the two democratic commissioners , he says . the debate has shifted now , i think , to not whether the fcc uses title ii or not , but how the fcc uses title ii . tim wu , known for coining net neutrality as a term , says that the ball s in their court in a way it hasn t been before . . . . he s the boss he s the head of the democratic party and the president of the united states . his ideas hold a lot of weight . fight for the future and signatories of multiple online petitions asked obama to fire tom wheeler if he doesn t support reclassification , but that s a far less likely prospect removing an fcc head for making a disagreeable policy call would set a terrible political precedent , and it probably wouldn t get critics a fiercer replacement . the fcc confirmed that it s looking at unpopular hybrid plansas it stands , the fcc s response has been fairly noncommittal . as an independent regulatory agency we will incorporate the president s submission into the record of the open internet proceeding , it said . it even used its statement to confirm that it s been looking at unpopular hybrid plans , which only apply title ii rules to certain parts of the web . it s unclear whether we ll see a net neutrality rule in place by the end of this year , and the statement emphasized how complicated the process is going to be . if the fcc votes to accept obama s plan , commissioners will still have to create a real policy . what parts of title ii , like price regulations , shouldn t apply to broadband internet ? how should the rules for wireless and wired internet differ ? jon peha , a carnegie mellon university professor and former assistant director of the white house office of science and technology policy , says it s the details that will determine whether the proposal is useful or dangerous . among other things , he says , the fcc will need to make sure it s tailored rules to allow very specific kinds of useful discrimination without compromising the larger framework . we don t want to prohibit carriers from blocking viruses , for example . no matter what they come up with , there s a long road ahead . any version of net neutrality is probably going to draw lawsuits from companies like verizon , which successfully managed to overturn the rules almost a year ago . if title ii is in the mix , opposition will be even stronger . regardless of how much or little obama can directly control , though , he s instantly raised the public profile of net neutrality . and he s come out in favor of the most dramatic policy change on the table . . . or , at least , the skeleton of one . it s up to the fcc to flesh it out . 