 in boyd multerer was leading development on the xbox one , a console microsoft hoped would ampnbspbecome the standard platform for cable television , streaming video , and next gen games about gladiators and martial artists . it was one of the most high profile product launches of the year , with billions of dollars and the reputation of a multinational giant at stake . he was also working on a tiny , self funded e zine of interactive romance and erotica . subscription based fiction site ampnbspsilkwords , which launched on valentine amprsquos day , is a curious and inadvertent outgrowth of microsoft amprsquos quest to own the living room . it goes back a couple of years , boyd says . i was working for microsoft chief software architect ray ozzie and looking into future of tv stuff ampmdash where is tv going ? how does interactivity work ? then his wife keri brought up a category she felt would appeal to women outside his normal audience romance novels . buyers of romance novels ampmdash who tend to be older and female ampmdash are a far cry from the young men microsoft is publicly courting with the xbox one , but they amprsquore a powerful voice in the publishing world . romance writing consistently brings in more money than any other fiction subgenre , and it amprsquos easily made the jump to e readers as a substitute for mass market paperbacks . romance readers read a lot , says sharon fisher , self described geeky romance writer and editor of silkwords . when they find an author they love , they are very willing to buy books , whether it amprsquos ebooks or print books . they go through a lot of them . silkwords isn t interactive fiction in the traditional sensethe multerers don amprsquot pretend to have a deep familiarity with the genre , and the stories on silkwords seem aimed at a general cross section of readers . their focus is on the interactive element . where game developers were looking for plots to go with their time tested gameplay , the multerers took what they saw as an obvious step for traditional fiction . in video games , you amprsquove got all this interactivity , and they amprsquore trying to find ways to bring more story into games , boyd says . well , let amprsquos experiment with going the other way . here amprsquos a story . let amprsquos bring a little bit of video game in and see how we can make it more interesting . interactivity can be a sore spot for writers . the gaming community sometimes treats readers like passive receptacles waiting to be blessed with multiple choice endings , ignoring both the rewards of close reading and the rich tradition of fan interpretation and response . for some women , romance novels are similarly sensitive ground . the factual most romance readers are women easily turns into the sweeping , stereotypical women like romance or women only like romance ampmdash a trap boyd and keri multerer can occasionally , if accidentally , slip into . if you don amprsquot fit the category , it becomes tempting to loudly and mockingly reject romance novels , which all too often plays into a pattern of treating anything traditionally feminine as frivolous . by and large , however , silkwords is an interesting combination of online magazine and choose your own adventure series . lightly interactive stories are selected , paired with illustrations , and edited by the multerers and fisher , who they brought on while building the site . at select points authors offer two choices , which might be as small as leaving a bar with a handsome stranger or as large as avenging your father amprsquos death . like flipping backwards in a physical book , though , you can scroll up and easily undo any or all of the choices . when you read a story , there amprsquos always that amplsquooh , god ! why did she do that ? amprsquo keri says . this gives the reader the chance to say , amplsquookay , what is she going to do ? amprsquo it shares far less dna with dating sims , video games , and interactive fiction engines like emily short amprsquos versu . decision points in games , for example , tend to be either stupidly obvious or maddeningly opaque . defuse a bomb rather than setting it off , and you amprsquore the hero . keep saying nice things to someone , and they amprsquoll like you . but accidentally misread a sarcastic option as a friendly one , and they amprsquoll hate you forever . getting it right is stressful ampmdash the antithesis of what people often look for in romance . silkwords authors are unabashedly guiding readers through a narrative , using choices as a way to organize scenes and story lines . i never got eaten by snakesthe fun of interactive romance is playing matchmaker by shaping your character amprsquos choices . it amprsquos an antidote to the ron and hermione problem , or any of the unsatisfactory endings that have launched a thousand revisionist fan stories . but the site amprsquos erotica ampmdash more sexually explicit and less focused on relationships ampmdash is almost a more comfortable fit . it amprsquos sort of like amplsquowhat amprsquos your favorite flavor of ice cream ? amprsquo says fisher . there are very natural choice points . does she go with him ? does she go with her ? do the three of them go off together ? no matter how simple or complex a story line , it amprsquos useful to spin as many sexy scenarios out of it as possible , some of them mutually exclusive . despite the site amprsquos strengths , it amprsquos clear that silkwords is in its infancy . so far stories tend towards conservatism , sparingly sprinkling do or don amprsquot links between scenes . to put it very unromantically , it amprsquos a collating mechanism . want to find the scenes you like ? here amprsquos your path . the submission guidelines also stipulate a long held genre rule everything must be able to end well . my worst case endings tended to involve going home alone or being unable to convince an old lover that i amprsquod changed my errant ways . i never got eaten by snakes or hit with a karma penalty . i just furrowed my brow , clicked back a few steps , and accepted that date with the cute amplsquo s secretary . interlocking stories could all share a worldover time , this could evolve into something more like a traditional game . the multerers imagine sets of interlocking stories set in the same world , where how players act in one place will shape how people respond to them in another . but authorial control is central to silkwords , and it will need to be maintained carefully if the stories get more complicated . we could have tuned it the other way and added complex , choice based narrative changes , says boyd . you amprsquod get to the first node and it would say amplsquohey , i see you amprsquove been here before ! this person has left the bar and is no longer available . amprsquo make it too hard to reverse course , and you amprsquore just back in an rpg . ad free , silkwords runs purely on a subscription model . for a year , . a month , and . for two days , a scale that amprsquos not far off self published ebook prices . subscribers get access to the site archive and any new stories , which are published about once a week . right now , that archive is pretty paltry , at some half dozen titles . but with time , it amprsquos meant to hold a variety of works that go beyond white , heterosexual ampnbspwomen ampnbspor any particular genre , while still holding enough appeal for anyone who visits . the multerers declined to say precisely how many visits they amprsquove received in the two weeks since launch , but their next step is building connections with the larger romance community ampmdash something that will largely determine the project amprsquos success . it amprsquos also something they admit to not being completely prepared for , though they amprsquoll have the help of veteran author fisher . perfectly frankly here , i amprsquom probably better at writing code than doing a marketing campaign , says boyd . he and keri hope that by steadily building the story base , they can convince readers to take the leap for a subscription . for now , they amprsquore placing a risky bet while boyd is on sabbatical in the wake of the xbox one amprsquos release . how do they finance the site , we ask ? one , you keep your costs as low as you possibly can , says boyd . and then two . . . we amprsquove done fairly well in the video game business . 