 as a biomedical computing student at queen s university seven years ago , justin lee knew he wanted to build his own internet of things device but he didn t want it to be any old smart lamp , toaster , or light switch . i wanted to put a computer into one of the most ubiquitous objects in the history of the human race , he says . he chose the cup . then , he enlisted yves b har , the esteemed designer behind jawbone and the olpc , to build it . the result is vessyl , a ounce cup that recognizes any beverage you pour into it , displays its nutritional content , and syncs all your drinking habits to your smartphone . let s cut to the chase while i only had an hour with a vessyl prototype , i tried nearly a dozen beverages in it and it successfully identified all of them . within seconds , the device , which currently resembles more of a thermos than a finished product , recognized crush orange soda , vitamin water xxx , tropicana orange juice , gatorade cool blue , plain old water , and a few other beverages , all by name . yes , this cup knows the difference between gatorade cool blue and glacier freeze . vessyl can tell the difference between strong and weak coffee , lee says , noting caffeine disparities . it can even measure the sugar , protein , calories , fat , and caffeine inside any beverage you pour into it , mass produced or homemade . as you go about your day , the device tracks how much you re drinking , and when you tilt vessyl to its back , it displays a bright blue line that rises and falls to indicate your hydration level . lee plans to ship vessyl in early at a cost of . , though preorders are available now for . building a smart cup made even more sense once lee started thinking about the various ways we track our movement , but not what we re eating . even sleek apps like up coffee , which tracks your caffeine consumption , require you to input your consumption manually drink by drink . the big idea behind vessyl is to provide transparency , automatically , about how terrible most of our drinking habits are . and vessyl might just succeed . many of us already carry around some kind of water bottle , after all , be it a nalgene bottle or kleen kanteen , and vessyl can take advantage of that habit . consumption is as important or more important as what we track through exercise , says lee , so we developed a sensor that could instantly analyze the nutritional content of what s inside a beverage on a molecular level . lee won t say exactly how the sensor works . he likens it to the kind of sensor you d find in a bottling factory that analyzes batches of liquid or other foods to make sure each batch is consistent . it s the kind of sensor you d use for quality control , lee says , and the sensor doesn t degrade . it s non contact . there s no hole , or singular point where vessyl samples what you re drinking it just looks like an ber modern , but empty , cup . i press lee for more information about how it works , but he won t budge . the details of the sensor we re keeping pretty close to the vest , he says , but notes that the device includes a processor and algorithms that match your beverage to one of thousands of beverages his team has tested with vessyl . and yes , vessyl recognizes many kinds of beer and wine . perhaps more impressive , however , is that vessyl actually measures and displays the nutritional content of any beverage on the spot , even your homemade smoothie . in other words , vessyl isn t just drawing from its drink library when it displays nutritional data . vessyl is a neat party trick until you start using it to actually make better habits . the content of every beverage you drink syncs back to your smartphone over bluetooth low energy , but you can also choose one metric for the vessyl cup to display on its side . when you pour coffee into vessyl , for example , its display will read coffee but you can choose whether vessyl then displays the total mg of caffeine you ve consumed today , or some other metric . above this tiny display is a line that lee calls pryme , a measurement of how hydrated you are . pryme is a proprietary hydration metric calculated using your height , weight , and other characteristics that you enter into the vessyl app . if you re perfectly hydrated , lee says , the pryme bar will be full and a small blue light will illuminate above it . but as you go about your day , your pryme will deplete . to activate the pryme display at any time , you just pick up vessyl and tilt it away from you . an accelerometer inside the device recognizes the gestures and illuminates the pryme bar . the gesture is so natural and simple that some vessyl users might not choose to check their stats inside the app , which displays your drinks over the course of a day along a sleek timeline . they might just tilt to check on their pryme , and if they re low , will bounce over to the kitchen for a refill . there s no metal wristband to strap on every morningvessyl s greatest potential lies in its pryme display . what person wouldn t appreciate a simple indicator of how much water they should drink every day ? you can indeed use vessyl without the app after initial setup , which could truly separate vessyl from most other fitness trackers and quantified self gadgets on the market . nike s omnipresent nikefuel points indicator is , arguably , one of the gadget s most appealing aspects . but vessyl s strength is that unlike these other trackers , it combines effortless tracking with a behavior you re already doing . there s no metal wristband to strap on every morning , and no fob to clip to your pants pocket . if you leave vessyl on its charging coaster while you sleep or are at your desk , you might forget that it s a smart cup entirely . one minute charge provides a week of power , lee says . the big idea is to help you stay better hydrated on a daily basis , and while vessyl won t send you a push notification quite yet when you re not drinking enough , they might not be far off . vessyl s primary virtue is that it s easy to understand . integrating breakthrough technology into everyday products is always a challenge , at the same time , this is exactly how design makes tech products easily adoptable in life , says b har . if vessyl can succeed in accurately measuring what you re drinking day after day , as lee says it will , it just might be the first quantified self tracker i could recommend to anyone . 