 last saturday , fans of minimal government gathered for the new york libertarian party convention , which was held in the ballroom of a decidedly unflashy ukrainian restaurant in manhattan s east village . the attendees , who ranged from shiny shoed businessmen to scruffy survivalist looking types , were there to vote for the presidential delegates who will travel to the party s national gathering in orlando later this month . but nick spanos had arrived on a slightly different mission . a former ron paul campaign consultant , he s now the ceo of blockchain technologies corp . , a new company that seeks to replace america s voting system with bitcoin derived blockchain technology , and which had been selected to run the convention s vote that day . though the convention was small , encompassing just several dozen voters , for spanos it represented a chance to demonstrate his vision for the future of elections administration , one where votes are recorded on a blockchain database subject to full public scrutiny . around in the afternoon , word began spreading that anti virus software pioneer john mcafee who was recently deported from guatemala and is now back in the us , vying for the libertarian party s presidential nomination had entered the premises . spanos spared no time in introducing me to the aspiring politician . nick spanos had arrived on a slightly different missionbut mcafee , with fading green highlights in his hair and an intense stare , quickly dismissed the core mission of spano s company , proceeding to stump against larger evils . the problem has nothing to do with technology . it has nothing to do with purity and truth . it has to do with power , and we have a system in america that controls the voting process , mcafee told me . we can talk about the technology all day long , but it means nothing unless you have a plan for usurping that control . as mcafee spoke , i noticed that spanos and i were both wearing gold colored admission wristbands , which convention organizers had given to guests they could not afford to feed during the day s events at the budget ukrainian restaurant and ballroom . given how widely the party s ideas have influenced powerful republicans , the convention s modesty lent the libertarians an underdog air . and , in this backdrop , mcafee s call for revolution felt a bit ambitious . seeming to prefer a more gradualist approach , spanos was visibly amused by mcafee s indictment . he s also eager to expand beyond the libertarian community , saying that his products are on the verge of being adopted by customers that would dwarf the spendthrift third party convention . he claims to be in talks with multiple domestic and foreign governments about running their elections on his software . it has nothing to do with purity and truth . having grown up entertaining himself with elaborate circuitry projects in long island , spanos has spent the last few decades focusing on the more technical aspects of campaign consulting and election logistics . he says the inspiration for blockchain technologies came partly from frustrations with the opacity of florida s voting machines during the presidential election , when he was working for republicans . i asked them , let me see the source code , spanos told me , saying that he was denied at every turn . when you don t know what the hell any of the machines do , how are you supposed to have a transparent election ? they could be counting digital unicorns . the principles that underlie blockchain technologies proposed solution are fairly simple . in the system spanos deployed over the weekend , a voter fills out a paper ballot that s marked with three qr codes , that assign it a unique blockchain identity . once scanned , the company s system routes the digitized vote to the candidate s wallet , and the blockchain record begins to expand . after voting , public versions of the blockchains are released for open inspection although , as in traditional elections , voter s identities are not tied to ballots . all that the company s technology requires is a computer , a printer , a screen , and a scanner which spanos says should be kept disconnected from the internet ensure security . blockchain s technology can be adapted to all varieties of voting , spanos says , including electronic voting machines . yet spanos emphasized that he prefers to have voters mark their choices on paper ballots . this is meant to not only add a layer of accountability to the system by leaving a paper trail , but also to put voters minds at ease . humans need the paper ballot , spanos told me . it s going to be a long time before a human trusts a computer . instead , spanos argues that his technology can essentially improve analog paper balloting by locking results into the blockchain , creating an obstacle to manipulating any tabulation after the fact . they could be counting digital unicorns . spanos leans libertarian , but says he has worked for both democrats and republicans and appears at home in the company of all manner of politician . as his team diligently set up their polling operation on two dining tables in a half lit corner of the restaurant , spanos pushed aside silverware at a nearby table and opened his laptop . using wi fi from an adjacent diner , spanos showed me several chunks of inscrutable blockchain code before pulling up photographs of his work involving foreign politicians . he had shots of him posing with former soviet head of state mikhail gorbachev , photos of him shaking hands with a somali politician , and something he was particularly excited to show me a choppy video of him boldly propping his feet on a coffee table within eyeshot of fidel castro at a formal dinner . spanos says he also specializes in event planning and logistics of high profile public figures . spanos argues that the beauty of blockchain lies in how difficult it makes manipulating the system , even for a biased administrator . this here , i can t change any of this shit , spanos said , pointing to an unused ballot , the type that his colleagues had just been frantically printing off on . x office paper . even if i wanted to , there s no way i could change this person s ballot . this is here forever and the whole world can see it . even if i wanted to , there s no way i could change this person s ballot . spanos pitch has been enough to convince an initial round of clients . in february , his company worked with rand paul s campaign during the iowa caucuses , according to a press release , and last month it administered voting at the texas libertarian convention . spanos says that he is also in talks with several foreign governments about helping to administer their elections . citing political sensitivity and competitive concerns , he declined to name any country in particular . he also says that he is speaking to numerous us governmental jurisdictions which he also declined to name , including a school board in texas , that he says is looking like a particularly hopeful candidate for his first ever official government election . as the voting commenced saturday , spanos circled the faux wood ballroom collecting ballots with a wire mesh basket he paraded above his head . as spanos delivered the votes to his team s processing table in the adjoining dining room , a crowd began to form around the operation . after striking up a few conversations with the gawkers , i realized that they were official election observers who had been dispatched by candidates to guard against counting shenanigans . what did stalin say ? it s not who votes , but who counts the votes ? this shouldn t have been a surprise like american conservatives at large , those i spoke with at the libertarian convention professed deep mistrust of election administration . this is something that blockchain technologies could no doubt capitalize on . it s possible to imagine that , among red state governments staffed by officials with similar sentiments , blockchain technologies could find receptive ears for its sales pitch of protecting against ostensibly ubiquitous election fraud . the day after the libertarian vote , spanos sent me a video of republicans including former arizona governor jan brewer alleging that electronic voting machines seemed to have been rigged at the party s convention , which had also taken place on saturday . it could have happened , they could have done that in arizona , spanos told me , emphasizing that his company s system can leave a paper trail . but even if nothing happened , if no one got robbed , people still need to feel confident in the results . what did stalin say ? it s not who votes , but who counts the votes ? spanos mused . but if you count them openly , it s back to who votes . 