 as someone who works full time as a food activist , advocating for measures like better school nutrition standards , trans fat bans , and calorie labeling , nancy huehnergarth thought she d seen the very worst of food industry marketing . but just last month , huehnergarth realized she was wrong . after following a link sent to a food policy listserv , huehnergarth stumbled upon a video describing the strategy behind an award winning mobile app game from gatorade ampmdash called bolt ! ampmdash that featured gatorade sponsored sprinter usain bolt racing through a series of challenges and roadblocks to accumulate points . the game was initially released in , and then updated in april of last year . in that update which is no longer available in the itunes store bolt needs to pick up gatorade to supercharge his performance and avoid droplets of water that slow him down . the video that huehnergarth saw , posted as an accompaniment to the game s bronze prize from the ampnbsp interactive advertising bureau s mixx awards , was pulled from the website after she wrote ampnbspa blog post earlier this month decrying the game and its underlying strategy . in a copy of the video obtained by the verge and posted below , however , members of media strategy group omb who developed the game describe bolt ! as an entertaining and competitive way to reinforce to teens that consuming gatorade would help them perform better . . . and that water was the enemy of performance . marketed to children . . . for a wide variety of inappropriate uses . of course , that s not true for the vast majority of youth . unless they re hardcore athletes , the american academy of pediatrics recommends water as a kid s friend , not their enemy , where physical activity is concerned . in ampnbspa report , the academy went so far as to advise against the widespread consumption of sports drinks , noting that the beverages along with energy brews are marketed to children and adolescents for a wide variety of inappropriate uses . pepsico , which owns gatorade , itself appears to see the nutritional value in water the company last year signed onto michelle obama s ampnbsp drink up campaign , specifically designed to get people to drink more of it bottled , of course . that s what really galls me , huehnergarth says . pepsi signed onto this initiative , and then under the radar they re still working this other angle with kids . so is the game a little shady ? sure , particularly given its wild success in engaging its target audience . bolt ! racked up myriad advertising awards , was downloaded . million times , and saw the twitter endorsement of celebrities including justin bieber and bolt himself . but in the wild west of food marketing , is it really surprising that a beverage line owned by pepsico would decry the health benefits of h o for the sake of sales ? experts say no ampmdash and point out that this instance is only the latest in a series of ploys by food companies to promote their products with ruthless effectiveness , and without much in the way of federal regulation . bolt ! is far from the first effort by a food company to target youth through gamification , where thinly veiled advertisements are disguised as entertainment . they ve been doing it online for years , points out jennifer peters , the director of marketing initiatives at yale s rudd center for food policy amp obesity . websites like burger king s ampnbsp bk crown or mcdonald s ampnbsp happymeal offer colorful , engaging game hubs that feature a bevy of each food chain s offerings , whereas products like ampnbspfruity pebbles cereal and ampnbsppop tarts have dedicated game sites of their very own . such games are pervasive because they work users are more engaged , and for longer periods , than they would be during a second tv commercial , and the sites circumvent self imposed industry regulations about how many food ads and for what kinds of foods can appear during children s television programming . these games can be accessed from pretty much anywhere . the push into mobile games , however , is something of a newer phenomenon . a few years ago , we never would have seen these games , peters says . now they re everywhere . of course , the move to mobile is a logical one as more kids and teenagers rely on mobile devices , food companies are simply keeping pace with the trend . but peters , huehnergarth , and other experts worry that mobile games might become a particularly pernicious phenomenon . it s easier for parents to keep track of what a kid is watching on tv , or what they re doing on a computer , peters says . it gets a lot more difficult when these games can be accessed from pretty much anywhere . in perusing the itunes app store , it s decidedly tricky to figure out which games are sponsored by food companies and which aren t ampmdash they all look pretty much the same . but in ampnbspone study out of the rudd center , researchers pulled up iphone apps for beverages alone , including those designed to promote coke and red bull , as well as eight major fast food companies with at least one mobile app game . a quick scan of apps available today pulls up games including cheetos ampnbsp app of massive distraction where players can launch themselves into a snack flinging frenzy and m ampm s ampnbsp chocolate factory that asks users to help guide the candies into the bags . both are clearly advertisements , but neither seem nearly as dubious as a game deriding the benefits of water . whether a game s message is sketchy or not , food companies are largely free to design and promote the apps however they want ampmdash and often use celebrity endorsers , or mimic other popular mobile games , to reach a big audience . that s because , despite years of debate over how food is marketed to youth , federal agencies offer little in the way of regulations that would reign in online or mobile promotion . in large part , the food industry regulates itself through series of agreements reached by major food companies about how they will and won t promote products ampmdash particularly those with minimal nutritional value . in , major companies formed the ampnbspchildren s food and beverage advertising initiative , whereby they committed to improve the standards for ads targeting kids . as part of that initiative , which includes pepsico , companies have agreed not to advertise any foods to kids under the age of unless they meet certain nutritional criteria . for pepsico , which did not respond to repeated requests for comment via phone and email , the only product that meets the criteria is quaker oatmeal . pepsi said they wouldn t market gatorade to children under , period , peters says . i imagine that in this instance , they would argue that the game was for a general audience and so it doesn t fall under that agreement . i don t know how they can say that , but that seems to be the message . the food industry largely regulates itselffood policy experts and government officials have long sought tougher standards , but so far , they haven t had much luck in passing any . in , a series of regulatory guidelines compiled by experts at agencies including the fda , cdc , and ftc , were submitted to congress . the guidelines would have strictly limited which foods could be marketed towards youth ampmdash excluding even peanut butter ampmdash but would also have been , yet again , entirely voluntary . lobbyists for the food industry ampnbsppushed back , arguing that the rules would virtually end all advertising towards those younger than . the regulations stalled in congress , and ampnbspwere just last week killed for good , peters says , with a single sentence in the omnibus spending bill . i believe this is a deceptive campaign . huehnergarth , for one , isn t quite ready to let that gatorade advertisement get a free pass from regulators . she last week filed a complaint with the new york state attorney general , arguing that because the adver game included a deceptive message pepsico should be fined for false advertising . we all know that the role of the industry is to generate profit , and i understand that , she says . but from a scientific point of view , i believe this is a deceptive campaign ampmdash and there should be meaningful accountability for that . 