 making phone calls from , feet in the air has been a hot button topic of late , spurred on by recent comments made by tom wheeler , the chairman of the federal communications commission . the agency is investigating whether or not it should lift its long standing ban on making phone calls from a plane , following its recent decision to allow passengers to use portable electronics below , feet . in fact , the fcc is already at the point where it is asking for the public amprsquos opinion on the topic , which will be factored in if and when the commission does make a decision on the matter . a number of citizens and airlines have spoken up against allowing cellphone use in airplanes , citing the inevitable nuisances and uncomfortable situations that would be created by the person sitting over b incessantly talking on their phone . members of congress have also proposed a bill outright banning calls based on the disruption to other passengers that they may cause . but apart from the controversy , there is still the question of how all of this will work , and perhaps more importantly , how much it will cost for you to call in an order for a pizza while coasting over nebraska . the answers aren amprsquot exactly as cut and dried as you might think . how all of this will work and how much it will cost ? you may wonder why you can amprsquot just turn on your cellphone while in an airplane and have it work . since today amprsquos cellphone networks were explicitly designed for use by people on the ground , the towers broadcast their signals laterally , to cover as much ground as possible . they don amprsquot fire their signals upward , in the direction of an airplane . combine that with the airspeed of a commercial jet , which is far too fast for cellphone towers to reliably transfer a signal from one to another , and you can see why you won amprsquot just be able to use your cellphone in a plane as you would on the ground . therefore , special technologies and systems need to be put in place in order for it to happen at all . though the focus of this topic has largely been on the social faux pas of using your phone on a plane , the actual statement by the fcc is only concerned with whether or not it should approve one specific technology required to place calls from a plane using your mobile phone . this technology has been used by international airlines for years and consists of installing a small cell tower on the plane itself commonly called a picocell that transmits calls from the air to the ground . use of picocells in airplanes has been banned in the us , but other countries have not had a problem with allowing them . in fact , when international planes with picocells fly into the us , they have to turn them off until they exit us airspace . roaming on a planethese picocell systems , which have been around for the better part of a decade , allow cellphone users to make calls to the ground using their own phone numbers , as opposed to using a different phone number as the old in plane phones required or voip services such as skype . since the picocell systems add extra electronics and components to airplanes , the fcc has not approved their use in the us due to concerns about potential interference with vital navigation systems in the plane . but a picocell isn amprsquot the only technology that lets fliers place phone calls from their cellphones while in the air , and the other option has already been approved by the fcc . gogo , the ubiquitous in flight wi fi provider , announced in november that it would launch a new mobile app for ios and android that lets users place phone calls and send text messages from their phones while they are in a gogo equipped plane . like picocells , the gogo system lets users make calls with their own phone numbers . a gogo representative told the verge that since the system is app based , the technology to make it all work is already in all of the planes that have gogo wi fi and there is nothing for the fcc to approve or deny . the technologies already exist and we already have them ampmdash it amprsquos up to the airlines to enable it , said gogo . the only issue for gogo is airlines , not the fcc amprsquos decision . given delta amprsquos ceo referring to in flight calling as a disruption to the travel experience , it doesn amprsquot look like many airlines will approve it . the technologies already exist and we already have them ampmdash it amprsquos up to the airlines to enable it . gogo claims that it can enable the text messaging features independently of voice calling , so if airlines do reject the calling option , cellphone users will still be able to send texts . the company says that the voice calling feature was built in response to requests from private plane operators and international airlines . a picocell system would likely require customers to pay roaming fees for each minute that they are talking on the phone , much like how international roaming is charged today . virgin atlantic amprsquos aeromobile service is only available to customers of british carriers o and vodafone and costs amppound per minute for calls and pence for text messages , for example it amprsquos also limited to six users at a time . when asked if there were any plans for in air roaming rates in the works in light of the fcc amprsquos announcements , none of the major us carriers had anything to share . for its part , gogo says that its service , due to be available next year , would use the same per minute rates as a customer amprsquos ground calls , with only a yet to be determined fee to access the service while in the air . it will be the airlines amprsquo decision . at the end of the day , it amprsquos likely not the technical or regulatory hurdles that will decide whether or not your next cross country flight will be full of people with phones pressed to their ears . rather , it will be up to the individual airlines to allow or deny it , something the fcc explicitly called out in its initial announcement . ultimately , if the fcc adopts new rules , it will be the airlines amprsquo decision , in consultation with their customers , and consistent with federal aviation administration faa and department of transportation usdot rules , whether to permit internet access , texting and voice services on mobile wireless devices while airborne , said the agency . though in flight calling carries less of a social stigma internationally , the backlash against the fcc amprsquos announcement shows that it amprsquos not something that many american fliers approve of . and since the airlines typically choose to do what amprsquos in their best business interests , they probably won amprsquot want to piss off potential customers any more than they already do . still , when you consider the effect that modern gadgets ampmdash smartphones in particular ampmdash have had on what we consider to be socially acceptable behavior , it amprsquos not unreasonable to think that in flight calling could eventually cross that bar as well . after all , the technology amprsquos already here ampmdash someone just has to flip the switch . 