 facebook s instant articles promised to transform journalism but now big publishers are fleeing inside facebook s menlo park headquarters , the arrival of instant articles in the spring of was presented as a cause for celebration . talking with reporters , executives described the fast loading , natively hosted articles as a promising new creative format . a suite of publishing tools incubated in facebook s now defunct newsreading app paper would find their way to instant articles , executives said , evolving the news posts shared on facebook into immersive multimedia experiences . for publishers and journalism the stakes were high . readers who once regularly visited their desktop websites now got their news from facebook , twitter , snapchat , and other apps outside of publishers control . for many large publishers , survival would depend on whether they could build loyal audiences inside third party mobile apps . publishers were wary . some feared facebook would absorb so much content behind its walled garden that the web itself could be at risk . platforms are eating our business , and we re letting it happen , wrote mat yurow , then director of audience development at the new york times . do you have any proof that publishers using another company s proprietary platform have ever created a lasting and sustainable business ? asked john battelle , a media industry veteran . the answer appeared to be no . platforms are eating our business , and we re letting it happen . there was optimism , too . facebook s daily aggregation of eyeballs is the largest in human history , and publishers were eager for the chance to capture more of them . it seemed possible that a superior reading experience could benefit readers , publishers , and facebook at the same time . in the long run , wrote will oremus at slate , some might find they re better off outsourcing their distribution and ad sales to well funded tech giants and refocusing on what they do best reporting the news . but two years after it launched , a platform that aspired to build a more stable path forward for journalism appears to be declining in relevance . at the same time that instant articles were being designed , facebook was beginning work on the projects that would ultimately undermine it . starting in , the company s algorithms began favoring video over other content types , diminishing the reach of instant articles in the feed . the following year , facebook s news feed deprioritized article links in favor of posts from friends and family . the arrival this month of ephemeral stories on top of the news feed further de emphasized the links on which many publishers have come to depend . in discussions with facebook executives , former employees , publishers , and industry observers , a portrait emerges of a product that never lived up to the expectations of the social media giant , or media companies . after scrambling to rebuild their workflows around instant articles , large publishers were left with a system that failed to grow audiences or revenues . facebook says the adoption of instant articles is growing quickly , and that upcoming changes to the platform will lure back some of the major media companies that have abandoned it . but given facebook s other priorities , the future of instant articles is less certain than ever . instant articles went live on may th , , with tools that included d maps , audio captions for images , and photos that moved based on the position of the phone in your hand . publishers abandoned those tools almost immediately , instead focusing on the format s ability to solve an increasingly pressing problem attracting and retaining readers . the early signs were hopeful readers liked instant articles faster loading times , and they rewarded them with more of their clicks . instant articles was built from the raw materials of paper , a newsreading app facebook released on ios in early . a bold reimagining of the company s flagship app , paper offered users customizable sections including politics , technology , and food . the news feed was there , too and without any ads . paper was a hit with critics but not with facebook s core user base , and it was ultimately shuttered last year . mike matas , whose design firm push pop press was acquired by facebook in , had been responsible for its unique look and feel , and he was tasked with designing instant articles . though the format would have important financial consequences for the companies who used it , generating revenue for publishers was not a primary goal in its development . the team is legitimately motivated by making great articles , matas told me in . one former employee familiar with the matter said media companies business models had initially been all but an afterthought . the idea that these products could meaningfully impact the revenue of the news industry just didn t really come up , the former employee said . i don t know that anyone at facebook took that piece all that seriously . fidji simo , a vice president of product at facebook who oversees news , video , and ads in the news feed , disputed the idea that the company didn t take revenue seriously . about percent of publishers initial requests to the company involved direct ad sales , she said in an interview last week . facebook agreed to the proposal publishers could keep percent of the revenue of any ads they sold themselves , or percent of the revenue if they wanted facebook to sell the ads for them . at publishers request , facebook also included analytics tools so they could understand and track their audiences , and customization tools so they could make their articles look distinct from one another s . publishers were drawn to the sheer enormity of facebook s audience but it was never clear , even then , how much of that audience instant articles would attractbut the build first , monetize later approach that facebook takes in building so many of its own products made for an awkward fit at media companies , many of which were still reeling from the transition from print to the web , and were now losing their hard won digital audiences to facebook s news feed . publishers were drawn to the sheer enormity of facebook s audience but it was never clear , even then , how much of that audience instant articles would attract . still , the optimism was real . this is a very exciting experiment , declan moore , chief media officer for national geographic , told me in may . national geographic was one of nine publishers , including buzzfeed and the new york times , invited to be launch partners . facebook was careful not to guarantee that publishers would see expanded reach from instant articles . but it seemed likely that facebook would favor the instant links , given that the articles loaded up to times faster and kept users glued to the company s flagship app . in the beginning , having access to instant will provide a huge advantage over publications that don t , wrote john herrman , whose content wars series in the awl had warned publishers that facebook would ultimately change the terms of any deal to benefit itself . eventually , publishers numbers will even out as competition increases . but it s unclear if any huge advantage ever materialized . facebook decided from the start that publishing a story using the instant articles format would not automatically improve its ranking in the news feed . in practice , instant articles typically do reach more people , because people are more likely to read and share them . but as the format spread , competition increased , and any advantage to using instant articles was blunted within months . given that instant articles were designed to carry less advertising than mobile web articles , broad reach was essential to ensure publishers would profit from the format . the reach just never arrived . facebook did meet regularly with publishing partners , and gradually implemented their suggestions . we deeply believe that the only way to have publishers use instant articles is if this works for them , will cathcart , who oversaw instant articles at the time , told me on its first anniversary . as part of that effort , facebook added more revenue generating tools to the format . first it permitted more display ads then it implemented video ads then it introduced sponsored posts shared on the publishers own feeds . but across a wide swath of major publishers , results have been uniformly weak . the revenue in no way backed up the amount of time that was being spent on it , says jason kint , ceo of digital content next . dcn is a trade group that represents many large publishers , including nbc , the new york times , conde nast , espn , slate , business insider , and vox media . vox media owns the verge . at the end of last year , dcn surveyed its members on the financial performance of content published to third party platforms including facebook , twitter , snapchat , and google s amp project . it found that not one publisher reported earning more money through instant articles than they did through their own properties . we make less money on instant articles than we do on mobile web , which is probably everyone s experience , said bill carey , director of audience development at slate . and while facebook reported that publishers using instant articles saw readers consuming percent more content , most dcn members had seen no such increase . in a presentation at the social media week conference in february , the verge s audience engagement editor , helen havlak , presented a slide comparing views of traditional verge links posted to facebook to verge instant articles as a percentage of overall facebook traffic . it showed that article views from facebook were essentially flat in , with instant articles representing a larger share of that traffic over time . viewed in this light , instant articles had simply replaced one kind of view with another , less profitable one . facebook says that the stagnant traffic is a product of a growing marketplace , and attributes it to increasing competition there are more posts than ever to read , while readers time remains finite . simo told me the company is building a tool that will show publishers how their articles would have performed if posted as traditional links rather than instant articles . spoiler badly . were it not for instant articles , the company says , publisher traffic would likely have declined even more . this appears to have been by design . even as it courted publishers for the instant articles program , other teams at facebook were building the features that would gradually push it out of the limelight . last june , adweek reported that publishers posts were reaching percent fewer people than they were previously . a few weeks later , facebook confirmed that it had altered the news feed algorithm , prioritizing posts from friends and family members over links shared by publishers . facebook is building a tool that will show publishers how their articles would have performed if posted as traditional links rather than instant articles another new priority soon emerged in the form of video . in september , just four months after instant articles launched , facebook s ad product lead said that a year or two from now , we think facebook will be mostly video . a massive investment in live video followed , and a video tab was added to facebook s flagship app . i wouldn t be surprised if you fast forward five years and most of the content that people see on facebook and are sharing on a day to day basis is video , ceo mark zuckerberg told buzzfeed in april . this month s arrival of facebook stories , a rolling series of photo and video posts that disappear hours after they re posted , pushed instant articles further down in the news feed . and publishers can t use the stories format even if they want to they are currently enabled only for individual users . the camera is going to be the priority , not news and entertainment content , one former employee told me . that s just going to keep getting shoved down in the feed . the company has all but confirmed this the camera is the new keyboard is a popular refrain on campus these days . simo says that the news feed is becoming more of a multimedia experience over time , and that instant articles which support video is part of that . we live in a world that s multimedia , where you tell stories using a variety of formats . what we ve tried to do is bring these things together so publishers can tell stories that combine all of these things . and so for publishers that do their journalism primarily by linking to text , the news feed appears increasingly forbidding . i d suggest that links in general have felt weird on facebook for a long time , herrman , now writing for the new york times , told me in an email . it s the most obviously dated part of an otherwise constantly modernized platform it s a big messy border with the web that produces a bunch of difficult and institutionally unusual problems . while big publishers have been largely disappointed with instant articles , the format is propagating quickly throughout facebook . since last year , when facebook began letting anyone publish to the format , the number of publishers using instant articles grew times , to , publishers , simo said . that figure has grown percent this year alone . and a quarter of all clicks to articles on facebook are now to instant articles , simo said a number that has grown percent in . it s easy to see why readers like instant articles they re fast and uncluttered . and it s easy to see why facebook likes instant articles they keep people on facebook . but for big media companies , the format has looked like a bad bet . and after two years of experimenting with instant articles , many outlets appear to have had enough . the new york times , which had been a launch partner for instant articles , abandoned the platform last fall . vice news , forbes , the los angeles times , the chicago tribune , and hearst publications are among the large publishers who have joined it in leaving . since last year the number of publishers using instant articles grew times , to , publishers others are publishing a small handful of articles to the platform while pushing the majority of their readers to their own websites , including cnn , the new york daily news , and the wall street journal , according to an analysis published last month by the tow center for digital journalism . conde nast decided not to roll the format out company wide after all but one of its test titles lost money on it , a company source told the verge . now publishers are turning their attention elsewhere . google s accelerated mobile pages project borrows elements from instant articles while giving publishers more control . publishers that use paywalls , such as the times , can implement them in amp but not instant articles . articles published through amp remain part of the open web , which publishers generally prefer to facebook s closed ecosystem , and google has flooded amp with traffic from search . most importantly , it makes more money than instant articles . by february , it was serving percent of all traffic to major us publishers . publishers are also paying increasing attention to apple news , which added push notifications as part of a redesign last year and now delivers significant traffic thanks to the fact that it comes pre installed on hundreds of millions of devices . the team that built instant articles has moved on , too . matas quit in february . michael reckhow , the product manager who led development of the initial version , left for uber a few months later . reckhow has been replaced by mona chaudhuri , a well regarded former vice president of product at chartbeat , who joined facebook last august . chaudhuri led a listening tour of publishing executives in new york last fall , and facebook says it is responding to their concerns . all of these publishers are very open to coming back to the table once we implement a lot of their feedback . the biggest request subscriptions . publishers who rely on a membership model are pushing facebook to effectively build a paywall inside instant articles . subscribers could read instant articles just like any others , but others would be offered a chance to subscribe . a lot of the frustrations you hear are business model frustrations , rather than the performance of their content on facebook or otherwise , simo said . facebook wouldn t comment on whether it is building such a system , but based on my discussions with publishers , it seems likely . we re listening to the feedback and we re continuing to iterate , simo said . all of these publishers are very open to coming back to the table once we implement a lot of their feedback . she added i want them to find value . if instant articles can t build traffic or revenue , perhaps it can at least inspire loyalty in publishers existing audiences . this month , facebook added a module to instant articles allowing publishers to solicit newsletter signups or likes to their pages . in the future , facebook says the module could be used to invite readers to install publishers mobile apps or begin a trial subscription . slate s carey said the company has seen early success in attracting newsletters subscribers this way . the company is shifting away from a page view driven business model to one that emphasizes reader loyalty . loyal readers are more likely to sign up for slate plus , its premium subscription product . for us right now , the big question is whether we can bring more people back into the slate audience , and make them slate readers , he said . the newsletter signup module has been a good start . we re hopeful that tools they have coming down the pike will be similarly helpful . neha gandhi , senior vice president of content and strategy at refinery , told me instant articles neither helps nor harms the company s efforts to build audiences through facebook . the publisher remains part of the program so it can beta test new features , such as the newsletter modules . these are products that are testing building daily habit , increasing stories per session , and building loyalty all of which are core priorities for refinery , she said . meanwhile , the news feed is as unpredictable as ever . the ones who can afford to adapt to every new format facebook introduces , hoping that , in aggregate , engaging with the platform s ecosystem will lead to profits . it s the constellation of things that we have on facebook , said mark silverstein , who leads business development at the huffington post . the huffington post was the top publisher on facebook in , according to newswhip , embracing instant articles , live video , and video on demand . consumers are going to go where consumers go , silverstein said . it s our job to meet them there . two years later , it s increasingly clear that instant articles won t resolve publishers s anxieties about building sustainable businesses . but neither has it led to a cataclysm . despite instant article s middling results , facebook s power over publishers seems stronger than ever . where facebook leads , publishers follow from articles , to instant articles , to video , to live video , to ephemeral stories and beyond . facebook changed , and so did publishers , herrman said . the underlying dynamic didn t , at least not that much . 