 the lights were low , and the house was slowly filling . ben tucker set down an armful of film reels in the projection booth and checked the dryden theatre s vintage machinery for dust and positioning one last time . as assistant collection manager and archival projectionist at the george eastman house in rochester , new york , tucker helps maintain one of the largest , oldest , and most historically valuable film collections on earth . on this evening in early may , he was screening the classic of classics casablanca . it was a typical evening at the eastman house s seat , single screen movie palace except this version of casablanca had the potential to kill us all . image courtesy of the george eastman housefilm from the ashesa beautiful but deadly art is reborn at the nitrate picture showby john lingan the lights were low , and the house was slowly filling . ben tucker set down an armful of film reels in the projection booth and checked the dryden theatre s vintage machinery for dust and positioning one last time . as assistant collection manager and archival projectionist at the george eastman house in rochester , new york , tucker helps maintain one of the largest , oldest , and most historically valuable film collections on earth . on this evening in early may , he was screening the classic of classics casablanca . it was a typical evening at the eastman house s seat , single screen movie palace except this version of casablanca had the potential to kill us all . this version of casablanca had the potential to kill us allthe print dated from , meaning it was made from a base of nitrocellulose , a cousin to gunpowder . nitrate , as it s commonly known , was the earliest mass produced celluloid format , and the dominant motion picture medium from to . renowned for the beauty and clarity of its images , nitrate is so flammable and physically unstable that it s rarely , if ever , still screened . the heat from a cigarette is enough to make nitrate catch , and once it does , the flame is so powerful that it ll burn underwater . the explosive theater fires in cinema paradiso and inglourious basterds were both the product of nitrate combustion , and the first half century of mass moviegoing was dotted with dozens of similarly deadly real world conflagrations the first of which occurred at the world s fair in paris and killed people . ampnbspthe un still classifies nitrate as dangerous goods . tucker was joined by two specially trained colleagues a lot of manpower for one screening , but nitrate necessitates it two projectionists trade off from one reel and the next on their respective machines , while a third gathers and winds each minute length of brittle film and returns it to its nickel plated aluminum canister . the dryden s projection booth is tiny , low lit , and gizmo packed , like a submarine control room . in addition to the floor to ceiling film gadgets , it s equipped with sprinklers , reinforced steel doors , and a network of ceiling cables that control two guillotine like steel gates perched above the windows , ready to slam shut in the event of a fire . the projectors themselves , which date from , house each reel in a steel box of its own , and the projectionists have to keep one hand on the dowser , which cuts off the connection between the light source and the film in case of overheating . in tarantino s inglourious basterds , nitrate film becomes a weapon for revengedespite the effort required , casablanca was the opening whistle of an unprecedented event a three day festival consisting of only nitrate screenings . announced in early winter , the nitrate picture show drew hundreds of scholars , historians , critics , and classic movie devotees to rochester an impressive crowd considering organizers didn t even divulge the program until the festival began . megan labrum , general manager of australia s national film and sound archive , told me before the casablanca screening that there is a warmth , a brightness , a depth to nitrate . but it s basically impossible to see nitrate films in her home country , she said . we have a fabulous cinema , but we can t afford the constraints around putting it on the licenses , the safety measures , the equipment . the eastman house is one of only three venues in america that are licensed and equipped to screen nitrate , and the only one outside of california . labrum may have traveled the farthest to attend the festival , but many of us had clocked hundreds , even thousands of miles all to watch a technology rise from the dead . a still from michael powell and emeric pressburger s black narcissus , shot on nitrate stock . image courtesy of the george eastman housejared case graduated from the eastman house s selznick school of film preservation in and has worked for the organization ever since , currently as head of collection information and access and as the executive director of the nitrate picture show . he s the rare person who s seen so many nitrate prints that he can t even remember his first one . but the first to make a real impression was laurel and hardy s babes in toyland , from . the clarity of those breaks between light and dark provided by the nitrate base and the silver in the photographic emulsion created images that jumped off the screen , he described in a post at my nitrate memories , a blog created to advertise the picture show and its aims . he designed the festival to provide other people with that same aesthetic epiphany . nitrate doesn t have to die . by showing a nitrate film , we can show that the experience people had years ago can still be had today , case explained by phone shortly after the festival was announced . he said the idea was to proclaim , nitrate doesn t have to die , be hidden away , or used only for research . it s a viable , living artifact itself . in , that s a radical notion . beside its combustive properties , nitrate is also supremely fragile the film naturally shrinks and deteriorates over time , even when treated with exacting care . for decades , the motto among film historians and preservationists has been nitrate won t wait , meaning that with each passing year , more and more films are lost to history . many have been digitized , or reprinted on polyester stock the popular replacement for nitrate from the s until only a few years ago but a surprising number of movies have not . the complicated inner workings of a nitrate projector . image courtesy of the george eastman houseand even if digitized nitrate films still exist , connoisseurs will tell you that they re poor substitute , as if the last remnants of van gogh were gift shop posters . the format is prized for its famed three dimensional quality and rich colors . its proselytizers also stress the value of seeing a film the way it was meant to be seen for people who care about cinema , seeing a nitrate projection is like watching a live orchestra performance instead of a cassette recording , attending a play instead of reading it , or standing at the rim of the grand canyon instead of flipping through photos . but these days , watching a nitrate film is rarer and harder to achieve than any of those experiences , and thus has an even greater aura of romance and authenticity . the nitrate picture show was conceived to raise awareness of the medium , but also to take stock of what remains . no one really knows how much nitrate exists in the world , or what kind of shape it s in . the eastman house currently houses , reels of the stuff , a total of , titles . but many of those are incomplete , or have shrunk to less than percent of their original size , making projection impossible . for the festival , case and his colleagues scoured the collection for the best preserved feature length films , and they approached some of the biggest archives in the world for contributions as well . the final program included nitrate screenings , drawn from the british film institute , the academy film archive , the library of congress , and the nasjonalbiblioteket in oslo , among others . the casablanca print , ben tucker s favorite of the bunch , was submitted by moma , where it was in fact the last nitrate film the museum screened , back in . that same year , the bfi hosted a nitrate program of their own , entitled the last nitrate picture show , a nod to the fact that the medium likely wouldn t survive long . at the time there were fewer than digital projectors in the entire us and europe combined . dvds were still brand new , youtube didn t exist , and limitless streaming video was barely a dream . the intervening decade and a half has seen an explosion in the sheer number of widely available movies , which in turn has made serious cinephiles even more keenly aware of what remains out of reach , and what aesthetic sacrifices are made in the transition to digital . that skepticism isn t limited to film fans the last few years have seen the resurgence of vinyl records and a ampnbspseeming plateau ampnbspof e readership . that might be enough to compel the impossible . the time might be right for a relative ampnbspnitrate ampnbsprevival , or at least as right as it s ever been for the last years . as the house music faded at the dryden , paolo cherchi usai , the eastman house s senior curator of motion pictures , stood up behind a lectern in front of the theater s billowing yellow curtain . he welcomed the near capacity audience to the nitrate picture show and , in a move i ve never seen at any festival or revival screening , announced the names of the projectionists , occasioning a standing ovation directed at the booth . ben tucker waved modestly through the glass . once the crowd was seated , usai presumed with a wild grin that there was at least one individual at the screening who had never seen casablanca . ampnbspa couple stray hands shot up among the dense crowd , met with cheers . well , this is like getting your first kiss in front of the taj mahal , usai said . earlier that day , a couple eastman house staff drove an excited handful of festivalgoers to an unassuming white bunker about miles outside rochester . the louis b . mayer conservation center is where all the house s nitrate prints are stored , though driving by , you wouldn t expect to find anything of note inside . that s by design the eastman house doesn t advertise its address or publish pictures of the center s exterior , and the facility isn t open to tourists . but this is where the real grunt work of film preservation gets done . the midmorning sun was blinding , and huge painterly clouds hung motionless in the sky . it was a clear , brightly colorful and beautiful day the platonic ideal of spring nitrate weather , as more than a few festival attendees pointed out to me . i don t have kids . i don t have pets . i have film . the lobby of the mayer center , meanwhile , couldn t have been more humdrum gray venetian blinds , two walls worth of stuffed file cabinets , a half empty water cooler , printers , and a microwave , all under fluorescent lights . standing in the middle of it , beaming for the chance to show some fellow aficionados around her playhouse , was gray haired , unflaggingly friendly collection manager deborah stoiber . this is my eden , she bragged . i don t have kids . i don t have pets . i have film . the building was originally a welding factory , but since the eastman house purchased it in , it s been transformed into a pristine temple of preservation . stoiber led us out of the office foyer , over a tacky mat , and into the workroom . it was empty but for three light tables with reel winding mechanisms . the archives of the the louis b . mayer conservation center this is the magenta negative of the final reel of gone with the wind , she said , picking up a strip of film off a table , the part with frankly my dear . a few audible gasps came from the group . this print is nitrate , and was actually on set during filming . right near clark gable and vivien leigh . every single copy of the movie ever made has been taken from this film . go ahead and look . one by one , the crowd approached the table and held the filmstrip up to the lightbox . one the edge , between the perforations , the customary stamp identified it n i t r a t e . other than that one detail , it looked exactly like any other film , and didn t even seem particularly aged . despite its renowned fragility and explosiveness , nitrate film is surprisingly sturdy and durable if treated well , and this gone with the wind had lived the most privileged nitrate life possible air sealed , artfully projected , kept cold and moisture free . in may , a uk photography studio discovered century old nitrate footage in their archives , just as an argentinian studio found long unseen footage from metropolis in . with some minor refurbishing , these films played perfectly well . try to imagine someone years from now stumbling upon a box of floppy disks or a maltreated flash drive how easily will she access those secrets ? will the technology to access them even exist ? the mayer center is as thoughtful and rigorous as nitrate preservation gets , and assuming its storage and environmental standards are continually upheld , deborah stoiber says that each of its , reels will last years . the eastman house takes this mission deadly seriously in , when their nitrate archive was kept in a literal barn , a spontaneous combustion resulted in the loss of more than titles . they learned their lesson . the six vaults are now held at a continuous degrees fahrenheit with percent relative humidity . a full mechanical air exchange is programmed to occur every minutes . in accordance with the newest standards from the national fire protection association , the building was recently updated with grated film carts , nine fire extinguishers , new emergency exits , a new sprinkler system , and outward opening steel reinforced doors . before new film goes in the tightly packed vaults , it spends hours in a shared staging room , kept at degrees . but not too many new films go in each vault can hold only , reels , and most are at or near capacity . nitrate film is strikingly physical and tactile heavy , thick , and dense . the mayer center s collection includes everything from silent rarities to undersung masterpieces like the peter pan , featuring early work from legendary cinematographer james wong howe . martin scorsese s personal print of his mentor michael powell s masterpiece the red shoes is here . deborah gestured to one meat locker vault door and declared , that s where we keep all the garbos . she asked for requests , and one of my fellow devotees asked to see meet me in st . louis . deborah pulled down reel and opened it for us to see . white fabric gloves on , my heart swelled as i held one of my most beloved movies in my hands . so who wants to go watch it burn ? in person , nitrate film is strikingly physical and tactile heavy , thick , and dense , each reel was like a circular black brick . thousands of tiny plastic photographs wound end to end , each one expertly tinted and color adjusted that s what gives old film that famous luster and otherworldly hues . it didn t look fragile , it looked powerful and important . deborah reached in the big trash can and grabbed a couple discarded feet of nitrate film . holding it up , she asked us all , so who wants to go watch it burn ? back outside , in the stunning natural light , deborah walked us over to the far end of the small parking lot by the edge of a field . she dropped the film in an upturned canister lid , then bent over and began flicking at a matchbook . when she tossed in the light , the nitrate ignited and hissed back at us . the flame shot up , a foot pillar , and then spread laterally , unstoppably , along the length of the coiled filmstrip . i felt its glowing heat from almost feet away . within a few seconds , the film burned out and left behind only a shaft of singed emulsion , like a scrap of femur after pompeii . deborah laughed , delighted , as we dipped to our knees on the asphalt to take cell phone pictures of the ruin . if you have a fire here , she said , it s going to take out the whole neighborhood . back in the theater , the lush yellow curtain raised and ben tucker s co workers trained their beam on the screen . the scratches and pops crackled like a campfire , then a blaring fanfare announced the warner brothers logo and a map of africa . i stared intently , eager to see something life changing . but it only looked like an old movie . maybe a little sharper than usual , but also blemished and scuffed . then , right after peter lorre s corrupt operator is gunned down and humphrey bogart goes upstairs to his office safe , there s a shot of claude raines scheming vichy officer , standing fully lit , talking to bogart s shadow . when that shadow darkened the screen , i sat up . here it was the famous depth of nitrate s blacks . it looked and felt like real negative space , like an infinite void . from that point forward , i began to notice all sorts of little details the clarity of individual fibers in bogie s low lit hair or the texture of ingrid bergman s dress . the rest of the weekend provided a parade of similarly breathtaking imagery . the picture show organizers had included a huge breadth of filmmaking styles , all of which yielded moments of incredible beauty . in cecile b . demille s biblical epic samson and delilah , it was an opening sequence full of red and purple smoke , which billowed so warmly that i could nearly smell it . nothing sacred , an underappreciated carol lombard screwball comedy from , contained outdoor and aerial footage of depression era manhattan more immersive and gritty than any comparably aged movie i ve ever seen . leave her to heaven and black narcissus , two of the most blaringly colored and psychosexually intense movies of the s , both felt positively enveloping . but the highlight was william dieterle s underseen black and white fantasy romance , portrait of jennie , which in its climactic seaside storm scene takes on a subtle green tint before moving to full color for its last shot . the effect was overwhelming the promise of nitrate stock fulfilled all in one emotionally devastating minute sequence . the opening scene of cecile b . demille s biblical epic samson and delilahi came away a proselytizer . on nitrate , characters somehow move across the screen at a more lifelike pace than on regular film . it feels like you re sharing an atmosphere with them , within reach of their conversations . this festival was the most wonderful moviegoing experience of my life . it was the closest i ve ever felt to time travel . there will never be a final film formatthe eastman house sold nearly festival passes to people from countries , and looks poised to hold it again next year . but this excitement belies a wider unease . film has been more scrambled by the digital age than any other medium . once standard mm celluloid is now a luxury item used mainly by high profile directors who insist on it . ampnbspdigital projection and storage is now standard , but just like its film forebears , it poses its own preservation challenges file formats change so quickly and hardware is so unreliable that , in the words of matthew dessem , writing for the dissolve , unless the unique challenges of digital preservation are met , we run the risk of a future in which a ampnbspfilm from ampnbspprinted on card stock has a better chance of surviving than a digital film from . cultural artifacts , like natural ones , go extinct as a matter of course . the question is simply how to carry history into each new era . there will never be a final film format the movies will keep getting upgraded and compressed into tinier units of digital memory . but as they do , the world s slowly improving stock of nitrate film will beckon romantic , profound , extraordinarily novel . before the festival , jared case said he hoped the nitrate picture show would attract a broad group of bloggers , scholars , and film tweeters who would spread the word of nitrate s viability as a living medium . for a certain segment of the population , he told me , it s a real experience . nitrate film will never be widespread again , and certainly nothing will ever again be printed on it . but to go from near invisibility to one specialty destination weekend a year would constitute a huge increase in the sheer number of people who have actually witnessed this beautiful sight . it would offer the chance , rare for film fans , to commune with original artifacts from the golden age of the medium . and it would refute , even just a little , the stubborn idea that digitalization is forever . for a supposedly dying , deadly format , we have a lot to learn from it . photography by matt wittmeyer edited by emily yoshida , ampnbspmichael zelenko