 for the past few years , samsung has been on top of the smartphone world , outselling apple s iphone and besting everyone else by creating powerful phones with big screens and small prices . but now the korean company is getting a taste of its own medicine as a variety of small chinese manufacturers are starting to deliver even cheaper phones with no less impressive capabilities . the smartphone market can t stop growing , but samsung smartphone sales are actually falling and while undercutting the competition on price is still a viable strategy , others are now doing it better . the world s biggest smartphone maker didn t get there by accident . having spent years toiling in the shadow of feature phone leaders like nokia and sony ericsson , samsung s mobile division rose to prominence at the turn of the decade by embracing the android platform aggressively . the korean company was early to the smartphone fight and more agile than most . while nokia and blackberry were ponderously trying to evolve their outdated software , samsung was focused on just cramming the highest specs inside the cheapest phone . it wasn t pretty , extraordinarily well made , or in any way original , but a samsung galaxy phone was assured to give you the most for your money . a vast , integrated supply chain can be a double edged swordthe problem of slumping sales for samsung should not be underestimated . this may be a company that makes everything from oceanic drilling rigs to kitchen sinks , but more than half of its operating profit comes from its mobile business . and while a vertically integrated supply chain gives samsung the advantage of developing new and exclusive technologies , it also means that any loss of business is felt multiple times over . samsung display depends on assured demand from samsung mobile , and when one falters , the other feels the pain too . there s no better example of how quickly things can unravel for a dominant company than nokia s experience since the turn of the century . having once grown to accommodate demand for hundreds of millions of phones per year , the finnish company had to be painfully dismantled when its symbian and maemo platforms were devastated by android s ascendancy . it s obvious that samsung s growth couldn t continue indefinitely , but what s happening at the moment is that people are replacing samsung devices with cheaper alternatives . according to the latest idc figures , huawei has doubled its smartphone shipments over the past year , lenovo has risen dramatically , and a further dozen chinese companies like mi are in with a chance of making it into the top five vendors in the world . samsung should be nervous . there are numerous reasons for samsung s recent stagnation . one is that the old spec race has basically run its course . in the days when the galaxy s ii was fighting it out against the htc sensation , samsung could tout the fastest processor , nicest display , and best camera around , but now all of those specifications have generally plateaued . samsung s octa core processor offers little to compel a buyer that might consider a less overpowered phone . and the greatness of super amoled displays has been matched and even surpassed by ips lcd screens . samsung s old technological edge has been dulled , its pricing advantage has been dispelled , and now the company s left with trying to convince people it s worth their time through software and design . the spec war s over and samsung has no peacetime planto its credit , samsung s leadership has shown no lack of foresight . the company has made constant and repeated efforts to make its tizen once known as bada software a viable platform to compete with android . knowing the importance of having something unique to keep users engaged , it s built up its own app store , partnered with the likes of amazon for galaxy exclusive kindle offers , and built a comprehensive suite of tweaks and additions to the basic android os running on its phones . the problem has been execution . the samsung ui that was once known as touchwiz has earned derision for being bloated , bloopy , and unintuitive , while the subscription based samsung music hub was recently shuttered due to lack of user interest . ironically , samsung s now struggling with the same sort of software issues that gave it the opportunity to become a leading phone manufacturer in the first place . the outlook isn t much rosier when it comes to design . samsung s last three galaxy s flagship phones have all come in for criticism for their cheap , plasticky feel and fake metal aesthetics . the latest s , in particular , has been the butt of a recurring band aid joke , owing to the dimpled pattern on its back . samsung tries incredibly hard to be a design leader both in software and hardware but the real world rewards results rather than aspirations , and the company s products have struggled to cross a threshold of excellence that would inspire loyalty and delight among its user base . the galaxy s gold , or what i call the galaxy s band aid pic . twitter . com xu fzvwrvz joanna stern joannastern february , more than anything , samsung s issue is one of brand loyalty . the company has poured billions into marketing itself as apple s equal , but it has never achieved the depth of affection that its cupertino rival commands . samsung has sought to be the pragmatic rather than aspirational choice pay less , get more . that works only so long as samsung is indeed winning on price or specs , but when one starts to be undercut by competitors and the other ceases to be quite so important , the vast number of current samsung users and the company s incredible manufacturing capabilities start to become irrelevant . they mean nothing to a person looking to buy his or her next phone . these problems aren t new , they ve just been patched over by growing salesthe failure to properly address the two critical issues of software and industrial design is starting to catch up with samsung monetarily , but there s still plenty of time to correct course . the evolution of the company s gear smartwatches from the experimental and thoroughly flawed galaxy gear a year ago to the much improved gear live today shows a company learning quickly from its mistakes . the gear fit is a brilliant use of samsung s curved amoled display , though its software still needs a lot of work . the agile and aggressive samsung of old is still around , channeling its efforts toward wearables , but it might be time to bring that same attitude back to smartphones as well . if samsung were to learn not copy from its competitors like the all aluminum htc one or brilliantly ergonomic moto x , it could finally start living up to the haughty claims in its pervasive ads and promotions . mobile chief j . k . shin has promised that at least one new phone this year will be made of new materials , offering hope that samsung is finally ready to stop emulating leather and metal and start actually using premium materials in its phones . samsung has always been able to build phones that sell well on paper and on store shelves , but to engender the sort of customer loyalty that won t evaporate with the merest hint of price competition , it needs to give us the complete package an uncompromised phone that can outsell the iphone because it truly is better . 