 valley village is located next to north hollywood , which isn t very close to hollywood at all . the santa monica mountains , plus a handful of neighborhoods and freeway exchanges , separate hollywood from north hollywood . for the past several months , it has been impossible to drive between these neighborhoods without passing a billboard advertising a youtube star . most often , that star is grace helbig , a year old comedian who recently crossed over , landing her own honest to god television show on e ! . viewership of the grace helbig show tanked quickly by its third episode , it was only drawing , viewers , causing the network to move it from friday to sunday night . helbig , meanwhile , still posts videos for her youtube channel , where she has . million subscribers . connor goes to hollywoodchasing stardom in youtube s crowded universeryan bradley valley village is located next to north hollywood , which isn t very close to hollywood at all . the santa monica mountains , plus a handful of neighborhoods and freeway exchanges , separate hollywood from north hollywood . for the past several months , it has been impossible to drive between these neighborhoods without passing a billboard advertising a youtube star . most often , that star is grace helbig , a year old comedian who recently crossed over , landing her own honest to god television show on e ! . viewership of the grace helbig show tanked quickly by its third episode , it was only drawing , viewers , causing the network to move it from friday to sunday night . helbig , meanwhile , still posts videos for her youtube channel , where she has . million subscribers . sixty four thousand people , he said that s an nfl stadium . on a recent midsummer afternoon , connor manning was sitting in a valley village bistro , picking at his salad and considering helbig s level of celebrity , celebrity generally , and if that was what he really wanted . manning is not famous . except , perhaps , to the , people who were subscribed to his youtube channel . that doesn t sound like a lot , compared to the stars on the billboards , but it s all relative . sixty four thousand people , he said that s an nfl stadium . manning had just had his hair cut , shaved close on both sides , slicked back for the most part though stray locks escaped to cover one of his two very blue eyes . he was anxious his knees bobbed and bounced under the table . i ve never been the one who s been really assertive , he said . but i m in a place where i m trying to practice that and , like , faking it in a way . he laughed . just a few minutes earlier he had mentioned how hard he works to appear unguarded for his audience , his fans . if he wanted to develop his youtube videos into a self sustaining career , the kind where he wouldn t have to wait tables on the side , he would need to present a more confident facade to the companies that control the pathways to larger audiences , more money , greater success . he d need to fake it , maybe , or figure out another way . manning , , had moved to la exactly two weeks before i met him , driving across the country from his home in the baltimore suburbs where , for the better part of five and a half years , he d made videos of himself and posted them to his youtube channel , aconmann . for now , he s crashing at his friend sasha s apartment in studio city , just over the hills from hollywood . ever since he was in high school and probably even earlier , manning had dreamed of coming to la to make it as a performer , because this is where performers go to make it . in recent years , the nature of manning s performance had evolved from something traditional a zany sort of adolescent comedy act into something more complicated , harder to pin down . at some point , his videos began to address much more of his own life depression , addiction , bisexuality . his audience responded , his subscriber numbers steadily rose , and he began to think of what he was building as a viable , stand alone career . tomorrow , at vidcon , he would begin figuring out just what that career might look like , especially now that he was here , in la . vidcon is a conference that began six years ago , mostly for youtubers like manning , but has since metastasized to include viners and snapchatters and even facebookers too , along with hoards of their fans . the conference also draws industry people the people manning needed to fake it for , and the gatekeepers to becoming this new kind of celebrity . among manning s earliest videos is one , posted five years ago and viewed , times , called legit old guy . in it , he narrates over a clip of a man parking a very small car in a very small garage . that guy should be the president of the world , manning says , looking squarely into the camera . a lot of his early videos are similar he either points to an already popular thing on the internet , or weighs in on an evergreen topic of internet discussion twilight s vampires , lindsay lohan s sexuality , the rise of auto tune . manning called his web series generally awesome , and even developed a tagline i m connor manning and you ve just become a little more awesome which managed to stick even after his videos became more personal . he dropped the tagline about five months ago . manning had been practicing his public speaking for yearsthe talent manning has for extemporaneous speech appears , in his videos , innate . but he had been practicing his public speaking years before he made his first video . in high school , he was a star on the speech team , competing at the state and national level . he was a fierce competitor , ruthlessly confident . manning was , by all accounts , an ideal kid a good student and son , endlessly goofy and positive . but he was troubled , too . his parents went through an ugly divorce he never sees his biological father , and his stepfather was distant and the two never bonded . after high school , manning went to george mason university , where he began drinking heavily , grew depressed , and ultimately , considered suicide . the next , dark period of his life dropping out , living at home , going through therapy , his addiction and depression is something manning avoids discussing in great detail . for someone who semi professionally confesses to the internet , he remains incredibly guarded , ampnbsppackaging his personal narrative in a way that insulates the messier , more intimate aspects . he doesn t like to talk about what he was addicted to , specifically , nor does he talk about his depression in more than the broadest of strokes . on november nd , , manning posted a video called the meaning of life . he knows this date by heart . the video signaled a definitive shift , the beginning of something new . i ve been thinking a lot about time , and how crazy it is , manning says in the video , launching into a brief and wide eyed explanation of the theory of relativity . then he reads questions from his audience . have you ever had suicidal thoughts ? someone asks . please give me some advice . i think you re going to have one less viewer . now , i could say a whole lot of things to this , manning replies . too many things . . . the answer is yes , i have had those thoughts . everybody has horrible times but if that weren t the case . . . the good times wouldn t be worth it . he goes back to the beginning , then the very beginning , the creation of the universe , and the improbable fact of our existence , born out of chaos . it s not just how skillfully he connects his answer to the theme he s previously laid out , but how he speaks from a place of deep experience without making it about himself . it s universal . to feel means you exist , and existence , in my opinion , outweighs any negative thing that could happen , he says . it was the first time he d ever done anything online that was not solely designed to be funny . it was personal and helpful , and it was , he says , his way forward , his crucible . at the end of , he started attending community college , and , in the beginning of , he got a job working customer relations at the national aquarium . that got him out of his shell , and it also helped him save money for the move to la he d begun to imagine . three years ago , he told his mom and stepdad that he wouldn t be going back to university , that he wanted to pursue his dreams out west . in the meantime , his videos had become more personal , with titles like falling for straight people and feeling myself and am i a real man and would you date someone with scars ? if you watch manning s channel , you feel that you know him . his mom , cathy williams , watched his videos from the very beginning , even when she couldn t quite understand just what the heck it was he was after . she says the videos allowed her to watch her son transform from a goofy guy who worked hard for a laugh , to just , like , an everyman . none of connor s videos have gone viral , and he takes pride in that . it s easy to make a viral video , he says , but it isn t meaningful a flash in the digital pan that doesn t establish a connection with followers or guarantee a wave of new subscribers . i love my story individually , which is what i primarily tell , but i also like kind of validating everyone else s story as well , he said that afternoon in the valley village cafe . i wondered aloud if he could monetize that . connor told me that yes , yes he could in fact he already had . donations from viewers had helped him relocate cross country . for the first time , he was being paid to attend vidcon . the first vidcon , in , took place in the hyatt regency in downtown los angeles . it was put together by sibling youtubers known as the vlogbrothers john and hank green . john , the older brother , is also author of the ya bestsellers turned movies the fault in our stars and paper towns . attendees of the first and second vidcon speak wistfully about how intimate , low stakes , and fun those conferences were . it was a place to meet your internet buddies in real life . sure , there were industry folks then , too , but they mostly helped creators with little tricks to grow traffic and build audience . back then the fans moved in smaller , more manageable packs they were respectful , almost . it all felt very collegial . in its third year , vidcon moved to the anaheim convention center , a much larger venue that sits next door to disneyland . industry people with serious money poured in . so did the fans . for manning , vidcon has become the signpost of his year , a way to take stock . his mom came with him to his first vidcon four years ago , because he was still in rough shape , and because she was curious just what this youtube world looked like up close . even with her there , manning snuck off , got trashed , and didn t return her calls for a night . they had a big fight . still , manning met the people who inspired him to be better , not just in his videos , but in his life . about a month after vidcon , on july nd , , he got sober . this year s conference took place over three days in july . thursday was industry day , a chance for the businesses that run the platforms to fly in , meet the talent , mingle , and be home to their families by the weekend . the real fan and creator stuff the panels , the meetups didn t begin in earnest until friday , and continued through saturday . when i stepped into the enormous , airey outer atrium of the anaheim convention center on vidcon s first day , the first thing i noticed was the sticky sweet smell of teenage perfume and cologne . across the convention center hall , packs of young adults with hair dyed in blues , purples , and rainbows huddled around power outlets , each other , and the occasional creator . on the second and third floors of the center , the scene was decidedly more suit jackets and business casual . i kept climbing until i made my way to a balcony facing out over a line of food trucks , fountains , and a stage where stars from awesomenesstv performed . up here , the conversation circled around packaged content and talent incubation , crossed formats and investor appeal , cross channel promotion and synergy , synergy , synergy . up here , the conversation circled around synergy , synergy , synergyawesomenesstv is a multi channel network , or mcn , one of a slew of new and powerful talent incubators and content distributors to have emerged in the rush to the online video goldmine . for the very biggest youtube stars comedians , gamers , and unboxers of new products it is not uncommon to make well over million a year . according to the youtube stat monitor social blade , an unboxer that goes by the name disneycollectorbr could be earning more than million a month . signing creators at that level is lucrative business . even managing a dozen lesser stars , with several hundred thousand subscribers apiece , is enough to build a healthy media company . though manning exists in a lower and less profitable tier creators with under , subscribers he had had been signed to an mcn called big frame , which describes itself as a company building sustainable media brands around youtube s most influential channels , and connecting advertisers with their highly engaged audiences . he ended his partnership with big frame in december recently , the company was acquired by awesomenesstv . manning said he d left big frame because the company s advertiser driven business model wasn t what he was looking for . but advertising is where the serious money is and always will be , and the serious money , once it got very serious , is always with the same entrenched media companies awesomenesstv is owned by dreamworks and hearst another major mcn , maker studios , is owned by disney . the only newish player among the media behemoths is the platform itself , youtube , which is owned by google . later in the day , in an auditorium bigger than all the rest , susan wojcicki , youtube s ceo , spoke to hundreds of her industry peers . the fans , she said , are leaning in and changing the definitions of what it means to be a celebrity . a variety poll from earlier this year found eight of the top most famous , recognizable , and important celebrities to teens were youtubers . during her presentation , wojcicki unveiled a redesigned youtube play button that looked like a diamond a special button for special creators , with channels of million subscribers or more . in mock awards show fashion , she presented physical , heavy looking versions of the button to a few of the creators who were there the epic rap battles of history guys . million subs , the duo behind the comedy channel smosh million subs . fans are changing the definitions of what it means to be a celebrity . manning is aware of the push for ever greater numbers , and the opportunity at stake . he is tactical with the content he produces . he knew , for example , that when he made a video about his bisexuality , or a video called too gay , too straight , it would do well , because lgbt videos do well on youtube . he could do one of those , then get away with maybe three or four weirder ones , maybe shot in a single take . i look at hank , at what he s done and i just , i want to do that , connor told me the day before vidcon . hank is hank green . he is manning s hero , not just because of his success , but because he seems to have preserved exactly who he is despite it a nerdy guy who makes videos about things he s passionate about , and makes people passionate about those things , too . he s a force for good in the world , manning said . he also knew that hank green would be at vidcon , and there was a good chance they d be in the same room at the same time , and maybe get a chance to meet , and talk , creator to creator . that would be cool , but he didn t want to force it , make things weird . people were coming up to hank green all the time , wanting things from him , and he didn t want to be one of those people . on the morning of his second day at vidcon , manning was slumped in a chair in the lobby of the hilton , a stone s throw from the convention center and where he and most attendees were staying . he was staring at his phone and double checking a list of questions for a panel on mental health he would soon be moderating . behind him , a line of weary , bleary eyed parents snaked its way out of the hotel starbucks . manning yawned and stretched his long skinny arms dramatically , then placed his hands over his face . i m tired , he said . manning is often tired . for a while , his twitter bio read a little bit tired . playing a version of himself for an audience of tens of thousands twice a week is bound to be draining . plus , now , vidcon . the panel he was moderating featured will shepherd , kati morton , and savannah brown , who all work in a similar confessional vein to manning . brown is a poet , morton is a therapist , and shepherd is a gay man who had recently begun to grapple with ptsd and who has the largest audience of the bunch , subs . half an hour before the panel was slated to begin , the room filled with attendees , gossiping about vidcons past . the panelists entered to huge applause . manning asked them to introduce themselves , then asked how they ended up on youtube . we re kind of like the outcasts , brown said . what i love , shepherd said , is this is like where the weird kids go to express themselves , then , later none of us have massive channels , but we are all so raw . part of that rawness was , the group agreed , admitting when they did not always know the answer , that they were just figuring it out themselves . i really don t know what i m doing , manning agreed . i m living the experience and then making videos as my way through it . the drawback is people presume to know what i ve been through or am going through . they come up to me and go , are you okay ? are you okay ? no , i m fine . i m fine . i m just tired . are you okay ? no , i m fine . i m just tired . during the q ampa portion of the panel , a middle aged woman in the audience stood and spoke to the room for a long time about how she saw millennials and post millennials . they were all , in her eyes , spiritually lost . eventually , morton cut her off . being lost isn t a problem , she said , and the room erupted in applause . an hour after the mental health panel , there was an informal meet up , an lgbt hangout , outside the convention center . there was no line for autographs or selfies here many of these fans were in fact old friends or people manning had known a very long time online and occasionally in real life . someone in the group described some of the vine stars as looking like beautiful space alien creatures another person in the circle fawned over manning s hair cut . manning , uneasy with all the attention , pointed to a trash can . this is me . this is who i am , he said . hank green looks young for his age which is , but old for vidcon . he has dimpled cheeks , slightly mussed hair , and the air of a hip , young dad . green has interviewed president obama , co founded a record label , and invented a pair of d glasses for people who want to watch d movies in two dimensions . beyond the vlogbrothers channel he runs with his brother , hank is involved with at least a dozen other youtube channels . two years ago , green founded a crowdfunding company called subbable , which let people who enjoyed the work of certain creators donate money to them , either through a one time payment or a monthly subscription . in march , subbable was acquired by patreon , a much larger but still private company that essentially offers the same payment structure , while taking a percent cut of all donations . last year patreon announced it paid ampnbsp million per month to its creators , of which there are more than , this year the company says its pledges have grown percent , and that its , financially active creators are pulling from a monthly pool of millions of dollars . manning is one of them . currently , he makes . a month from patreon donations . seventeen of his patrons pay at least a month , and , for their donations , receive a handwritten letter from connor . it s not a fortune , but that income which he says is increasing allowed him to move to la , and will soon help him get his own apartment . a vlogbrothers video , friday afternoon , after the morning s mental health talk and midday lgbt meetup , manning sat waiting for his turn on a series of filmed panels for uplife , a youtube channel for online communities against sexual violence . hank green was there , sitting near him , being filmed for another panel . manning was extremely attuned to the way most people approached hank at vidcon , treating him as an object , a celebrity . he didn t want that . and so although they were in the same small room for nearly an hour , he and green never spoke . my path is not repeatable , but i don t know of any path that is . later , i talked with green , and asked him about his path , and manning s , and if they were at all analogous if green s career might shine a light on how manning might come up , too . no , green said . my path is not repeatable , but i don t know of any path that is . someone could go from , subscribers to , , he said , but beyond that , in today s environment , things get murky . vlogbrothers , with their . million subscribers , have been around a relatively long time eight years to youtube s . their channel grew popular organically a remarkable feat and an increasingly difficult proposition in . the reason is simple there s simply too much money on the line . green said that in order to develop a very popular , sustainable franchise with millions of subscribers in this new , moneyed era , you need institutional support mcns eager to promote your brand through their other , more popular talent and channels , or connect you to high paying branded deals . it all meant faster access to resources money , better cameras , lighting , stages that could free you up to make loads of content . but in time , green said , that support goes from enabling you , to people or companies asking you to do things for them , because they gave you money . i think they re following me , as a person . there is , however , another , hidden landscape . on twitch . tv , a tip based , live streaming video game platform bought by amazon last year for million gamers make a decent and sometimes great income with modest but extremely dedicated audiences . you can have , viewers and make a better living than the million plus guys , green said . all you needed was to become the thing the podcast , the song , the video , the habit for some people , and they d pay a month for you . manning knows that to build a career , he needs to think beyond youtube subscriber numbers he needs to build an audience that will zealously follow him to snapchat , or facebook , or some other platform that doesn t exist yet . it s a business reality that manning is innately attuned to . essentially i don t think people are following my videos , manning had told me over our first lunch in valley village . i think they re following me , as a person . outside , after the panel , i asked manning if he was sorry he didn t get a chance to talk to his hero . he shrugged . of course i am a little bummed , he said , but also not really . because i know it will happen . i know i am exactly where i need to be . back in the san fernando valley , a few days after vidcon , manning was draped across the couch at his friend sasha s apartment . manning s bedroom consisted of a mattress in the corner of the living room , clothing confettied in piles around it . he waved his hand at the scene and said , this is it . this is home , for now . over the three days at vidcon he d gained about a thousand subscribers . he d met a bunch of new creators . he d moderated a panel and nearly met his hero . still , he was rootless and in a post conference malaise . at least , he said , he was in decent health he hadn t caught the vidcon virus , a flu like disease born out of the annual confluence of teens , their germs and hormones rampaging . he needed an apartment . without a home , he said , he felt like he was still drifting . this vidcon , he said , had felt different than previous ones he was actively building a business , developing a strategy . in the end , he didn t have to fake it as hard as he thought he might . people seemed to know him already . i didn t have to explain what i do , he said . this is it . this is home , for now . he was , he said , being courted by a few mcns , but he wasn t interested in a contract . not until i know i can be a priority for companies , he said . i really want to have some negotiating power , because i don t want to be treated as an afterthought again . he was looking into the idea of partnerships . a few weeks after vidcon , he did a branded video , his first in years , for a company called famebit . it felt different than similar projects he d done with big frame he was in control , and didn t feel like he was diminishing who he was , his own brand . with the money from that , and patreon , he d be able to pay rent off internet work alone . recently , manning texted me he d signed a lease . a bouquet of exclamation points followed . it was a studio near his friends in the valley , not too far from the hills . beyond them was hollywood proper , with its billboards of youtube stars standing right alongside movie stars , reality tv stars , pop stars . he d be living alone for the first time . he was getting closer to where it was all happening , and he could , he said , finally start building something on his own . it felt like the real beginning of this new stage , finally . photography by john francis petersedited by michael zelenko , ampnbspemily yoshida