 space and planetary scientists are out in force this week at the annual meeting of the american geophysical union in san francisco . the buzz centers on comets , especially on results from rosetta , the first mission to orbit and land on a comet and mars , where possible traces of methane belching microbes have again been spotted . here s a round up of some of this week s science . philae in flight to p churyumov gerasimenko as seen from rosetta . esa still searching for philae any hour , any day now , rosetta mission scientists expect to know where their lander is . the photos we need have been taken , says matt taylor , project scientist with the european space agency . they re in a pipeline , we re just waiting for them to come down now . almost every day it surprises us with new results . taylor and fellow members of the rosetta team spoke today discussing early results . in november rosetta s lander philae touched down on p churyumov gerasimenko comet , a duck shaped ball of ice and dust million miles from earth . despite failing to fire its harpoons , and bouncing twice before coming to rest in a shadowy canyon , philae instantly began sending messages home to earth . with only hours of battery life , and unable to use its solar panels in shadow , philae went on an experimental bonanza sniffing , sampling , drilling , and recording the comet . so far the findings have been fascinating , says kathrin altwegg , the lead scientist for rosina , the sensor aboard rosetta able to sniff out chemicals and molecules . i think we picked a really good comet . almost every day it surprises us with new results . altwegg and her team have begun to analyze the comet s chemistry , which she says is more varied and richer in organic molecules than she expected . other groups are analyzing its icy geology , with the suspicion that the lumpy comet is actually two comets melded together . rosetta mission selfie , with p in the background . esa rosetta philae civa why comets are cool comets , and their drier compatriots asteroids , are holdovers from the ancient days of our solar system . like a snapshot from the nursery , they might tell us what conditions were like in our planet s early history . our planet s water probably didn t come from a cometthe start of life on earth , about . billion years ago , coincides with a time when the planet was suffering heavy pummeling by asteroids and comets the late heavy bombardment . earth s earliest oceans vaporized under the pelting . the delicate carbon based molecules upon which life is built could not have survived . yet , here s a mystery life , it seems , began just as soon as it could . fossils appear rather quickly . the earliest date from . billion years ago . how did life find the needed water and carbon based molecules on earth s surface ? comets hold both water and carbon based molecules . that makes them tempting targets for explaining how it was that life came to be even though they also have wiped out a number of species . but the comet as nursery theory came under some pressure earlier this month , when rosetta released its first results . the chemical signature from the comet s water didn t match the water on the earth s surface . our planet s water probably did not come from a comet at least , not this type of comet . some space scientists think asteroids were a more likely delivery route or perhaps the water was made here all along . two nasa missions , the already launched dawn and the upcoming osiris rex are hot on the pursuit of asteroids . and we haven t heard the last of philae , according to jean pierre bibring , the lead lander scientist . next february or march , as the lander gets just a little more light to power its solar panels , he expects it to wake up again . i believe if we re patient enough philae will go beyond our expectations , he says . a shot of the first sample collection hole drilled in mount sharp . nasa jpl caltech msss martian methane comes and goes yesterday at the same meeting in san francisco , nasa shared their latest findings from the curiosity rover which has spent the last two years drilling , sniffing rocks and taking selfies on the surface of mars . starting in late november , curiosity detected a spike in methane levels , nearly a fold jump from low background levels . methane remained abundant for about two months and disappeared as quickly as it arose . on earth methane is usually a product of gas burping microbes , so its presence raises hopes that mars now or at one time hosted life . mysterious methane methane on mars is as much of a mystery as it s ever been , says john grotzinger , the mission s project scientist . this finding reverses a announcement by the team in which curiosity found no methane gas . that surprised many since , in , nasa reported spotting a martian methane plume based on data from earth bound telescopes and spacecraft orbiting mars . we knew that could happen , but you report what you find , says grotzinger . we don t know when it might pop up again , but we ll keep monitoring . although microbes would be most people s favored source for the martian methane , it isn t a clear signal for life . it might also be the reaction product of water , rock bound minerals , and ultraviolet radiation . at any rate , grotzinger says he felt lucky to detect any methane at all . it s not evidence that we ve found life on mars , but it is one of the few hypotheses we can propose and consider as we go forward , says grotzinger . the fact that we saw anything is amazing . a deductive line of science grotzinger and his team also announced proof of organic molecules in ancient rocks on mars . like methane , chlorobenzene can be created through non living chemical reactions . it is still tantalizing , however , since organic molecules like these are what would be needed for life on or under the rocky red surface . in , grotzinger and his team plan to drill more holes and hunt for other organic signatures . mars is turning the corner , grotzinger says . it used to be a planet where space missions would explore and seek to explain . i think of it as the star trek mode build a spacecraft , find cool things that no one has ever found before . mars is now becoming a proving ground for a more deductive line of science . as evidence he pointed toward nasa s maven mission . they re testing very specific hypotheses about how the atmosphere of mars eroded , he said . we re doing the same for curiosity with these ancient rocks . artist s conception of the maven spacecraft orbiting mars . courtesy nasa gsfc the maven of the skies nasa s mars atmosphere and volatile evolution spacecraft has been orbiting the planet since september . its mission is to study what happened in mars once abundant atmosphere . the loss of atmospheric gas , as solar wind gradually chewed it away , completely transformed mars . it was once a relatively wet , warm pleasant place . now , it is a frozen wasteland of dry rock . a visitor from the oort cloudmaven s team presented early results on monday at the agu meeting . the solar wind , a river of hot protons that flows from the sun , can penetrate deeper into mars spare atmosphere than previously thought , they announced . the ionosphere , a protective layer of ions and electrons , should normally act as a shield to the solar wind . yet maven s observation that some protons make it deep within that layer are links in a chain toward explaining martian history , according to bruce jakosky , the mission s lead scientist . in october maven , and the other orbiters and rovers that make up the mars flotilla , survived a close call . the planet was buzzed by wayward comet siding spring , a visitor from the distant oort cloud . a martian would have seen thousands of shooting stars per hour , researchers estimate . for the flyby curiosity , which spends most of its time looking at the ground , glanced upward . it captured a few snapshots of its cometary visitor , much as an earth bound human might , staring in wonder at the night sky . 