 now that we ve had a moment to catch our breath after all the excitement surrounding the windows release , let s rewind to the other big news of this week the launch of ampnbspmotorola s smartphone lineup . moto hosted three simultaneous events and launched three different phones on tuesday , but there was one unifying vision tying them all together . and that vision , even under the ownership of new parent company lenovo , is very much in the spirit of motorola s former owner , google . at google i o this year , sundar pichai set out google s internal mission as being the development of ampnbsptechnology that works for and is accessible to everyone . that s exactly the strategy that motorola has been pursuing with its smartphones over the past couple of years . the chicago based company has been consistently undercutting its competitors prices and surprising us with the amount of smartphone power it can fit into the tightest of budgets . this week , the globally successful moto g evolved with even more premium features , while the top tier moto x split into a pair of devices , the x style and x play , both of which target shoppers for flagship devices while costing a whole lot less than most android flagships . motorola makes exactly the sort of android phone that google wants everyone to haveparticularly in the united states , the new moto x has a chance to really disrupt the pricing and distribution of the best android smartphones . motorola is foregoing the usual sweetheart deals with carriers to offer the phone for , unlocked and ready to go on any network you want to use it on . you ll be able to buy the phone directly from motorola , amazon , or best buy . this is what google s nexus program , in its initial and most ambitious form was all about bypassing the carriers and creating a direct relationship between the phone s maker and its user . now motorola is staking its fortunes on realizing google s dream scenario . of course , neither google nor motorola is interested in nudging out the influence of carriers purely out of some altruistic desire for a better world . both companies are pursuing their best self interest , and in motorola s case , the motivation could be as much the result of being rebuffed in its negotiations for favorable carrier deals as anything else . it s noteworthy that motorola isn t pursuing the same outsider strategy all around the globe it s not even doing it with the moto g in the us . whatever the machinations behind the scenes , however , it still takes a lot of courage for a smartphone manufacturer to dive into the scary and unknown realm of selling its flagship phone without the usual support of carrier subsidies and marketing . so far , this has mostly been the game plan for lower profile players like oneplus , alcatel onetouch , and huawei . motorola is acting more like oneplus than htc , and that s a good thingmotorola is taking on the sort of risk that competitors like htc and lg haven t been willing or able to accept . htc continues to bend a knee to both at ampt and verizon , giving them alternate ampnbspexclusives on its latest devices and limiting its potential audience in the process . htc also maintains , staunchly , that its sense software on top of android differentiates its phones and adds value for customers . motorola , on the other hand , happily admits that android doesn t need any window dressing and delivers it in its pristine form , adding only small apps and utilities like active display . just the way that google would like it . it may sound like a counterintuitive idea , but it s arguable that google selling motorola is precisely the thing that made it possible for moto to become even more google like in its approach to the smartphone market . in spite of a harmonious relationship when the two companies were together , motorola s ampnbspmoney losing ways did not sit well with google and google didn t really have a long term vision for building phone hardware . new moto owner lenovo has both the funds and the patience to rebuild the famous motorola brand through projects that may not be immediately profitable . that s what gives moto the financial wiggle room that companies like htc don t have . lenovo s considerable resources act as a buffer against bullying tactics from carriers and give moto the room to try the bold strategy that it s embarking upon today . lenovo has given motorola the resources it needs without interfering in its strategy google had very little influence over motorola s designs , chief designer jim wicks told us during tuesday s event , and lenovo has been the same . so , even with all the top level corporate changes , motorola itself has been relatively free to set and pursue its own course . this should come as no surprise for any close observers of lenovo , which has already proven itself an astute custodian of historic brands through the way it s handled the takeover of ibm s thinkpad business . lenovo s hands off approach worked out with selling laptops , and it stands a decent chance of bearing fruit in the smartphone market as well . all of this places a great deal of pressure on motorola itself . the smartphone maker has drawn a line in the sand , achieved the all important differentiation from the pack , and now it must actually deliver . among the bold promises uttered on tuesday , marketing vp adrienne hayes offered perhaps the biggest , guaranteeing that the cameras in motorola s phones will now be best in class . that s as tall a task as disrupting the calcified us smartphone market . but hey , better to aim high and miss than to keep trudging along the same path to gradual irrelevance . if google was a smartphone maker , it would be doing exactly what motorola is doing today . deliver pure android . spurn the carriers . slash the prices . it s bold , outrageous , and a little bit crazy . even though it s no longer a google company in the official sense , motorola is carrying on the personality of its former parent . now more so than ever . verge video hands on with motorola s new flagship phone