 it arrived on monday , like a hyper detailed unicorn emerging from the hdr mist . samsung , sony , dolby , th century fox , and a host of other companies were teaming up to form the uhd alliance . its mission to standardize terminology and expectations around ultra high definition , sweeping away k confusion and accelerating consumer adoption in the process . samsung display executive h . s . kim called it a game changer . bill lee , the company s vp of tv , said it was a great opportunity for the industry to rally around uhd . it s not going to be that easy . with no defined ecosystem and products rushing into market , ultra high definition has become a mess . manufacturers are putting out k televisions , trying to one up each other by signing exclusive content deals that might be good for them , but lock out other manufacturers . meanwhile both streaming services and cable satellite providers are picking and choosing when they want to get involved and who they re ready to work with . and then there s the matter of high dynamic range . with the first wave of televisions failing to catch fire , everyone s looking for the magic bullet that will make k a must have for consumers . many think the brilliant , vibrant imagery of hdr is the answer but there are multiple options out there to choose from as well . the uhd alliance is claiming it can fix all of this , so in the wake of the announcement let s grade the biggest players in the game and those that should be . samsungalliance member yes grade csamsung has been one of the most active manufacturers in the world of k , and it s the company that spearheaded the uhd alliance . there s no denying it s committed to the format . unfortunately , it s also one of the worst actors , with samsung cutting a string of exclusive content deals that limit the proliferation of k , and confusing customers with its terrible naming conventions . someone explain suhd . please . to really help the k ecosystem , samsung will need to learn to play nice with others . sonyalliance member yes grade asony has been espousing the benefits of k for years , from its movie cameras to its televisions . it s also one of the biggest providers of k content sony s k media player was the first way to actually watch k material , and sony pictures movies are available on every k service out there . its entertainment arm isn t officially part of the alliance only sony s tv division is but given how committed the company has been overall we can t slight them for that . the only ding we d add is the company s slightly murky branding when it comes to high dynamic range technology , but that s the kind of branding issue the uhd alliance was made to handle . amazonalliance member no grade bif you can t be netflix in the k streaming race , you d want to be amazon . the company supports streaming to tvs from a number of different manufacturers , is producing and releasing shows like transparent in k , and has movies from sony as well . better yet , amazon s a partner in the high dynamic range dolby vision program . we re tempted to give it a higher grade , but amazon hasn t actually announced that it will be releasing dolby vision or hdr content anytime soon . and then there s the matter of the uhd alliance itself amazon isn t a member , though vice president of digital video michael paull says the company is in conversations . netflixalliance member yes grade a there has been no better advocate of k than netflix . the streaming giant was an early partner with dolby vision , and has consistently pushed the envelope , bringing k hdr streaming later this year . although its current library of k content isn t huge , the company has made it known more content is coming , and all of its original shows will be shot in k going forward . applealliance member no grade incompleteapple just hasn t shown up for class . there has been no word about k content for itunes , and no new apple tv with k support . apple s invariable move is to make a surprise announcement about its k plans , but until it happens , the world s largest company gets an incomplete . googlealliance member no grade cwhile youtube does support k uploads and streaming , google hasn t discussed its plans for k content on google play . the video store may not be the biggest platform out there , but having one of the largest companies sitting quietly on the sidelines isn t great for the ecosystem . comcastalliance member no grade dcomcast has announced plans to offer k content through its xfinity in uhd app , but thanks to one of those pesky exclusivity deals , the app is only available on samsung tvs . combine that with the fact that the company still maintains data caps for some of its users , and it sounds more like comcast is setting a trap than bringing customers into the future . directvalliance member yes grade cdirectv previously only offered its k content on samsung tvs in an exclusive deal , and via on demand at that . but the company is loosening those restraints , striking a deal with lg , and recent rumblings indicate that sony might join up soon too . even with these changes , though , directv doesn t allow all k tvs to get its content , and one off deals is not where the next generation of tv should be headed . dishalliance member no grade bthis year dish announced the k joey , the company s new set top box that will let any uhd television owner watch k on demand . they re the first satellite provider to go wide with their availability for directv , it s still samsung or nothing . the ultra hd joey won t be shipping until summer , but that s still the best satellite has to offer . th century foxalliance member yes grade cthis week fox announced that it would be bringing k content to samsung televisions in an exclusive deal . it s a welcome move the more content the better but services like netflix have told us they d be reluctant to add movies and shows that can only be played on a subset of k televisions . kudos are deserved for jumping in the game , but let s go wide , fox exclusivity deals feel so . warner bros . alliance member yes grade bwarner bros . has largely remained quiet about its plans , but this week it announced it will be bringing movies to streaming services with the hdr dolby vision format . it s a big commitment , and with both amazon and netflix lined up as dolby vision partners we wouldn t be surprised to see both services get warner bros . movies in . among the titles warner bros . has announced thus far are the lego movie and oblivion but we caught a glimpse of godzilla playing in a ces demo as well . dolbyalliance member yes grade b dolby brought the importance of high dynamic range imagery to the forefront when it showed off dolby vision last year , and it s the best iteration of the technology we ve seen yet . the company is also signed up with netflix and amazon , putting it in a prime position should all the pieces come together . getting them to come together , however , is the issue . big manufacturers like sony and samsung have declined to adopt dolby vision , rolling their own hdr solutions instead , and while warner bros . is a huge get , it won t be enough on its own . dolby may have won the moral victory , but it will take more than that to win the war . learn morecredits lt ! b . js type text javascript gt gt