 the gulf between people and police is widening , and comedian w . kamau bell is podcasting about it . on december th , gunman ismaaiyl brinsley allegedly shot and killed two new york city police officers in the bedford stuyvesant neighborhood of brooklyn . he later killed himself . the murders came after weeks of nationwide protests against law enforcement in america , with people taking to the streets to denounce the shooting deaths of michael brown and eric garner and the non indictment of the police officers involved , and reports indicate that brinsley committed the killings as revenge against law enforcement at large . with these new killings , the tenor surrounding the situation had changed in one fell swoop . the shootings gave bell pause , but also a chance to find a new platform . he d already , in his small way , taken part in the protests . he also discusses race and law enforcement in his work . in a recent vanity fair piece , bell say he s petrified of the cops , and describes his fear as a cultural inclination , a means of survival . but it was when he got to speak candidly with retired lapd police officer anthony escobar in september , two months before the michael brown grand jury decision that he felt like he had something worth saving and one day sharing . i d never had that kind of unfettered access to a police officer where i never felt like he was going to turn on me or arrest me or murder me , bell told me over the phone . the conversation turned into an hour long podcast he calls coptalk , and it seemed like the right thing to help bridge the yawning gap between police and the communities they serve . but when two cops die and the president of the patrolmen s benevolent association says protesters and the mayor himself have blood on their hands , what can a podcast hope to achieve ? he s is still figuring that out , but releasing it feels like a step in the right direction . there s a part of me that goes , is this actually the wrong time to put this out ? he told me , letting me in on his doubt . but i sort of feel like i can t sit on this any longer . coptalk was made and released through the earwolf podcast network this week , which hosts popular shows like the comedy bang ! bang ! podcast . bell calls his effort the first episode of a new series , but he isn t sure what episode two will look like yet . in fact , he doesn t seem to have a fully realized plan . all he knows is that this show just needed to be out there now . i just want to add this to the conversation . it was just about trying to focus on what it s like to be a cop in these situations and what is it like to be a person who s not a police officer and just walked into the neighborhood , bell told me . and i certainly don t think that we addressed that in that hour long conversation . i think there s more we could address . i just want to add this to the conversation . sharing this conversation via podcast , as opposed to , say , an appearance on meet the press , felt right and in keeping with the media landscape today . there s something to the diy ness , he says , of making something important without worrying about production values . bell even cited serial , the true crime podcast that quickly became the fastest growing show in the medium , for giving him the opportunity to make something he feels is powerful and his own . i think the one thing serial did was it started conversations about the criminal justice system , he said . now , it didn t have to do necessarily with police brutality or abusive cops . i don t know that it addressed the racist side of the criminal justice system . in my mind , that s not their job . he laughs . that s my job . over the course of their talk , bell and escobar converse frankly about how police and communities particularly communities of color interact . escobar even gives a first person perspective on how law enforcement is trained to use the weapons at their disposal billy clubs , tasers , and guns when faced with the kind of threat michael brown was said to have posed . the discussion can be hard to hear at times , especially in light of how the case panned out . it s even clear that the two disagree on fundamental points , and bell concedes that the show could have also been called trigger warning . it might be too much for some people . but that s okay . for him , the key part of this discussion was that there was some attempt to reach consensus . it s the kind of discussion we need more of . sometimes the best thing we can do is shut the fuck up and listen to other people . sometimes the best thing we can do is shut the fuck up and listen to other people , he said . i think we live in a time where , with social media and twitter , everybody has an opinion . it would have been really easy for me to sit down with anthony and go no no no no no . even times when i disagreed with him , it was just like , no , let me let him talk and get his point across . and i think the challenge of doing more of this podcast is finding other cops who are as open as he was . he continued , i think if we did more of these podcasts , we d do them live , and i think we d start to go around the country and go to the places where they need to talk to the police who patrol that community . the problem is can we get cops to sit down at that table ? i got lucky . truthfully , bell doesn t have much hope that cop community relations can change much in the near term . unfortunately right now , people think we re an occupied nation negotiating with the police , as opposed the the police being our servants , he said . but , as a comedian with a platform who s used to spitting into the wind , it s enough for him to try to build something that can effect change . we are at a critical time , and you have to be open to all new ideas and all new ways to solve the problem , he said . because you don t know where the solution s gonna come from . obviously people are dying , and it seems like every day . that s why i felt like i couldn t sit on this any longer . this may be the first step toward us working on this show and figuring out what we can do here . this is my way . update a previous version of this article stated that earwolf hosts wtf with marc maron . that was incorrect and the piece has been corrected . 