 on monday , the sunday times sent the intercept a dmca notice over an article headlined , the sunday times snowden story is journalism at its worst and filled with falsehoods . the article , by glenn greenwald , prompted the sunday times to quietly remove major ampnbspclaims in their own story , such as the claim that greenwald s life partner david miranda had met with snowden in moscow prior to being detained in heathrow . the target of the takedown notice was an embedded image of the sunday times front page , which the sunday times tweeted on june th . greenwald has stated that he does not intend to comply with the dmca notice , and it s likely invalid , according to corynne mcsherry , legal director of the electronic frontier foundation , who calls the notice ridiculous . mcsherry pointed out that the digital millennium copyright act dmca doesn t even apply here because the notice and takedown procedure is for intermediaries sites like youtube , facebook , or twitter that host content at the direction of their users . no , thesundaytimes , we are not going to remove the image of your humiliating headline from our story about it https t . co scl irnt glenn greenwald ggreenwald june , while the sunday times has already received some ridicule for sending out an invalid notice in what appears to be an ill advised attempt to squelch criticism , it may face little to no legal repercussions . that s something that the eff has been fighting for years to change , by arguing for a stronger interpretation of u . s . c . f , which bars knowing material misrepresentation of dmca notices . an important court date awaits them on july th , when the ninth circuit court of appeals will hear lenz v . universal more popularly known as the dancing baby case . section f is the only counterbalance written into the dmca meant to curb misuse of the law . the question in lenz is whether the provision can be invoked when someone tries to take something down without considering whether it s covered under fair use . in , stephanie lenz , the mother of two young children , posted a second clip on youtube featuring month old holden lenz pushing a toy stroller and jiggling excitedly while the radio plays in the background . the sound quality is poor , and the music is nearly indistinct , but prince fans will recognize the song let s go crazy . universal music group issued a dmca notice , and youtube took it down . weeks passed . stephanie lenz was angry . the eff came to her aid after one of their attorneys helped her file a counter notice the video was restored . but then the eff then took it a step further . a dmca takedown for less than seconds of fuzzy background audio was nonsense , especially coming from a well monied and well lawyered corporation like universal . universal had abused the dmca , and under f , they ought to pay . it seems simple enough , but things didn t pan out exactly as the eff had hoped . the lawsuit started eight years ago and is still ongoing . in january , the judge denied motions for summary judgment , meaning that the eff and universal would have to go to trial . his opinion in lenz may have rendered f into a toothless law . in the judge s words , lenz had to show universal had some actual knowledge that its takedown notice contained a material misrepresentation . it wasn t enough that universal had claimed that lenz was violating copyright , even while failing to consider if it had been a fair use . lenz was supposed to show something more . and on top of that , the judge ruled that even if lenz ended up winning at trial , she was entitled to , at most , , for the . hours that an eff attorney spent filing a counter notice . she wasn t entitled to damages for loss of youtube s hosting services and chilling of her free speech or lost time and resources , or even attorneys fees for the entire lawsuit in the first place . in other words , plaintiffs like lenz would have to pay huge amounts of legal fees in order to be able to recoup smaller amounts of legal fees incurred from fighting abusive dmca notices . commentators like eric goldman , professor at santa clara university school of law , were declaring that u . s . c . f is dead . the judge s opinion may have rendered f a toothless law . the eff appealed the decision to the ninth circuit , which will finally hear arguments in the case next month . i think f has been misinterpreted and that s why the lenz case is so important , said mcsherry . this is an opportunity for the ninth circuit to set the record straight . if you go to the statutes , it s really pretty straightforward . the eff is hoping the ninth circuit will make it clear that before you send a takedown notice under the dmca , you have to consider whether the use in question is authorized by law . not just authorized by the owner but authorized by law . and on top of that , plaintiffs like lenz should be entitled to any damages . that s what congress said any damages . that means any and all damages , including attorneys fees and costs . dmca abuse is fairly commondmca abuse , as the intercept has learned , is fairly common . for example , both twitter and wordpress estimate that approximately one third of dmca notices sent to them are not worthy of compliance . but cases about dmca abuse are rare . lenz is important because it s one of the few cases out there about f . to date , only two plaintiffs have ever won f cases . one case was online policy group v . diebold , where the voting machine manufacturer attempted to take down information about security flaws in its machines . the other , automattic v . steiner , was decided just this march . in automattic , blogging platform wordpress was hit with a dmca notice by homophobic organization straight pride uk , over a blog that had published an unflattering press statement that straight pride uk had written themselves . as the case played out , straight pride uk vanished into thin air , and wordpress ended up winning the suit possibly , as eric goldman asserts , because straight pride uk defaulted by disappearing . if the ninth circuit reverses lenz , f could finally live up to its potential . we have years of takedown abuse to show that this is actually a real problem . the statute needs to be interpreted correctly so it can actually help users in situations like the intercept s , situations where you ve got someone reaching for the dmca as a tool , not because there s any legitimate infringement , but because they want to shut someone up , said mcsherry . media organizations have used the dmca to get back at each other for criticismthe sunday times defective dmca notice could set off the streisand effect , at most , and will probably go no farther . but dmca abuse in the media will continue . mcsherry predicts that it will run rampant in the coming campaign season . in the past , media organizations from opposite ends of the political spectrum have used the dmca to get back at each other for criticism for example , in right wing pundit rush limbaugh used the dmca to take down a minute compilation of rush limbaugh s most vile smears against sandra fluke , uploaded to youtube by left wing publication daily kos . of all organizations , they should know better than to abuse the dmca in this way , said mcsherry . they should be defenders of free speech , they should be defenders of fair use because they rely on it themselves . and although a publication can just shrug off a defective dmca notice , the growing trend in digital journalism is a reliance on third party platforms like facebook , which are indeed the intermediaries that the dmca actually applies to . see , for example , facebook s instant articles , where stories from outlets like the new york times and buzzfeed are hosted on facebook s servers . what will happen when facebook gets hit with dmca notices intended to censor those articles ? with f in its current state , there are few incentives for third party platforms to stick up for their users in the face of even a defective notice . what happens with dmca abuse , censorship , and digital journalism in the next few years may really all depend on how that dancing baby case plays out . 