 human feces floated in saline solution in a mortar , on a marbled countertop , in a dimly lit kitchen in burlingame , california . a bottle of ethyl alcohol , an electronic scale , test tubes , and a stack of well worn pots and pans lay nearby . the stove light illuminated the area as josiah zayner crushed the shit with a pestle , creating a brownish yellow sludge . i think i can feel something hard in there , he said , laughing . it s probably vegetables the body doesn t break them down all the way . a bitter pilljosiah zayner s gut was making his life hell so he embarked on an extreme diy fecal transplantby arielle duhaime ross photography by vjeran pavic human feces floated in saline solution in a mortar , on a marbled countertop , in a dimly lit kitchen in burlingame , california . a bottle of ethyl alcohol , an electronic scale , test tubes , and a stack of well worn pots and pans lay nearby . the stove light illuminated the area as josiah zayner crushed the shit with a pestle , creating a brownish yellow sludge . i think i can feel something hard in there , he said , laughing . it was probably vegetables the body doesn t break them down all the way . this heralded the beginning of zayner s bacterial makeover . he was clad in a wu tang clan t shirt , jeans , and white socks and sandals . at his feet , james baxter , zayner s one eyed orange cat , rubbed its flank against its owner s legs . the kitchen smelled like an outhouse in a busy campground . over the course of the next four days , zayner would attempt to eradicate the trillions of microbes that lived on and inside his body organisms that helped him digest food , produce vitamins and enzymes , and protected his body from other , more dangerous bacteria . ruthlessly and methodically , he would try to render himself into a biological blank slate . then , he would inoculate himself with a friend s microbes ampnbspa procedure he refers to as a microbiome transplant . zayner imagines the collection of organisms that live on him his microbiome as a suit . as such , it can be worn , mended , and replaced . the suit he was living with , he said , was faulty , leaving him with severe gastrointestinal pain . a new suit could solve all that . you kind of are who you are , to a certain extent , he said . but with your bacteria , you can change that . a full bacterial overhaul like this had never been documented before in fact , it may have been the first time it had ever been attempted . there was no evidence to suggest it would work , though there was a real risk it could make zayner life threateningly sick . that didn t bother him . zayner unwrapped a brand new syringe and filled its barrel with the brownish liquid . he grabbed one half of a gelatin capsule , pushed the syringe s plunger , and filled the capsule with the fecal slurry in inconsistent spurts . undigested portions of the meal are clogging it , he said . frustrated , he removed the needle and pushed the plunger again , letting clumpy muck accumulate in the half capsule . but by the time he joined both ends of the pill , the gelatin casing had begun deteriorating in his gloved hands . i think the liquid is dissolving these fucking capsules , he said . for a brief moment , zayner considered throwing his head back and swallowing the feces straight up , like a shooter from hell . but the thought disgusted him , and instead he opened a kitchen drawer and grabbed an inoculating loop , an instrument used by microbiologists to sample microorganisms . he dipped it into the large , poop filled ziploc bag on the counter . we re going to try this new technique the stuff and jam , he said . the unadulterated shit had a frosting like texture and didn t eat through the gelatin the pill held up . exhausted from his most recent dose of antibiotics , zayner took a break . tomorrow , in a hotel room near the san francisco international airport , he planned to start his transformation . zayner is a punk his ears are adorned with a row of piercings each , his body is covered in tattoos , and his dark mohawk is topped with a shock of bleached blonde hair . the haircut , the piercings , and most of the tattoos he did himself . he doesn t trust others with these tasks , he says . this is a running theme in zayner s life . as a child , zayner rarely saw doctors his family , he says , was too poor to pay for visits . then in college , he got health insurance and finally started going gastrointestinal pain was making it hard for him to lead a normal life . he was pooping more than four times a day , and severe attacks forced him to isolate himself for hours . the doctors visits were expensive and ineffective , he says , and over time , zayner grew suspicious of physicians . i ll take their advice if there s something i can t fix myself , but otherwise , if what they say goes against what i know , i m not going to necessarily believe them or trust them , right ? he says . that s not to say zayner is dubious of science in fact , he s a scientist himself . in , he earned a phd in biophysics from the university of chicago and subsequently served as a postdoc researcher at nasa s ames research center for two years . but the space agency didn t suit him . nasa was not what i imagined it to be , he says . it was supposed to be a bastion of innovation , but the experiments he saw performed at nasa were underwhelming . there s very little work getting done , because people either don t work , don t care to work , or because the last time they did any science was years ago , he says . so in january , zayner left ames and turned his attention to two of his own projects an indiegogo campaign aimed at providing people with crispr kits to alter bacterial dna , and the odin , a business he started in grad school that sells scientific kits and instruments to people who d like to do experiments at home . today , the odin has four employees who work out of zayner s garage . sustained by orders from schools and hobbyists , the odin is doing well , zayner says he expects the company s revenue to reach somewhere between , and , this year . on weekends he sometimes teaches free classes on genetic engineering in public lab spaces around san francisco . in our conversations , zayner stressed to me the importance of breaking science out of labs and classrooms and making it available to the wider public . i don t like titles , zayner told me . but i generally refer to myself as a biohacker . i don t like titles , zayner told me . but i generally refer to myself as a biohacker . leaving the world of conventional science made zayner happy and working from home was easier on his gut . zayner generally has to defecate two to three times before starting his workday , and also after every meal . he claims to have ulcers and irritable bowel syndrome , but he s a bit hazy on the details of his diagnoses . when pressed , he admits that he doesn t remember what his physician told him in college he could have ibs or inflammatory bowel disease . and a search through his medical records is inconclusive . i don t think i made it up or am remembering wrong , but who knows ? he wrote me in a text . but his physical distress and his frustration with the medical treatment he received was very real . so at , zayner decided to dive into one of science s most foolhardy traditions self experimentation . some of his predecessors have achieved great things . in , nobel winner barry james marshall ingested a species of bacteria to demonstrate their role in causing ulcers . he was , to his discomfort , proven correct . other ventures have been less successful . in , an american physician by the name of jesse lazear intentionally submitted himself to bites from yellow fever infected mosquitoes in an effort to learn about the virus transmission . he died . three decades later , russian physician alexander bogdanov performed multiple blood transfusions on himself to deduce whether the procedure would keep him eternally young . it didn t the experiment killed him . across cultures , human feces are reviled . shit stinks , yes , but that s not actually why it s gross thanks to its bacterial load , it s a disease vector that causes outbreaks of cholera , typhoid fever , and e . coli . but humans didn t truly figure that out until the th century . so , for a long time , shit was actually used by some as medicine . the ebers papyrus , a document from ancient egypt dating back to bc , contains more than prescriptions for medicines in which shit is the active ingredient . in the th century , a well known traditional chinese doctor described using a suspension of human feces to help patients with food poisoning or severe diarrhea . and in the th century , an italian anatomist named fabricius ab aquapendente was using shit to treat gastrointestinal diseases in veterinary medicine . the first modern fecal matter transplant didn t take place until the mid th century . in , an american surgeon named ben eiseman performed enemas on four pseudomembranous colitis patients . eiseman suspected that a treatment of antibiotics had killed off natural gut bacteria , leading to severe cases of diarrhea . so , instead of flushing their colons with water alone , he used shit from healthy patients . perhaps , he figured , reintroducing normal intestinal bacteria into the guts of patients whose digestive system had been wiped out would heal them . it seemed to work , eiseman told author mary roach in a interview . it made a small splash . sometimes patients can improve in a couple of hours . the fecal enema didn t exactly come into fashion over the next three decades , only a handful of trials were done . but by the late s , fecal matter transplants were increasingly recognized as a treatment for infections caused by the bacterium clostridium difficile ampnbspinfections that can cause colitis . and antibiotics , used more and more often in american health care , were triggering more and more cases of c . diff . by , c . diff infections were killing , americans a year . fecal matter transplants , or fmts the procedure that egyptian and chinese doctors used long before eiseman ampnbspsuddenly made a comeback . though enemas and nasal operations are still performed , the most publicized fmt procedure involves taking pills filled with the feces of another healthier individual . because shit is considered a medicine when it s administered by a doctor , the procedure is strictly regulated by the us government , and is only available to patients with recurrent c . diff . and in truth , the restriction has a lot do with the fact that scientists don t yet understand why the treatment works , or how it affects patients in the long term . but evidence suggests the benefits can be great the mayo clinic s campus in phoenix reports that percent of c . diff patients who receive fmts are cured of the infection . and the transplants can work fast . sometimes patients can improve in a couple of hours , says majdi osman , a physician and the clinical program director at openbiome , a nonprofit that facilitates fecal transplants by screening donors and collecting their feces . zayner doesn t recall the first time he heard about fmts and he s never been diagnosed with c . diff . but given his condition , replacing his gut bacteria sounded like a possible solution . the operation zayner envisioned , however , would involve more than a simple fecal matter transplant instead he would also alter the bacterial composition of his nose , mouth , arms , and skin his entire exterior . he d been thinking about full body microbiome transfers for a while in august he made a video in which he imagines a future where police use scanners to identify people by their microbiome a future where those who engineer themselves are persecuted and imprisoned , he told me . last november , i called zayner to discuss his indiegogo crispr kits and that s when he mentioned the transplant , which he described as kind of an art science project . in the weeks that followed , i reached out to more than a dozen researchers who might be familiar with such an experiment . eventually , a skin microbiome expert told me that the closest thing scientists had done in adults was to transfer bacteria from one site of the body to another . in that instance , a bacterial transplant from the study participants tongues to their forearms held up well eight hours later , but a transfer of tongue bacteria to participants foreheads didn t . the researchers obtained similar results when they attempted the same , small transfers between different volunteers . other research has been done on inoculating children born through c section with their mothers vaginal bacteria . but i found no mention of an adult ever trying to kill all the bacteria on their skin in order to permanently replace them with that of another human being . every single professional stressed that zayner s experiment could make him very sickthe lack of precedent meant that few experts were willing to discuss the bacterial skin transfer zayner was suggesting . one biologist did agree to talk and she wasn t impressed . i think that s sort of pie in the sky , said elizabeth hohmann , a fecal transplant expert at harvard university . changing the skin s microbiome is not as simple as coating yourself in some antibiotics and then putting a bacterial swab on ampnbsp ampnbspthat s just ridiculous . researchers were even less enthusiastic about the fecal transplant . of the nine biology and medical professionals i spoke with , every single one stressed that zayner s experiment could make him very sick . zayner vowed not to analyze his donor s feces it contradicted , he said , the diy ethos of the experiment and could make the project seem less accessible to laypeople . as a result , he was putting himself at risk for hepatitis , rotavirus , and a whole slew of other pathogens and parasites . and his decision to take antibiotics to kill his own bacteria before the transplant was risky , said openbiome s osman . some people carry c . diff without any symptoms if zayner was one those people , disrupting the balance in his gut could enable c . diff to flourish and the consequences of that could be life threatening . we actually advise patients to stop antibiotics before they have a fecal matter transplant , if possible , said osman . there was another thing that all the experts agreed on the chances that zayner would experience any benefit from the transplant were essentially zero . we don t have any evidence whatsoever that fecal microbiota transplantation helps cure other diseases , says sahil khanna , a gastroenterologist at the mayo clinic . hohmann added that zayner s experiment was ultimately na ve and poorly advised on several levels . for months , zayner mulled over the experiment . then , at the end of january , he booked three nights at a hotel just south of the san francisco airport . the crowne plaza sits along highway , the artery that shuttles tech workers back and forth between san francisco and silicon valley . the hotel is a dated and dreary place , decorated in a depressing blend of beiges and browns . a hotel room is not a sterile environment for the sort of operation zayner envisioned , but it was better than his home , where traces of his microbiome could be found in his sheets , his bathroom , his kitchen , his front doorknob . zayner s next challenge was finding a donor . everyone he d spoken to had either turned him down or backed out citing the risks involved . if i end up in the hospital , it s okay if i end up sick , it s okay . a few days before the scheduled procedure , he finally convinced someone to participate michael not his real name , a friend from college who zayner hadn t seen in years . michael knew people with gastrointestinal tract problems , and he thought zayner s experiment could help him . so michael agreed to poop in a ziploc bag , and have the skin on his arms , legs , the inside of nose , and his mouth swabbed twice . if the experiment worked , zayner and michael would share a unique and very personal biological bond . fecal matter donors typically undergo a rigorous screening process , says mark smith , director of openbiome . less than percent of all of the donors that we screen end up qualifying as donors . when i reminded zayner of the dangers involved , he insisted the experiment was worth it . that s the risk i need to be able to take to inspire people to take their health in their own hands , he said . comments like these took me aback they demonstrated the intricate ethical acrobatics zayner was continuously performing . he was convinced that carrying out a risky and unproven procedure using himself as a human guinea pig and then publicizing it , could help others . to a skeptic like myself , zayner s good intentions came across as misguided . would he feel responsible if someone repeated his experiment and fell ill ? no , not at all , he said without hesitation . he had calculated the risks and benefits of his experiment if i end up in the hospital , it s okay if i end up sick , it s okay and anyone following in his footsteps was responsible for doing the same . i m not your parent or government to regulate you do what you want with your body . at pm on a thursday in mid february day one of his procedure josiah zayner stood in the middle of his hotel room , stripping down to his boxer briefs . he donned a yellow , disposable isolation gown and blue shoe covers . he handed me a set as well , which i immediately put on . zayner s first task was to turn the hotel room into a sterile containment field . thousands of travelers have passed through here pilots and flight attendants from all over the world , snotty children , flu ridden businessmen not to mention countless employees . at one point or another , their microbiomes had colonized this space . zayner stripped the beds , replacing the sheets with ones he bought from amazon specifically for this purpose . then , he grabbed a container of clorox wipes and silently disinfected every surface of the room he was likely to touch . his experimental protocol was self designed . there were five main steps , two of which he d already started taking samples of his skin microbiome and feces for a later analysis and ingesting a two day regimen of antibiotics he d purchased on alibaba and ebay and verified for effectiveness . then zayner would try to rid himself of the bacteria on his body by cleaning his skin with powdered tetracycline , an antibiotic he would also dissolve and use to clean his nostrils and mouth . rubbing your skin with tetracycline powder is not going to sterilize it , elisabeth bik , a microbiologist at stanford university , told me . there is no way to sterilize your skin . any attempt at complete sterilization of a person s skin will most likely kill a person first before they are sterile . once clean , zayner would proceed to the actual transplant swallowing poop pills , and applying a saline solution filled with michael s skin bacteria to his nose , mouth , arms , and legs . later , he would sample his skin and fecal matter again . so far , so good . zayner had been on a digestive rollercoaster since he began the antibiotic regimen , but that was expected . he was tired and in pain . the drugs gave him cramps , in addition to explosive poops , he said . with the room disinfected to his liking , zayner jumped into the shower to begin scrubbing off his microbiome . as he applied the antibiotic with a kitchen sponge , his pale white skin turned an angry red he was scrubbing hard . after , he filled a neti pot with the same antibiotic liquid and flushed out his nasal passages over the sink ampnbspa process that involved hacking up prodigious amounts of yellowish saliva . i couldn t help but notice zayner cutting corners . after drying off , he put on a brand new hanes white t shirt to prevent his old microbiome from recolonizing his body , but an old though freshly laundered pair of jeans . he sampled his arms , nose , and mouth , but he didn t bother to take microbial samples from his genitalia , and didn t plan on applying michael s skin bacteria to his penis or testicles . he told me that there just isn t much scientific value in gathering that information . over the course of his experiment , zayner would only take a third of the poop pills that someone undergoing a standard fmt procedure would , stretched over a longer period of time . when i confronted zayner about my observations , he was either dismissive , or unaware of a standard fmt protocol . scrubbed raw , at around pm , zayner began the transplant . he put on blue gloves , grabbed a glass of water and took a plastic bag filled with poop pills out of the fridge . he was nervous . you start thinking about like wow , why do animals eat their own poop or eat other animals poop ? and like , what really are we so scared about with feces ? he d told me the day before , rationalizing the experiment . zayner looked like he was enjoying himself . the thrill of the experiment ampnbspand the idea that he may soon be rid of his digestive issues ampnbsppropelled him forward . sitting on the bed , facing the hotel window , he took a few deeps breaths and raised the pill in the air . yolo , he said , tossing it into his mouth . it disappeared down his throat , followed by a gulp of water . over the next three days , he d repeat this process , ingesting a total of eight poop pills . at one point he inadvertently tasted some of michael s shit , which had gotten on the outside of certain capsules . he describes it tasting a little bitter . next , zayner applied the donor skin bacteria . he removed his t shirt and unscrewed a test tube filled with saline solution and the cotton inoculating swab that zayner rubbed on michael s arms . he applied the liquid ampnbspwhich should have been teeming with skin bacteria , zayner told me ampnbspliberally on his arms , chest , and legs . then , he grabbed the swab that had been in michael s mouth , and applied it to the inside of his cheeks and onto his gums . he repeated this process with his nose . at pm , one hour after he began the procedure , zayner was in theory covered in michael s microbiome . then came the wait . the main risk right now is mostly with the pill that i took . if there s any toxic bacteria that grew on it or anything like that , it could put me in the hospital , zayner said , settling into his makeshift quarantine . for the next hours , zayner hid out in the hotel room , leaving only to buy snacks in the hotel commissary or eat in the hotel restaurant . he didn t shower , and spent most of his time on his computer or phone . he watched daytime tv and movies back to the future , furious , anything really . his girlfriend melissa visited him daily , but avoided touching him , and didn t spend the night . every few hours , zayner repeated his protocol take another pill , reapply michael s bacteria , and take samples of his own skin . on day two , zayner told me he was feeling great . i m so excited and happy , he said , sitting on the hotel bed . i really feel like i shed something . he admitted it may have been a placebo effect , but his bowel movements had become less frequent , he said , and he felt rejuvenated . by the morning of day three , zayner was relaxed . taking time off from running the odin had done him some good , he said , and his stomach was cooperating he went almost hours without having to use the bathroom . yesterday was a really awesome day so i was like oh , my gosh . it feels really good , but then today feels even better than yesterday , he said . but when he came home the next day , zayner s resolve to follow through with the transfer weakened . he had originally intended to keep taking the pills at home for a few more days . but after three days , he was too disgusted . he felt sick just thinking about them . three days after the transfer , he reached out to argonne national laboratory , a nonprofit lab run by the university of chicago , to get his samples sequenced . he sent them a total of samples , which included michael s donated poop zayner s poop before , during , and after the transplant as well as samples taken from michael and zayner s nose , mouth , and skin . he even sent in a skin swab from melissa and myself , as well as skin and fur samples from his two cats james baxter and trypsin to see if we had inadvertently contaminated the experiment . the sequencing cost about , . the process , zayner was told , would take six to eight weeks . there s essentially no research on the long term effects of fecal transplants , but some scientists are starting to look at the short term effects . in late april , scientists announced that when patients receive fmts , the new bacterial strains can survive for at least three months after the procedure . that means one day it might be possible to introduce customized bacteria to fully replace one s natural gut microbiome . but that hasn t changed the fact that fecal transplants are reserved to patients with c . diff ampnbspand no one else . fecal transplants are reserved to patients with c . diff and no one elsezayner is unique , but as far as his pain goes , he isn t alone . gastrointestinal diseases affect between and million americans each year , according to the national institutes of health . this number includes people with cancer and liver disease , but also individuals with chronic constipation and irritable bowel syndrome ampnbspconditions that aren t deadly , but aren t necessarily easy to treat , either . so for people , like zayner , who haven t found symptom relief through conventional means , turning to feces the drug that everyone has access to for free isn t all that surprising . home remedies are nothing new , but in the internet age , information on cures that others have tried have become increasingly available . finding someone who s willing to walk you through a home enema preparation is as easy as doing a youtube search . and there s no shortage of reddit threads and internet comment sections where people can discuss their use of fmts to cure a spectrum of ailments . in that respect , zayner s just the latest addition to a movement of individuals who for better or worse ampnbsphave taken their digestive health into their own hands . i hear from a shocking number of people who are doing things like this , says catherine duff , founder of the fecal transplant foundation , a nonprofit that aims to help fmt patients and raise awareness of the procedure . mostly for gastrointestinal things , but also for almost anything you can think of . duff doesn t advocate for diy transplants , but people still contact her to inquire about them . my concern is that there are so many desperate people who haven t found an answer with big pharma , and so they search for a magic bullet , she says . but generally people don t seem to have a grasp on what the long term effects of this could be because nobody knows . a few weeks after his transplant , zayner traveled to new orleans to participate in the bayer agvocacy forum . the last time he attended , four or five years ago , his digestive system didn t fare well . this time it was different . in an email he sent entitled new stomach is a powerhouse , he described a gluttonous diet chicken fried steak , beignets , and a po boy with a crawfish reduction . the conference also involved lots of drinking over the course of three days , zayner had beer , shots of jameson , a frozen hurricane , gin and tonics , and vodka red bulls . his stomach powered through like i was , he wrote , ecstatic . he was defecating only once a day . it s weird , but so cool , he added . no matter how much i have changed my diet over the years from mostly vegetarian to mostly meatatarian , it never changed my poop schedule it gives me hope . that is pretty insane , he said in a shaky voice . the experiment actually worked . then , two weeks ago , i received a text message from him . argonne national laboratory had completed the sequencing . with the results in hand , zayner performed a statistical analysis to find out if the bacterial composition of his skin , nose , mouth , and feces had changed over time and whether the transplant had caused it to resemble michael s . days later , zayner revealed the results of the analysis to me and to himself ampnbspover skype . the connection was poor , but i could tell from zayner s pixelated face that he was becoming emotional . the bacterial composition of zayner s post transplant feces were consistently more closely related to michael s feces than his own poop prior to the experiment . that is pretty insane , he said in a shaky voice . the experiment actually worked . the skin microbiome transfer results were less impressive . during zayner s stay at the hotel , the bacterial composition of the skin on his arms morphed to resemble michael s . but that didn t last long once he was back home , the arm samples began to resemble samples taken from his girlfriend and his cat . the results for his mouth and nose were all over the place , making it hard to reach any conclusions . the experiment was both a hit and a miss , but for zayner it was a success . it s exciting to think that we have a chance to affect the outcome of our own lives in these medical instances . to get reliable results , scientific researchers typically follow rigorous protocols multiple participants , control groups , perfectly controlled conditions . zayner did none of that . jason koval , a microbiologist who does independent sequencing work in argonne s labs , replicated zayner s analysis , and his results were almost identical to zayner s . but because of zayner s lack of rigor , he was more skeptical of the experiment s conclusion . the small number of samples zayner collected means that it would be almost impossible to tell if the differences he found between various samples are statistically significant . as a result , his experiment is more of an anecdote than science , koval said . it s a fascinating pilot study , but you can t firmly say yes , this happened . i skyped with zayner in early may . he looked sweaty and tired . running the odin was stressful , he said . but more than two months after the transplant , he was still feeling a lot better ampnbspand defecating a lot less . probably percent to percent of the time , it s only once in the morning , he told me . we also talked about his new living arrangements ampnbsphe s moved to a larger home in the east bay with his brother , his girlfriend , and one of his odin employees ampnbspand about his recent weight loss . he said he s lost about pounds which was both good news and a bit concerning . before the call ended , we discussed one more piece of anecdotal evidence that the transplant had worked zayner s newfound taste for sweets . gut bacteria has been shown to influence what a person eats and michael , zayner s friend turned stool donor , has a serious sweet tooth he can consume an entire a box of oreos in one sitting . before the transplant , zayner was never one for cookies . now i crave them , he said . the previous evening , he ate three oreos before bed . it wasn t scientific proof , really , but for zayner it was meaningful . edited by michael zelenko 