 a month ago , after one of the worst weeks of his life , siqi chen received a message from an unlikely source . chen is the ceo of the company behind stolen , a controversial game that let users buy and sell twitter profiles like trading cards . each user started with virtual currency that could be used to buy others rapid buying and selling bidded up the price on popular profiles . after an initial surge in popularity , the game ampnbspcame under criticism for allowing people s profiles to be traded and commented on without their consent . facing a barrage of criticism over the game s potential to enable abuse , chen ampnbsppulled stolen from the app store on january th . three days later , the direct message arrived on twitter . it was from ampnbspzoe quinn , the game developer , writer , and activist . quinn was the original target of ampnbspgamergate , the campaign of harassment against women in the video game industry . the movement began in august after quinn s ex boyfriend wrote a long , acrimonious , and inaccurate blog post about her she subsequently became subject to doxxing and death threats . today she runs ampnbspcrash override , a network of experts who offer support to victims of abuse . i know how nasty backlash can be on the internet . early in stolen s life , quinn had sent the company a sharply worded note asking to have her profile removed from the game . it quickly complied . but quinn s message to chen that sunday morning was not accusatory . instead , seeing the furor directed at chen by stolen players , she offered her support . i know how nasty backlash can be on the internet , quinn says . i just reached out i was like , hey , i hope you guys are all right . i know you got a lot of backlash . if stuff gets scary or anything , i do run an anti harassment organization . let me know if there s anything i can do to help . what followed led to today s release of ampnbspfamous , an ampnbspios app that picks up where stolen left off . an android version is now in beta . like its predecessor , the game represents an effort to let people show off their fandom by collecting their favorite friends , celebrities , and brands on twitter . but the game differs in several crucial respects , which has earned it the support of quinn , who is now a paid consultant to the development team . famous is different from stolen in two important ways . one , the game is entirely opt in unless a person joins famous , you ll never see them in the game . second , the app has dropped its off putting language related to stealing and owning people . instead , you become their biggest fan . what used to feel uncomfortably like a slave auction is now depicted as a show of support . the result is a game that captures much of what made stolen appealing without creating the same avenues for abuse . this vision and this design are supposed to be about being a fan , says chen , who remains unreservedly apologetic for the problems surrounding stolen . the germ of famous , he says , was what if we made it about being a fan ? a sense of competition over who s the biggest fan . the game is explicitly positive . it s not like , ha ha , you re mine now . it s not like , ha ha you re mine now . another new feature is called top fans . it appears underneath your profile , and shows everyone who has competed to be your no . fan . it makes the gameplay feels a lot less ephemeral , which was probably the biggest problem with our old mechanic , chen says . and it s true stolen often felt pointless because someone could steal a person back instantly , without ever leaving a trace of your momentary possession . those changes aside , famous looks and feels a lot like stolen which in turn was based on friends for sale , a once popular facebook game chen released in that eventually ampnbspsold to zynga . with famous you still log in through twitter , and players are still represented by trading cards . instead of showing a price tag , the card now shows a numerical fame value . to become someone s biggest fan , you ll have to pay up . you can buy currency using real money . or you can use the currency you earn from your own , um fan transactions ? the language around stolen , while fatally creepy , was also much easier to grasp . there are currently no ways for users to communicate inside the app . you can add comments to your own profile , and people can like them , but that s it . chen is considering adding chat functions over time , but given the potential for abuse he s being cautious . however , he says building a community inside the app is the only way to make it a sustainable business . over time , he imagines creating lists of high profile users around topics like music , sports , and entertainment , and encouraging a friendly rivalry to determine who the biggest fans are . the gameplay is a great hook , and it s really , really engaging , chen says . but it s only going to last for so long . the reason why people stick around is for the community . the reason people stick around is the community . famous will roll out slowly for now , you ll need an invitation to start playing . the first , readers of this story can play by entering the code verge note the asterisk and that the code is case sensitive . in part , that s because the sense of exclusivity around stolen was useful in helping to generate buzz . in a clever move , all verified twitter users could begin playing stolen immediately , drawing lots of people with big followings to start playing and tweeting about it . but chen also wants to make sure the platform doesn t lead to abuse in some new , unforeseen ways . quinn says the company deserves credit for listening to criticism and taking it seriously . it s one thing to criticize stuff , which is super important and necessary , she says . but the other half of it is , how can we do better ? they re so invested in trying to do the right thing . they don t want to ignorantly blunder in there and accidentally make something that hurts people . it s really heartening . 