 the world s largest solid rocket booster roared to life today , shaking the serene countryside of promontory , utah , for a full two minutes . the booster filled the area with smoke and flame viewers could actually see the fiery plumes dance and move around as they mixed with the surrounding soil . below the test stand , a layer of sand protecting underlying concrete structures melted into glass from the heat . bystanders were treated to a real life example of how light travels faster than sound the flames and vibrations were readily observable before the sound from the booster was heard . it went off without a hitchthis is the first of two planned qualification tests , designed to validate the booster s performance , and it went off without a hitch . the rocket motor fired for the full duration , thundering through the mountainside . the development of nasa s space launch system is the largest engineering feat since the apollo era . data collected from today s test will ensure the program is capable of launching humans to mars and beyond . today s test , dubbed qualification motor qm , is a test of the sls five segmented solid rocket motor , meant to evaluate how the booster operates in high temperatures . the booster hardware is heated to f before the propellant is ignited . the test is being run because the propellant in the booster burns faster at hotter temperatures , and that burn rate is a key component of the performance before and during launch . to prepare the booster for the test , the roll away test stand cover was heated over the course of several days , until sensors within the booster signaled that the hardware reached the targeted degrees . before the historic first flight of sls , the different components must be thoroughly tested . the launcher s initial thrust capacity is expected to exceed million pounds , with three quarters of that provided by two solid rocket boosters . that s . million pounds of thrust per booster roughly the equivalent of the acceleration of , nascar stock cars . that s how you make smoke and fire , baby ! yeah ! slsfiredup journeytomars pic . twitter . com ousb wroju nasa sls nasa sls march , a key step on the journey to mars following the retirement of nasa s shuttle fleet , the agency has been diligently working on its next heavy lift vehicle one capable of taking humans further than ever before . mixed with elements from the space shuttle and apollo eras , nasa s space launch system sls will be the most powerful launcher ever built with the goal of ferrying people to deep space . throughout the two minute long test , the booster s systems were monitored as all of the propellant burned . in , a second booster test , qualification motor qm will be conducted to see how the booster performs under cold conditions as well . verge video archives can we colonize mars ? the big future , ep . these two qualification tests are integral steps in getting the booster certified to fly on the first two planned flights of the sls in , and a key step on the journey to mars , sls boosters office manager alex priskos told the verge . nasa orbital atk rockets are fueled with two different types of propellant liquid and solid . ampnbsp liquid engines are controlled by nozzles and plumbing , while solids cannot be stopped once ignited . beginning with the dawn of the shuttle era in , twin strap on solid rocket boosters have been used to achieve the necessary thrust to escape earth s gravity and keep the vehicle s weight in check . the boosters operate in tandem with the vehicle s main engines , providing the thrust necessary to escape earth s gravity . when it launches , sls will employ two identical solid rocket boosters , just like the ones flown on the space shuttle , each one measuring feet tall and feet in diameter larger than the statue of liberty is from feet to torch . on the surface , the sls srbs look fairly similar to the ones used during the shuttle program , and for good reason . each sls booster is composed of five segments , one more than in the older shuttle srbs . and many of these boosters are being reused . the five segment booster is capped off with a forward skirt , nose cap , and frustum at the top , and an aft skirt at the bottom , housing all of the avionics . when vertical , the aft skirt is what supports the entire weight of the motor . nasa orbital atk during the shuttle era , the srbs were designed to be reused approximately two minutes after ignition , after burnout , the srbs would be automatically jettisoned and recovered from the atlantic ocean . next they would be examined , refurbished , and flown again . the sls srbs won t be reused in this way , due to monetary constraints , coupled with an abundance of booster segments and very few planned flights . the boosters will use hardware from total shuttle flightsall of the leftover parts flew on fewer than shuttle flights and were all refurbished and processed in kennedy space center s booster fabrication facility . the booster used in today s static fire is full of history , spanning the entire shuttle program . at the base of the qm booster sits the same aft skirt used on the very first shuttle launch . additionally , the booster is topped off with the forward dome used to cap the right solid rocket booster on the very last flight of the shuttle program . altogether , the boosters for qm , qm , and the currently planned exploration missions will use hardware from total shuttle flights . aside from the first and last shuttle mission , others of note are the first mission to begin assembling the international space station and the return to flight following the columbia disaster . nasa and orbital atk have worked together to carry out three full scale development tests leading up to this initial qualification test of the sls booster . once the two planned qualification tests are completed , the sls boosters will be ready to proceed towards the maiden flight of sls . when talking about our journey to mars , we often get hung up on the destination and forget it really is a journey , says charlie precourt , vice president and general manager of orbital atk s space launch system . the first flight test of sls is planned for and will launch an uncrewed orion capsule beyond low earth orbit before eventually carrying human to mars , and beyond . correction this article initially mischaracterized the difference between solid and liquid rocket systems . we regret the error . 