 nikola hu is running wrong . he amprsquos loping along , leaning back as he goes . suddenly a voice emerges from his phone your cadence is low . try swinging your arms legs and arms faster . hu amprsquos phone knows he s had running injuries before , so it amprsquos hypersensitive to how his feet land on the ground . lean forward and land mid foot to soften your impact , it tells him . he obliges , and the voice comes back immediately . good job ! hu , a former apple engineer , is jogging inside this glass walled conference room to demonstrate ampnbspmoov , a new wearable device that adds entirely new levels of meaning to the phrase fitness tracker . rather than collect and chart data in the hope that simply seeing their habits will help users to be healthier , moov instead provides a near constant feedback loop . it amprsquos equipped to not only tell you to move more but to move better . whether you amprsquore a runner , a biker , a golfer , or a yoga aficionado , moov amprsquos job is to turn data collection into real time coaching that amprsquos every bit as effective as a personal trainer . coaches and pros are the key to moov this is dee , says hu amprsquos co founder meng li , as she points to a woman shadowboxing on her iphone amprsquos screen , a moov strapped to each wrist . she amprsquos actually my coach in real life ampmdash but we amprsquore going to introduce her to more people . coaches like dee are the key to moov amprsquos success the company brought in a number of athletes and trainers and collected data as they worked out . the speed and pace with which they box or run or pedal the angle at which their legs , arms , and wrists move ampmdash every detail is tracked by strapping a moov to the ankles , wrists , arms , and shoes of the pros . when regular users work out , your progress and form is pitted against theirs , with constant feedback both visually and audibly . it amprsquos like having a coach in your face , constantly telling you not only what to do but how to do it better . except your coach sounds like siri , and doesn amprsquot cost hundreds of dollars an hour . we want to provide more actionable information for people to actually move more , li says , instead of just saying you should move more . moov comes from nearly a decade of li and hu s research , which focused in part on how runners can tweak their performance to avoid injury . hu and li along with tony yuan , the company s third founder worked with harvard , stanford and us army researchers , plus teams of certified trainers , to develop a system that could collect and process the necessary data to make these changes as you re running , not after you re injured . when it launches this summer , moov will support five activities running , biking , swimming , cardio boxing , and weight training . each is a separate app ampmdash for ios , with android coming soon ampmdash and in each case moov is constantly critiquing your pace , your form , and your progress . if you amprsquore doing pushups with a moov attached to your bicep , the device will know when you amprsquore bending your elbows incorrectly or if you re not keeping your body properly rigid . the boxing app is like a dance dance revolution spinoff , showing perfect ! and good ! as hu punched the air in front of him , and urging follow me ! when he gave up , winded . at the end of every workout you get a report of how many calories you burned , your progress against previous workouts , and a score for how you did that day . it amprsquos part gamification , part hard ass coaching . the moov is tiny and modular by designthe moov itself is a simple circle about the size of a silver dollar . it comes in black and white , and is little more than a plastic case for a battery and a handful of sensors . the battery lasts hours of active use , li says , which will be about a week and a half for most people ampmdash or enough to finish an ironman in record time . moov uses accelerometers , gyroscopes , and magnetometers to collect data not unlike ampnbspnotch , and uses the company amprsquos proprietary algorithms to turn that data into actionable information . the parts in the moov differ little from what you amprsquod find in any other fitness tracker or a smartphone , but they work in concert to collect more and more accurate data than any fitness tracker i amprsquove ever seen . as hu punched the air , the moov registered not only that he was punching , but how fast , plus the exact rotation angle of his wrist . moov is far more accurate than a ampnbspfitbit or ampnbspjawbone up , he says , and he couldn amprsquot say exactly how precise the device is only because there amprsquos nothing more accurate to compare it to . li amprsquos only method of comparison is to say moov is like kinect without need for a camera , or like the tricked out labs you see in nike and gatorade commercials as athletes run on treadmills . it amprsquos explicitly designed to be tiny and modular and able to be mounted or clipped onto almost anything . li mentioned building moov mounts for bicycle pedals ampmdash so it can measure biking the same way it sees running ampmdash and for golf clubs and tennis rackets . it s like gopro , in a sense a simple technology with new add ons creating new use cases . the device tracks its movement in space in exact detail , and as long as it knows where it is there amprsquos nothing it can amprsquot measure accurately . moov will have five apps , and is already building moremoov is working on even more apps , too , with yoga and golf first on the list . when i told li about a golf lesson i took last summer , how the instructor changed my entire game by telling me to turn my left wrist clockwise slightly , she beamed . exactly ! li and hu are the first to say that their algorithm is improving , and that there amprsquos a lot left to do the company amprsquos also working with developers to build everything from air drumming games to even more detailed workout plans . moov amprsquos data gives it a distinct advantage , and its ability to communicate with its wearer in real time gives it a leg up on every other similar device on the planet . data is good data plus feedback can really change things . moov will be out this summer for ampmdash it amprsquos ampnbspbeginning preorders today for . . i amprsquove only spent an hour watching moov work , but if the finished product delivers on the promise of the prototype and the precision of the data , step counting fitness trackers are about to seem woefully underpowered . 