 in february , an attack ad titled don t let the games begin started popping up in online gambling forums . the ad opens on two shadows shaking hands in a dark city alley . we see a distraught mother at her laptop , a young child at a computer in a dim bedroom , police cars with sirens . a narrator with a scaly voice comes on . an established al qaeda poker network could extract enough untraceable money from the united states in just a few days to fund several sized attacks , he says . say no to internet gambling . the message is clear internet gambling will fund terrorism and destroy your family . players reacted strongly , calling it ridiculous hysterics and distortion at its best . get a life , sheldon ! one commenter wrote . sheldon is of course sheldon adelson , the year old billionaire casino owner who has declared war on internet gambling , breaking with the rest of the industry . he s now pledged to spend whatever it takes to fight the spread of online casinos , and no one knows why . all inadelson grew up the son of poor jewish immigrants in dorchester , massachusetts , where he bought the rights to sell newspapers on a popular corner at age . he co founded the influential trade show comdex despite having little personal interest in computers then sold it for more than million in and got into the casino business . he s now the th richest person in the world , according to forbes , with a fortune of around billion . adelson has been the biggest single donor to many organizations , including the israeli holocaust museum yad vashem and the failed presidential campaigns of newt gingrich and mitt romney . he is passionate and outspoken about politics , but only very specific causes . he once told the wall street journal that a pro union measure was one of the two fundamental threats to society . the other was radical islam . the billionaire s denunciation of online gambling is relatively recent . in , adelson told the washington post he thought it was a promising opportunity . in , his company , las vegas sands corporation , spent . million exploring the possibility of running an offshore online gambling center in the uk . in august of , it was reported that adelson was neutral on the subject but expected to support a bill legalizing online poker . but when a justice department ruling effectively legalized online gambling just four months later , adelson was fiercely opposed . it s a threat to our society , he wrote in an editorial , a toxin which all good people ought to resist . adelson has given several reasons for what politico called his internet jihad . at first , he said the technology doesn t exist to stop kids from playing . since then , he s cited the danger of addiction , the possibility of money laundering , the threat to land based casinos , and the fear that facebook will come in and squash his business . it s unclear what adelson actually believes , but vegas insiders who spoke to the verge were skeptical of lines like my moral standard compels me to speak out coming from such a shrewd businessman . one online poker advocate suggests adelson is trying to take down a rival . this is a play from adelson to put the final nail in the coffin of caesars , he says . caesars wants internet gaming very badly . meanwhile , caesars thinks it s pure contrarianism . it s adelson s i m rich and i m right campaign , says jan jones blackhurst , head of government relations at caesars entertainment , which supports online gambling . that kind of scaremongering is just counterproductive to the entire legitimacy of the industry . it s confusing to everybody . others guessed that adelson s wife miriam , a doctor who specializes in teen addiction and drug abuse , goosed him up a bit about the issue , in the words of one vegas lobbyist . some think it s no more complicated than a grudge . i am told through the grapevine that isai s scheinberg , the founder of pokerstars son was invited to do something with sheldon , the vegas lobbyist says . either he didn t show up or he showed up late . purportedly he just had this animus toward poker players ever since then . caesars doesn t compete with sands in asia , where adelson says he makes more than percent of his money , so that explanation seems unlikely . miriam adelson certainly influences her husband she has a habit of kicking him under the table when he lets his mouth run in front of reporters but based on news reports , she doesn t say much in public about the issue . the theory that adelson is driven by a personal feud fits his reputation he s reportedly spent more than years going after former nevada congresswoman shelley berkley , who he believes betrayed him when she served as his corporate lawyer . but the verge was unable to confirm an adelson pokerstars dustup . the turnthe online gambling market grew from sites with million in revenue in to more than , sites and billion in revenue in , according to market research from christiansen capital advisors . the boom was largely fueled by poker it was cool , it was social , and the breakout success of a few amateurs like chris moneymaker , who went on to win the world series of poker , proved there was money to be had . many of the . million online poker players in the us turned pro . but on friday , april , , players discovered that the three largest poker sites pokerstars , full tilt , and absolute poker had disappeared , replaced by an fbi seizure notice . any money they had in their accounts was frozen . the poker sites had been operating for years in an iffy legal area . the wire act of , which prohibits interstate sports betting over a wire communication facility , was broadly interpreted to cover all forms of gambling . this was reinforced in when the unlawful internet gambling enforcement act made it a crime to accept payments from illegal online gambling operations . the government used uigea to justify its crackdown on online poker . but just eight months after the raid , the justice department decided that the wire act only applied to sports after all , clearing the way for online gambling to be legalized state by state . by the end of may , the gambling industry in vegas had splitadelson first tried diplomacy he reportedly sat down with frank fahrenkopf , then ceo of the american gaming association aga , which supported the legalization of online gambling on a state by state basis . fahrenkopf held his ground , politely saying the aga would continue to lobby for online gambling . so adelson started spending money . the billionaire has now built up a network of lobbyists and politicians from washington , dc , to california . he enlisted the public relations firm mercury public affairs and launched the coalition to stop internet gambling , which produced don t let the games begin . his lobbyists helped write legislation to ban online gambling with the exception of fantasy sports and horse racing , which was introduced by senator lindsey graham r sc and representative jason chaffetz r ut in march . by the end of may , the gambling industry in vegas had split adelson was joined by fellow billionaire casino owner steve wynn , with caesars entertainment , mgm , and boyd gaming lined up on the other side . the aga dropped its support for online gambling , citing divisiveness . one of the things i ve learned in this industry is we are extraordinarily competent at shooting at one another , current ceo geoff freeman told the wall street journal . the stakesmorgan stanley estimates the us market for online gambling will reach billion by , assuming it s legalized in more states . that number was revised down from . billion after lackluster results in new jersey , which legalized online gambling in november . the state had projected million in tax revenue the first year but has only raised million thanks to software issues and competition from illegal sites . that kind of money is peanuts to someone like adelson . there are multibillion dollar investment opportunities around the globe for the larger companies like sands and wynn , says mark lipparelli , a former chairman of the nevada gaming control board . they have to question , why would they would invest any amount of energy and time for something that s either going to be initially loss generating or potentially modestly profitable ? but while it may not make sense to walk into a legal minefield for such small profits , online gambling could eventually grow into a market that disrupts adelson s business and now would be the time to head off that threat . sheldon s lobbyist andy abboud says his boss isn t worried about whether the business of online gambling is a good or bad one . if we wanted to be in it , we could own it , he says . if we wanted to be in it , we could own it . abboud has a long list of rote reasons why casinos are a rite of passage while online gambling is stupid public policy . there is no algorithm to test whether a player is drunk , he says , and online games are marketed to youth . when he addresses lawmakers , abboud s trademark move is to pull a white phone from his pocket and shake it at them . it is a vice , he likes to say . it doesn t need to be everywhere . in a year when half the country banks online and percent use facebook , adelson s stated concerns with internet gambling feel a bit anachronistic . proponents of digital casinos say their technology can verify identities and detect problem gambling and money laundering even better than traditional casinos . but adelson and wynn seem distrustful of technology and uninterested in how it works . adelson doesn t text he says he s not an email type of person . wynn , who is , recently saw a demonstration of some of the security checks used by online gambling sites . i m sure it was impressive if you were a cyber guy , told las vegas journalist jon ralston . but it was bullshit . sheldon s old , and steve is virtually blind , one las vegas industry insider tells the verge , referring to wynn s degenerative eye condition . i ll guarantee you neither of them have ever been on the internet . i don t think they understand the world that is there at all . showdownit seems unlikely that congress will pass a law on internet gambling , either for or against , any time soon it just isn t a national priority . sixty three percent of americans say they oppose online gambling , but percent say they don t follow the issue . there is a lack of moral outrage regarding internet gaming , says jeff ifrah , a washington , dc based lawyer who represents poker sites . that dog doesn t hunt anymore . that means the battle falls to the states , many of which are eager for new forms of taxable revenue . by the end of , at least states had seriously considered online gambling legislation and nevada , delaware , and new jersey had passed laws . legalization looks most imminent in california , where tribes have reached consensus on an online poker bill . next is probably pennsylvania , the second largest casino market in the us , where multiple online gambling bills have been proposed to offset some of the state s expected million budget shortfall . and just last week , a canadian gaming company acquired the pokerstars and full tilt poker brands with the intention of bringing them back to the us . adelson is just beginning to spend money to stop online gambling . despite his record of failed political donations he also promised to spend whatever it takes to defeat president barack obama the billionaire is indefatigable . and he s gained real ground , as evidenced by the graham chaffetz bills , the aga s reversal , and the fact that politicians he s recruited are suddenly speaking out against it . there are signs the billionaire may be losing his laser focus on online gambling , however . he just cut his first check on a new issue . million to oppose medical marijuana . 