 french lawmakers have spent the past four days debating a controversial ampnbspanti terrorism bill that , if passed , would dramatically expand the government s surveillance powers . the law s backers describe it as a necessary measure to thwart terrorist attacks , and it has strong support on both sides of the aisle . but the bill has drawn sharp criticism from french internet companies over fears that it could harm business , and from privacy advocates who say it would severely curtail civil liberties . the proposed law , introduced in parliament on monday , would allow the government to monitor emails and phone calls of suspected terrorists and their contacts , without seeking authorization from a judge . telecommunications and internet companies would be forced to automatically filter vast amounts of metadata to flag suspicious patterns , and would have to make that data freely available to intelligence services . agents would also be able to plant cameras and bugs in the homes of suspected terrorists , as well as keyloggers to track their online behavior . this is not a french patriot act . this week s debate comes more than three months after gunmen killed people in a string of attacks that began at the paris office of the satirical magazine charlie hebdo . following the attacks , prime minister manuel valls called for stronger surveillance of social media websites and digital communications , raising fears that the government would respond with its own version of the patriot act the sweeping anti terror legislation that the us passed following the september th terrorist attacks . valls sought to quell those concerns when he announced the bill last month , telling reporters that surveillance operations would only be carried out on suspected terrorists , and that controls would be put in place to prevent abuse . this is by no means an implementation of exceptional measures , nor the widespread surveillance of citizens , he said . the bill makes clear that this enhanced monitoring will only concern terrorist communications , it demonstrates that there will be no mass surveillance . . . this is not a french patriot act . in a speech to parliament on monday , he added that the bill has nothing to do with the practices revealed by edward snowden , referring to the widespread surveillance conducted by the us national security agency . but critics say the law gives disproportionate power to the office of the prime minister , and that the proposed controls don t go far enough . the bill calls for the creation of a nine person commission to conduct oversight of surveillance operations , but it is only authorized to advise the prime minister s office , not override it . civil rights groups also say the bill s language is dangerously broad in defining legitimate targets , potentially implicating civilians as well as suspected terrorists . suddenly , you re in a system where the government has full power , full control over intelligence services , says eva blum dumontet , an advocacy officer at the london based watchdog privacy international . if we learn anything from history it s that giving full power to governments on surveilling citizens is really not a good idea . prime minister manuel valls has been the most prominent champion of the bill , which he says is definitely not a french patriot act . photo by thierry chesnot getty images privacy international , amnesty international , and other human rights organizations ampnbspexpressed alarm over the bill when it was announced last month , urging parliament to give it careful scrutiny . it s also been criticized by the national digital council , which advises france s government on technological issues , and by several french ampnbspweb hosting companies , which say the threat of constant government intrusion would undermine their business . of particular concern is the provision requiring telecoms to automatically filter internet traffic . under the law , internet service providers would have to install monitoring mechanisms referred to by the french media as black boxes that would use algorithms to detect , in real time , suspicious behaviors in internet metadata . the bill s supporters stress that this metadata would remain anonymous and that content of communications would not be automatically swept up , but the behaviors that would constitute a terrorist like pattern are still unclear . critics say the measure effectively amounts to mass surveillance of web traffic on a disproportionately large scale . under the bill , recordings could be stored for up to one month , and metadata for up to five years . france s current data protection laws date back to , and are among the strongest in europe . it s a comprehensive data protection framework that applies to both the public sector and all industries , fabrice naftalski , a data privacy attorney and partner at the legal firm ey in paris , says of current french law . protection of personal data is a fundamental right . they don t seem to actually want to debate . but the country s counter terrorism laws haven t been revised since , which was the original impetus behind drafting this bill last summer . the legislation took on a new sense of urgency following january s attacks , when valls moved to fast track it for passage by this summer . a vote is expected early next month . an alarmingly high number of french nationals have traveled to fight in syria and iraq , according to interior ministry figures , and the government has sought to combat jihadist propaganda on social media . three weeks after the charlie hebdo attacks , the government released a highly stylized website to deter young people from joining radical movements . last month , interior minister bernard cazeneuve traveled to the us to urge companies like facebook and google to play a more active role in turning over user information to french authorities . blum dumontet welcomes stronger regulation of france s intelligence services , noting that the measures it aims to codify are things that are already happening in the dark . but she fears that valls bill may be rushed through while the wounds of charlie hebdo are still fresh , and without the kind of careful deliberation it deserves . they don t seem to actually want to debate and have a roundtable about what the secret services should be entitled to do , blum dumontet says . and i think that s a really problematic attitude . 