 waiting , as the contemporary philosopher tom petty has observed , is the hardest part . and yet it was once the defining characteristic of a trip to sundance film festival , where anything worth doing required arriving well in advance . that isn t true of the celebrities and the filmmakers , who wait for nothing . nor is it always true of the press and employees of the film industry , who attend free screenings of their own . but for most of the , people who descend on park city each year , getting tickets used to be an agonizing challenge , one that required vast stretches of time standing around . it was part of the unique charm of the festival at a time when hollywood barely makes anything that isn t a sequel and fewer americans go to theaters than ever before , hundreds of people in park city will clamor to attend a grim documentary about domestic violence . sundance is an alternate universe where you try three times to gain entry to a glaswegian folk musical written by the frontman of belle amp sebastian , without ever fully understanding why . sundance is an alternate universeand to the extent that sundance is a festival open to all , it was the waitlist that made it that way . before this year , your number in line effectively served as a measure of how badly you wanted to get in even if you didn amprsquot have an advance ticket , you could show up to a coveted screening several hours in advance and secure a low waitlist number . to the festival s organizers , the old way of doing things created a problem hundreds of people were loitering around theaters well before they should have been , interfering with lines for other screenings . so the organizers created an app , new to the festival this year , and called it the ewaitlist . we amprsquore always looking for ways of making the festival more experientially positive , john cooper , the festival s director , told the salt lake tribune . naturally , everyone hates it . the hardest partin the early days of the th sundance , the ewaitlist is the talk of the town . the app lets you claim your spot in line via smartphone two hours before the scheduled screening ampmdash but for nearly every movie , the list fills up instantaneously ampmdash literally , within a couple of seconds . there is something about the whole affair that is not , as they say here in utah , experientially positive . e waitlist at sundance feels like a placebo sham , tweeted foursquare ceo and festival attendee dennis crowley . sundance made the ewaitlist too frictionless ! ! said corey o . , a visiting mba student . you used to have to earn your ticket in the cold . e waitlist at sundance feels like a placebo sham . seconds after waitlist opened pic . twitter . com yrr fttbk ampmdash dennis crowley dens january , where filmgoers once traded notes on the festival s breakout films , they now pump each other for intel on the app . what s the lowest number you ve gotten ? how many seconds went by before you signed up ? were you on wi fi or lte ? some complain the numbers seem to be generated at random , regardless of how fast you tap . others suspect that voodoo may be at work , or perhaps aliens . the ewaitlist was developed by a suspicious sounding vancouver firm called intergalactic agency , inc . the app works so well that it ruins something fundamental about the experienceusually when we complain about technology , it s because something isn t working . ewaitlist is the rare piece of technology to have the opposite problem it works so well that it ruins something fundamental about your experience . to understand why , you have to understand how sundance really works . god help usi have plenty of time to think about the waitlist the third time i try to see god help the girl , the aforementioned folk musical written by belle amp sebastian s stuart murdoch . the festival program describes the film as a poignant coming of age story that doubles as an indie pop musical , or precisely the kind of box office poison that you would never have trouble getting into anywhere but park city . press tickets are unavailable , so i try my luck with the ewaitlist . logging in precisely two hours before showtime , i am granted no . out of supposedly available spots ampmdash just low enough on the list to get my hopes up . i trudge over to the egyptian theatre to begin my wait , and spend the next couple hours trading waitlist stories with the motley crew of film school graduates and vacationing high schoolers who also planned to crash the gates . to a person , everyone insists that they claimed their place in line at the precise international atomic time certified instant that tickets became available . the idea that people did this simultaneously and were sorted more or less accordingly by the millisecond that their tap registered on a server never occurs to us ampmdash or if it did , it feels too dangerous to say aloud . the more desperately you want to see a movie , the more likely it is the person in front of you has no idea what it isas time passes , the line fills up . inevitably , every new arrival boasts a lower number than the misfits who showed up early . the elderly man who comes to stand directly in front of me illustrates a key principle of the new ewaitlist the more desperately you want to see a movie , the more likely it is the person in front of you will say to his wife , now what is this one about , anyway ? with moments to spare , nos . , , , and show up to claim their rightful places in line . they are tanned and wearing aviators , as if appearing in a comedy sketch about los angeles . naturally , they all get in . the last person to get in from the waitlist had a number in the s . nearly half an hour after the movie starts , volunteers apologetically usher us away . it is the sort of minor small town misfortune that stuart murdoch has spent the past couple decades writing songs about , one of which probably appears in god help the girl , which at this point we will just have to hope shows up on netflix . there s probably no great way to manage the waitlist at sundance ampmdash there are too many people seeking too few seats . three days into the festival , organizers said they had upgraded their servers after overwhelming demand crashed the system . but the real problem is that normal people can amprsquot game the system at sundance anymore ampmdash and gaming the system was half the fun . 