 as last year began , the app developer pixite held its company retreat at a converted old west movie set outside of palm springs . they spent a few days dreaming about the future while eating barbecue and sipping whisky in the sun . but was not a good year , and by last month the company s dreams had narrowed to survival . this year s retreat took place at the company s office in san diego , a handful of rooms perched above a hair salon . the printer was broken , so the agenda was distributed by email . as last year began , the app developer pixite held its company retreat at a converted old west movie set outside of palm springs . they spent a few days dreaming about the future while eating barbecue and sipping whisky in the sun . but was not a good year , and by last month the company s dreams had narrowed to survival . this year s retreat took place at the company s office in san diego , a handful of rooms perched above a hair salon . the printer was broken , so the agenda was distributed by email . i m sorry it s called a retreat and we re still in the office , says eugene kaneko , one of the company s co founders , as the daylong meeting begins . the company s six employees frown at their laptops , where the numbers in a google doc chart a steady decline . if money were better , we d be in the desert . unfortunately that s not the case . since kaneko founded the company with scott sykora in , pixite has released eight applications dedicated to photo editing and design . each has been featured by apple as a best new app photo editor tangent and design tool assembly won year end awards from apple . between and , downloads of pixite apps jumped from , to . million , and annual revenue doubled to , . pixite grew along with its cash flow , expanding from two to six employees as it explored ways to link its apps together and grow a loyal base of customers . then the bottom fell out . last year downloads flattened , and pixite s revenues plunged by a third , to , . suddenly , a company that needed to bring in , a day to break even found itself making , or less . pixite has no reserves of venture capital to fall back on aside from a , seed investment from a carnegie mellon fund for alumni entrepreneurs , pixite has funded itself . this past december , kaneko emailed me out of the blue . he didn t know it then , but i m a fan of the company s apps fragment , which applies prismatic effects to photos , is one of my favorite artistic tools . as an independent bootstrapped app company , we are struggling , kaneko wrote . if things don t turn around , we ll need to lay off half of our staff in the next few months . he invited me to come to san diego and observe the struggle up close . kaneko would open up pixite s books and share every piece of data that i requested while , over the course of two days , his team locked itself in a room and attempted to chart a path forward . pixite would either figure it out or die . last month , apple announced it had paid billion to developers since the app store opened , saying the store was responsible for creating and supporting . million us jobs . more than half a million ios developers have created apps the company s worldwide developer conference is so popular that tickets have to be distributed via a lottery . apple made our company , sykora says . if apple didn t exist , we wouldn t have a company at all . and the market for apps is growing between ios , android , and smaller platforms , apps could generate billion annually by , ampnbspaccording to market research firm app annie . but the app store s middle class is small and shrinking . and the easy money is gone . for a time , pixite was a shining example of the businesses made possible by the app economy . like thousands of other developers , pixite s founders took what had been a side project and turned it into a full fledged career . but the company s recent financial problems illustrate a series of powerful shifts in the industry toward consolidation and corporatization . for all but a few developers , the app store itself now resembles a lottery for every breakout hit like candy crush , hundreds or even thousands of apps languish in obscurity . certain segments of the app economy remain vibrant ludicrously profitable , even . apps for massive social networks , on demand services like uber , and subscription businesses like netflix and spotify remain in high demand . then there s gaming last year , percent of all app revenues went to games , according to app annie . supercell , the top grossing developer of clash of clans , reported revenue of . billion in . it spent million on marketing . but for a large swath of these app developers particularly those without venture capital and sophisticated marketing tactics the original app store model of selling apps for a buck or two looks antiquated . in , percent of apps were paid downloads , selling for an average of . apiece . by last year , a mere percent of downloads were paid , and the average price had fallen to . . today , profiting from the app store most often requires a mix of in app purchases , subscriptions , and advertising . meanwhile , a fatigue is setting in among customers . there are now more than . million apps in the app store android users have . million to choose from , but by , the majority of americans were downloading zero apps per month . and it turns out people simply don t use most of the apps they do download . according to comscore , the average person spends percent of their time on mobile devices using only three apps . massively profitable new software platforms come around very rarely but when they do , consumers race to fill them up with utilities , productivity tools , and games . the gold rush only lasts so long , though . after a while , the saturation of apps catches up to the user growth , says ryan sarver , a venture capitalist at redpoint ventures . and people are no longer searching they ve got the apps that they need . consumer boredom with apps is a key reason that the smart money in silicon valley began turning last year to messaging apps and bots , which many observers believe could represent the next phase of the internet . no one can credibly say that the app store is dying . but the range of opportunities in consumer software has narrowed dramatically to a couple of swim lanes , venrock vc david pakman told me . and so as pixite s on site off site begins , kaneko leads with grim news . our cash reserves are low , he says . we started out with , at the beginning of . now we only have , in the bank . sykora looks at a series of charts of pixite s app sales on his laptop . every chart tells the same story . all the apps are slowly drifting , sykora says . down , down , down . both kaneko , , and sykora , , grew up in san diego before venturing to northern california to study engineering . kaneko is short and radiates nervous energy sykora is tall and conveys a quiet calm . the duo met while working on freelance web design gigs after coming back to san diego . a client hired kaneko to build a website for djs to sell their beats , and sykora agreed to help him build it . they ve worked together ever since . when the app store opened in , many internet companies took a wait and see approach . google , facebook , amazon , and pandora all released basic apps , but that left a lot of room for independent development . iphone owners were hungry in those days for the new experiences enabled by their phones , downloading more than apps a month , according to admob , which was later acquired by google . and they were willing to pay by july they were spending a collective million a month . in the first months of its existence , , apps were added to the app store . many were games , a trend that continues to this day . but quirky independent apps dominated the inaugural list of the year s most downloaded software the top seller was a virtual koi pond the list also included an app that simulated drinking a beer . there was also a booming market for basic utilities top sellers included a level tool , a spell checker , and a voice recorder . in october of , sensing an opportunity , kaneko suggested he and sykora build an app for browsing pictures stored online . google owned picasa , one of the era s most popular web browsing clients , had no native iphone application , and its mobile web app was slow . in a few months , kaneko and sykora built an iphone app for picasa using its public api , and sold it in the app store under the name web albums . the iphone s superior camera was spawning a generation of smartphone photographers , and because the iphone allowed developers to access its camera , photography soon became a popular app store category . many of these photo apps offered tools that would eventually became native features in ios utilities for cropping , adding flash and hdr effects , and sharing photos over bluetooth . another set of utilities focused on sharing your photos to the web uploading and viewing photos on flickr , for example . it was in this last group that kaneko and sykora saw their opportunity and it turned out to be bigger than they imagined . the two hoped their cent app might bring in a few dollars a day while they worked on other projects . instead , in its first full year in the app store , web albums brought in , . first it was awesome ! this is a decent part of my income , i should spend more time on it , sykora says . then it got to the point of like i should probably not take every freelance job . then i should not take any freelance jobs . then i started getting rid of clients . that was an awesome set of transitions to go through . web albums was a simple utility , but a surprisingly profitable one . it turned out that picasa s web app let users view only the first photos in an album web albums had no such limit . the developers had sought only to make a functional client they accidentally built a superior one . with little competition , web albums became the first result in app store searches for picasa an invaluable boost to sales . a simple idea , executed competently but with little flair , was now feeding two families . from left to right ben guerrette , creative director eugene kaneko , product manager scott sykora , lead developerit couldn t last . they knew it couldn t last . surely google had a team of engineers working away on its own version of web albums , one that would erase their sales overnight ? in fact , it wouldn t arrive until mid , in the form of google photos . we ll be blown out of the water and we ll be dead , kaneko recalls thinking . it put pixite in a strange position . normally in a business you put money back into your main money maker , sykora says . we were in a situation where we were like , we need to stop putting time into this and force ourselves to step away and figure out what the next step is . kaneko and sykora incorporated pixite a portmanteau of pixel and excite and set about looking for an answer . they found it in a san diego co working space , in the form of ben guerrette . guerrette , a self taught designer , developer , and digital artist , had built the sort of creative tool that would come to define pixite . deco sketch let you draw simple shapes and animate them , and while it never made much money , it helped guerrette build connections to a growing community of iphone photographers and editors on instagram . by , guerrette was working at rdspace , a san diego co working club for the creative where pixite had set up shop . after the launch of web albums , pixite sought to repeat its initial success by making a series of similar photo utilities . between and , while the tech world was still catching up to the idea of native apps , pixite built and sold a variety of unglamorous photo viewing and uploading tools for facebook , flickr , and dropbox . in a fit of optimism , in pixite also built an app for transferring your facebook photos to a then new social network called google . for the app store , it was an era of wild expansion and enormous cultural impact . in the app store swelled to , apps , just as the american dialect society named app its word of the year . supercell was founded that year in helsinki two years later , its games were generating . million a day . uber launched , giving rise to a new category of on demand services . the next year , the store celebrated its billionth download . venture capitalists interest in the app economy followed accordingly . kleiner perkins caufield byers , one of the most prestigious vc firms in silicon valley , tripled its investment in apps to million in . one of those investments , a three year old gaming firm ngmoco , sold to japan s dena that year for million . pixite s ambitions were more modest . web albums remained the bulk of the company s business , but revenues were growing from , in to , two years later . at rdspace , the company s success had not gone unnoticed . i was like , these guys are the real deal , guerrette recalls . they make money making apps ! guerrette pitched kaneko and sykora on an app that went beyond viewing and uploading photos to manipulating them creatively . around that time , a niche community of iphone photographers had begun layering simple black and white geometric designs over their photos to make them pop on instagram . but it was hard to do you had to download the images from dropbox onto your phone , then layer them on top of your images using another app . guerrette proposed an app that included the designs as filters , letting you manipulate and post them to instagram directly . tangent , the app that resulted from guerrette s proposal , was finished three months later . the app was featured in the app store a highly valuable free promotion that all developers dream of . it went on to sell . million copies . two more creative apps soon followed . at the end of , apple named tangent one of the year s best apps . the company had sold nearly , units , earning revenues of , . lt ! new pym . parent pixite revenue graphic , m snippet thin gtthe revenue told a story of surprising success . but the path that pixite s founders took to get there would cost them later . the mistakes appear obvious in hindsight pixite was building apps that sat uncomfortably between professional design tools and novelty consumer apps . it failed to create a distinctive brand , instead giving each app a name unrelated to everything that came before . apart from web albums , its apps were hard to find using the app store s search tools , and the company never invested in advertising . and pixite clung to using the one time purchase business model , which led to a perpetual cycle of boom and bust as each launch generated a single revenue spike followed by a rapid decline . it didn t have to be that way . lightricks is an israeli company that resembles pixite in some respects . it also makes photo editing tools , gives them distinctive names , and sells them for a few dollars apiece . but lightricks also invested years in building its signature apps , facetune and enlight , and spent heavily on marketing . it wrote software to predict how much it needed to spend on facebook ads to stay on the bestseller charts , where the added visibility generated additional sales . its marketing is overseen by a co founder whose background is in artificial intelligence , and the marketing team is largely made up of engineers who run dozens of campaigns around the world hours a day . the result facetune , an app for taking better selfies that sells for . , sold more than million copies in its first two years and was the sixth highest grossing app in the app store in . enlight , a comprehensive photo editor that combines a wide variety of filters and effects , saw similar success . by last year lightricks had hired people , was on pace to earn million in annual revenue , and raised million in venture capital . meanwhile , pixite s approach exposed it to another risk hiding in the paid app business model flops . pixite aimed to release one app a quarter , giving it just three months to design , code , and ship each product . that limited the scope of what its apps could do . and with only four products coming out each year , a misconceived app could be disastrous . the company learned that lesson in when it released shift , a very late to market app for applying colored filters to photos . after four months in development , it earned only , in revenue , covering less than two weeks expenses . this despite the fact that it was one of two apps the company invested in porting to android , an effort that has yet to generate meaningful sales . still , pixite ended with . million downloads and nearly million in revenue . it would be the company s peak . pigment , pixite s coloring book appat this year s retreat , kaneko announces some news pixite has opened up a line of credit from its bank , letting the company borrow in case it lacked the money to cover expenses . in , the company produced two more projects that failed to hit . source , an ambitious effort to build a website for artists to share the work they make with pixite s apps , had floundered . assembly , a vector based design tool , had struggled as well . the team hoped source would promote artists work and inspire the next generation of casual photographers to be creative with their own pictures , using pixite s apps to do so . but falling sales during the development of source caused a panic , and work stopped . we hit , a day and everyone was like fuck me , what do we do ? guerrette says . we had to put that away for a little while . we only make money when we make apps . the arrival of google photos in may finally drove a dagger into the heart of web albums . with about three months of cash in the bank and a new sense of urgency , pixite poured all of its resources into developing an app meant to capitalize on the current fad of adult coloring books . pigment , which is free to download and offers a paid subscription for new books , lets users digitally color landscapes , geometrical shapes , and characters using a variety of brushes . about , people have downloaded the app to date . the subscription revenue offered the company a temporary reprieve . but by this year s retreat , downloads were already declining , and a rival named colorfy was dominating search results . it wasn t clear how to reverse the slide . why do we have a mission statement ? guerrette asks . it s the second day of meetings , and the pixite team is engaging in the most corporate of exercises the effort to capture the company s purpose in a sentence . unlike most companies , pixite tends to write a new statement every year . it s supposed to give you direction , says kaneko , who is drawing on the whiteboard . over the past day , kaneko has been jotting down pixite s priorities for the year . at the top build high end products that people respect . just beneath financial stability . over the next half hour , a mission statement emerges . build tools that empower artists evolves , in fits and starts , to build creative experiences and tools for your inner artist . kaneko then writes down three main takeaways from the week find a sustainable business model for the long term . focus . improve marketing . last year we were in a good place financially , so it was very idealistic , says ryan harter , the company s android developer . we talked about users a lot more . this year we re maybe a little too focused on keeping the company alive , sykora adds . well not too focused . the team laughs nervously . back in san francisco , i meet with danielle levitas , senior vice president of research at app annie . i believe in the future of apps , levitas says . she says that between now and , downloads of non game apps will quadruple around the world . but those numbers mask a radical shift in the app economy most of the growth will come from foreign markets . and the app stores are dominated by giants facebook and google make eight of the ten most used apps , according to comscore . in the united states , where more than percent of people already own smartphones , apps are approaching the saturation point . accordingly , the cost of acquiring new users continues to increase . ads that let users install apps directly can range from to per user . if your app only costs to begin with , ads are a non starter . if there s a path forward for independent developers , it has to begin with a strong sense of purpose . pixite can seem as if it s still grasping for it . underlying the tension is a basic difference of opinion between pixite s co founders . kaneko wants to focus on building tools for design professionals , while sykora is convinced there is a much larger audience of consumers seeking tools for creative play . if pixite s apps could help to reach and grow that market , sykora says , it could capture a large part of it for itself . outside gaming , the market for apps today values utility above all . consider the case of omni group , a highly respected developer that has been building productivity tools since the days of next . the company s ios apps range in price from for a flexible writing app called omnioutliner , to an unheard of for omniplan , a project manager . ken case , its founder and ceo , says ios is the fastest growing part of the company s revenue . it s very important strategically to be there , case says of ios . and it s very important for exposure . still , he adds , it s not actually where the bulk of our revenue comes from . desktop software still accounts for the majority of sales . but case is fundamentally an app store optimist selling software has always been hard , he says . in terms of how much money people are willing to spend , it s no worse than it ever has been , he says . the market of people who want to spend money on software and feel like it s worth it is still out there . two things developers say would help their businesses become more sustainable free trials and paid upgrades . tools we need for work , like the ones omnigroup makes , will stay on our home screens forever . but other apps are now more faddish than ever before . it used to be that if you got over million monthly active users , that was an incredible threshold , says redpoint s sarver . now you can get or million and still come right back down . i ve just become really disheartened about an app s ability to break above the noise and reach the consumer . pixite is trying to focus on the positive thanks to pigment , the company is currently bringing in enough to break even . but only two months into , it s unclear how long users will renew their pigment subscriptions . the download chart for pigment looks like the rest of pixite s apps a big spike at launch , followed by gradual decline . to build a sustainable business , the company needs more downloads . it s definitely fallen off , kaneko says . we feel like we should probably have times as many downloads . the company recently brought in a business coach to help it refine its mission again . kaneko has taken over the company s marketing efforts , and it plans to advertise for the first time this year . eventually , the coloring book fad will pass . but if it can help pixite figure out a subscription business in the meantime , it could serve as the lifeline that sees the company through to the next thing . just like web albums did back in . or pixite could decide to abandon creating apps altogether , shifting gradually to making apps for other people . the market for software supports freelancers and solo entrepreneurs . it supports big venture backed startups . but bootstrapping a six person team has never looked harder . it seems to be aggregating to a smaller set of winners who are getting more of the rewards , sarver says . it s trending to only get harder and harder than it is right now . back at the retreat , after dinner at a brew pub , the team sets off in search of more to drink . it is a perfect san diego evening , cool and breezy , and a sense of optimism prevails . the team has a renewed sense of focus , and something resembling a plan . this year would not be the end of pixite . but it felt like the end of something . let s keep walking till we hit the ocean , someone says , and they make their way toward the beach . product by frank bidesign by james barehamedited by michael zelenko