 there was never really any doubt that the next version of windows was going to look at least a little like windows . even windows . was a step back in that direction for microsoft , bringing back the start button that so many millions of customers missed . but for all the time terry myerson and joe belfiore spent on stage today explaining the enormity of change in windows they skipped a version number to prove the point there s no obscuring the blindingly obvious truth . windows is windows . microsoft has sent a clear message today that they will continue to make new versions of windows and offer them for sale casey newton caseynewton september , microsoft translated what we really realized was windows xp was the best . joanna stern joannastern september , windows is windows plus a handful of the things about windows that worked best snap mode , beautiful modern style apps , always updating live tiles , and now finally a universal app store that works across all screen sizes from phones to tvs . but it s still windows . windows is based primarily on the desktop , not the radical new start screen of windows you ll find most things by going to the new old start menu . everything runs in a window is billed as an exciting new feature . there are bits and pieces of windows here , but windows will be more jarring for windows users than for users who haven t updated their computer software since . you already know how to use it doesn t mean what microsoft thinks it meansthat is , of course , the whole point . familiar was a favorite word of myerson s and belfiore s . they described over and over how simple it is to upgrade , how similar windows will feel to what you ve already been using . we want all these windows users to have the sentiment that yesterday they were driving a first generation prius , belfiore said . and now with windows it s like a tesla . it s not supposed to feel different , it s not supposed to be scary . it s supposed to be windows . it s telling that throughout its entire event , microsoft seemed to be speaking not to windows users , but to the customers who took one look at live tiles and decided to stick with windows or windows xp . those fearful upgraders are largely business customers , which clearly hasn t escaped microsoft s notice the enterprise is windows great stronghold and its most important customer base . the command prompt even got prominent demo time during microsoft s presentation you can paste in it now ! even the invite for today s event specified showing what s next for windows and the enterprise . with windows for the desktop , microsoft is letting businesses customize the store , silo personal and corporate data away from one another , and more , but mostly it s letting them get back to work on a computer they actually know how to use . this is a smart , pragmatic , and clearly responsive move from microsoft . it turned boldly in a new direction with windows , and received massively negative feedback . as belfiore and myerson said at today s event , the problem wasn t that the features didn t work or that everything was too damn colorful . it was that there was too much training involved windows is just way too hard to learn , and most people just didn t want to go through the trouble . so microsoft kept as much windows as it could , while reverting the core pieces of the operating system back to something people know and understand . remember when microsoft demoed the command prompt in windows on a stage in dan dcseifert skyyyyyyrockets in flight enterprise delight t . c . chillmage september , in doing so , however , microsoft finds itself playing a dangerous game . for all that it wasn t , windows was at the very least an attempt to discover new and better ways of interacting with our devices . we wouldn t need to go looking for information , microsoft imagined a live tile would just flip over and what s new would be there on your screen . the desktop , that strange repository for your background and files without a better home , was dead . apps would work everywhere and always be up to date , no matter what device you used or the size of its screen . q from audience now it s windows . will we see future versions named after big cats ? harry mccracken harrymccracken september , you can still access windows by clicking the start menu times while chanting the true names of god casey newton caseynewton september , with most or all of those ideas undone or at least de emphasized when you use the touch screen you get continuum , which adds some of the metro shell on top of the desktop and turns on a back button windows feels like a platform that hasn t seen serious or meaningful change in eight years . apps have gotten much more powerful and there s a handy way to search everything , but when you pick up a windows pc it may not be immediately clear which decade it comes from . it s the best windows ever , but it s still windows . if that s all microsoft has up its sleeve , that s a problem . if it allows its most resistive customers to slow its pace of innovation , microsoft will essentially back itself into a corner from which it will have no choice but to watch its competitors race past it toward the next device type or the next interaction method . there s a long time left before windows comes to market in , and there s a lot more of the platform left to see . we ve only seen the desktop side of the equation , for one thing how windows will look on phones and other touch first devices is a big unknown . and for many users , a vastly improved windows is going to be a great improvement over everything that came before . but what we saw today in san francisco worries me , and it should worry anyone who wants microsoft to succeed long term . this looks like a microsoft that is unwilling to try things , one either without good ideas or without the confidence to commit to the good ideas it s already had . windows was an attempt to reinvent the way we use our most important and most personal devices , but now microsoft doesn t even seem to be trying . scott forstall and steven sinofsky standing at a whiteboard , mocking up a new os entirely out of discarded interface ideas . nilay patel reckless september , familiar is easy , it s safe , it s probably profitable . but in an industry that moves as fast as technology , familiar is dangerous . updated pm to better clarify continuum , which i had over simplified before . 