 it amprsquos early evening on the day of twitter amprsquos holiday party , and the company amprsquos headquarters are emptying out . michael sippey , the company amprsquos vice president of product , is holding office hours in the large dining area next to twitter amprsquos cafeteria , meeting with members of the twitter flock to solicit ideas and answer their questions . a few blocks away , the party venue ampmdash san francisco city hall ampmdash has been lit up in twitter blue for the occasion . tweets from the event will be hashtagged celebrate , underscoring the triumphant year the company has just finished . twitter amprsquos improbable rise culminated in it becoming a public company last month , in an offering that raised billion and firmly established the service as a pillar of the social internet . but while most of the company is relaxing , sippey is still thinking through the product . there is some reason for concern . despite its success this year , the company amprsquos user base grew more slowly than it hoped . at the time of its initial public offering , twitter had million monthly active users , compared with . billion for rival facebook . twitter amprsquos challenge from the start has been familiarizing new users with its core conventions ampmdash following , replies , hashtags , retweets ampmdash and helping them continually discover content that keeps them coming back . an evolving redesign of the company s entire range of productsit amprsquos sippey amprsquos job to make that all easier . since taking over the product team last summer , he has overseen a reorganization of the company amprsquos development efforts designed to make the company more nimble . that effort has begun to bear fruit in just the past four months , twitter has introduced a conversation view that joins tweets and replies with blue lines inserted image previews into the core timeline and enabled photos to be sent in direct messages . then , two weeks ago , the company redesigned its apps for iphone and android to let users swipe between different timelines and make messaging more prominent . the result has been an evolving redesign of the company amprsquos entire range of products . in an interview with the verge , sippey laid out the philosophy behind the changes ampmdash and hinted at the further changes yet to come . more timelines are on their way , and so are more images . direct messages , after years of neglect , are reclaiming a more prominent place within the product . in terms of where we want it go , we amprsquore constantly working on that ampmdash constantly , sippey says . and you have to continually be revisiting that , because the world changes , consumer behavior changes , the competitive landscape changes . and you want to be able to react to that . going mobile firstto understand twitter amprsquos new direction , it helps to remember the way the company used to build software . for most of its life , months would pass between major improvements to the product . it was a consequence of the once ubiquitous fail whale the company amprsquos engineers were frequently working overtime just to keep the service running . but twitter faced another hurdle to growing its user base ampmdash in a world that was rapidly shifting to mobile devices , its product teams were still focused on the web . until this year , a team building a new feature for the web would create it in isolation . later , small ios and android teams would be tasked with implementing that feature in their apps . facebook , notably , once faced a similar problem ampmdash it grew up on the web , and took its time adapting to a world dominated by mobile devices . twitter started on mobile phones , but until recently oriented its product development teams around the web . essentially , what we did was turn that model upside down , sippey says . now every team working on a feature includes mobile developers ampmdash a strategy that became possible only after the company overhauled its recruiting and training programs . transformimg employees into mobile developersin april , twitter bought training company marakana and had its team build an in house developer school called twitter university . the goal transform more of twitter amprsquos current employees into mobile developers . that amprsquos really accelerated our ability to have great back end engineers and java engineers become ios and android engineers , sippey says . from there , like facebook before it , twitter built an experimentation framework into its apps for ios and android . that lets the product team test hypotheses by randomly selecting percent of twitter users to see how new features change their use of the product . data drawn from those experiments gave the company new confidence this year as it set out to transform its products ampmdash and helped the team start moving faster . inside twitter amprsquos experimentstake conversation view , which twitter introduced in august to a mixed response . for years , it had been clear that seeing replies scattered around the timeline made twitter harder to grok . we knew through user research that the mechanics of conversation on twitter were difficult for people , sippey says . and we know that one of the best things about twitter are the conversations ! we wanted to make it easy for people to understand that conversations happen on the product , and how they happen . twitter built multiple treatments for viewing conversationswith its development team stocked with mobile engineers and the experimentation framework in place , twitter built six or seven different treatments for viewing conversations . one version put replies on top of the original tweet instead of underneath them . another made replies smaller than the original tweet , to give them a sense of hierarchy . informed by data from its experiments , twitter opted to simply link related tweets with a blue line . some users complained , but the outcry has mostly died down . and twitter has continued to iterate on the feature , working to make sure users don amprsquot see the same tweet every time new replies trickle in . it amprsquos done great things for users and it amprsquos been good for the product , sippey says . the timeline is easier to read . the company applied a similar approach to bringing images inside the timeline . we amprsquove known for a long time that great moments on twitter typically have a photo with them , sippey says . people like pictures . the question was how to insert them into the timeline in a way that felt natural how do we make sure we maintain the rhythm of reading twitter ? sippey says . and also how does it perform , and how does it drive engagement ? the team experimented with different ways of cropping photos ampmdash photos as squares , photos at full height , photos cropped to the height of a text tweet . ultimately , twitter settled on a rectangular crop that amprsquos as tall as two text only tweets . we saw in the data that it worked for users , sippey says . what everyone wants to know ampmdash and what sippey declines to say ampmdash is how these changes are affecting engagement and user growth , in raw numbers . the most immediate boost to engagement came when the company started showing action buttons reply , favorite , retweet without making you first tap a tweet . sippey expects other changes to boost engagement over time ampmdash an indication , perhaps , that they haven amprsquot yet sent it skyrocketing . twitter is betting that it can change user behavior over time by changing their concept of what the service is . as you see more photos in the product , you think of twitter as a photo product , sippey says . some of these things are investments in the future of where we want the product to go . as you see more photos in the product , you think of twitter as a photo product . another one of those investments in the future is messaging . in , a redesign that came to be known as newnewtwitter moved direct messages a layer deeper in the interface the company reportedly once considered eliminating them altogether . with the release of its new mobile apps , dms are once again front and center . it amprsquos no wonder messaging apps have exploded in popularity , and whatsapp alone boasts more than million monthly users . it amprsquos always been a great part of the product , sippey says . what we want to do is make twitter a great experience for both public conversation and private conversation ampmdash because we think the two complement each other . what lies aheadthe company amprsquos redesigned apps , which it released earlier this month , offer further hints about twitter amprsquos future . today you can swipe from your home timeline to discover , which highlights popular tweets and trending topics , and activity , which lets you know what the people you follow have been doing on twitter . the company is already testing a tab called nearby , which shows you tweets in your area ampmdash a service that could make twitter more useful at a concert , a sporting event , or during an emergency . you want to have other experiences , depending on the time of day , or where you are , or if there amprsquos some event happening in the world . many other such tabs are possible . there are millions tweets that flow through every day , sippey says . a lot of what you want to go experience probably isn amprsquot in your home timeline ampmdash you can amprsquot follow enough . you want to have other experiences , depending on the time of day , or where you are , or if there amprsquos some event happening in the world . we want to build flexibility into the product to be able to present those collections of tweets to users . and so the experiments continue . there are now between and tests running inside the mobile apps , informing a development cycle that now releases every month on ios and every week on android . as at google and facebook , twitter amprsquos engineers will constantly be looking for new ways to build and retain their audience , and the most successful experiments will become core features of the product . and features are likely to be introduced gradually ampmdash a break from the company amprsquos historical approach to redesigns , when it would bundle scores of changes together and introduce them all at once . part of that is for testing purposes rolling changes out independently one another makes it easier to assess how each of them impacts engagement . but it amprsquos also designed to reduce the strain on everyone using the product . the goal all the time is to make things cognitively simpler for the user , sippey says . doing it this way gives them the opportunity to learn and see the change and adapt to the change while we amprsquore actually making the product better . the challenge for twitter lies in finding ways to attract new users that don amprsquot alienate its existing base . and when twitter users are unhappy , their judgement can be swift and relentless . recently , an effort to improve the way users can block offensive content backfired when victims amprsquo advocates said the changes would make victims of harassment less safe . within a day , twitter had reversed the changes ampmdash all that for a feature most people on twitter have likely never used . one thing people inside and outside the company tend to agree on twitter does need to evolve . to realize its vision of a world connected publicly and in real time , it has to grow quickly ampmdash and the current version of the product has only gotten it so far . but what will it evolve into , exactly ? there are risks in listening too closely to experimental data , which can favor incremental change over bold new visions . twitter sees itself as a service that makes it easier for people to connect with one another , and to discover what amprsquos happening in the world . but how it gets there is still very much in development . the company didn amprsquot train all those mobile engineers to do nothing . product teams , sippey says , like to ship . 