 dave morin is ready to start talking about path again . after a year of keeping quiet and releasing hardly any product updates , the path ceo is today unveiling the future of the company a messaging app , an acquisition , and a social network where you can add as many friends as you want . he s also breaking out numbers about path usage for the first time in months . the app now has million daily users , morin says , up from . million at the beginning of , and handles times more traffic than it did a year ago . first , path is releasing a messaging app called path talk for iphone and android . path talk is essentially path s messaging feature , stripped out and given its own standalone app . there s no way to chat inside path anymore you ll need path talk for that . morin decided to break out messaging into its own app because messaging was already path s most popular feature . more importantly , morin felt encumbered by the swiss army knife he felt path was becoming . other companies have tried the same tactic before facebook recently broke messaging out of its own primary app and foursquare recently gave check ins their own app with foursquare swarm . the strategy is becoming increasingly common for social apps in particular , which users expect to be lightning fast . messaging in path was indeed speedy and powerful . countless other apps from messageme to facebook copied its checkmark feature to let you quickly say okay with one tap , as well as a location feature that let you send your location to a friend very easily . in the shuffle , path will lose its messaging component , and will instead bounce users out to path talk or prompt them to download it when they receive a message . path talk is not so different from messaging in path proper , but has a few key additions to set it apart . first , path talk messages disappear after hours . second , talk incorporates the ambient location of friends . like foursquare swarm , path talk will show you if a friend is nearby , listed by neighborhood . but , path talk takes the idea a step further , displaying details about what you re doing automatically . if your phone detects movement , it might show that you re working out , and if it detects that you re moving very quickly , it will show that you re in the car so friends might choose not to bother you until later . the app also shows what music you re listening to , and even if you re low on battery . it s a lot to automatically share , so the feature has been made to be opt in . path , which came under fire in the past for collecting users address book data without asking for permission , is treading carefully here . facebook also took precautions with the launch of its ambient location feature nearby friends , recently , making that feature opt in as well . people generally don t like it when a company they ve trusted all of a sudden expects them to share a lot more information with their friends list . speaking of , another very important element of path is changing today the company is lifting its cap on the number of friends you can add . in user studies over the last few quarters , morin and co . discovered that path users were on the whole very confused by the company s trademark policy that users can only have friends . users didn t understand that this was a big part of the app , and they d have drama with removing people or not letting somebody in , says morin . they d get frustrated and have negative experience . path began with a user cap on the number friends you could have and later changed it to , but clearly , users still weren t getting the message . we ve failed a lot in terms of implementations we ve tried , and we finally came down to well , let s make it simple . path s choice is one of two things . it s an admittance that the premise on which path was originally built dunbar s number , a theory stating that human communities can only be as big as was wrong . or it s a white flag a statement of defeat that the customer is always right , and that path s take on friending is no longer worth pursuing . it s extraordinarily hard to map friendships to software , admits morin . we ve failed a lot in terms of implementations we ve tried , and we finally came down to well , let s make it simple . either way , today s announcement finds path shrugging off its main differentiator from other social apps , and one of the primary marketing tactics it s used to sell itself over the years . consequently , path now feels more like facebook than it ever has . with an uncapped friends list and ambient location features , path talk seems quite a lot like facebook messenger too , so path is packing on another feature to differentiate itself . the company is today announcing that it has acquired boston based talkto for an undisclosed amount of cash and stock . talkto lets its users text businesses and get responses in under five minutes , says ceo stuart levinson , and will be integrated into path talk by the end of the summer . talkto works by either calling businesses itself , or by offering businesses the opportunity to respond via email or sms when customers want to text them . being able to text business instead of calling them is indeed a nice feature , but will it feel awkward built into an app for texting your friends ? and do we even need one more app for texting friends ? well , perhaps path isn t looking to impress us . the company s largest and fastest growing user base is in southeast asia , and the company s recent funding round was led by an indonesian venture capital firm . southeast asia has traditionally been much more receptive to products like paid stickers and filters , which path offers . the company s largest and fastest growing user base is in southeast asiaintegrating talkto could also bring a viable new revenue stream to path , which has until now monetized using premium accounts , sticker packs , and filters . the year old talkto hasn t yet monetized its business , but morin says that getting involved in local commerce could give the company more options for making money . path also intends to build out its path premium service which for now includes free sticker packs and filters for . per year to resemble evernote premium or amazon prime , morin says . a big part of the opportunity is that we can offer talkto for free , but if you become an intense user maybe we offer a higher level of service at premium . path plans to release a handful of other new social apps in the coming months , which will presumably offer free features and paid features as part of path premium . path s new direction is a bit uninspired unbundling large services into apps is one of the big themes of . but , a fresh start could be just what path needs to get back on the horse after a year of often bitter ridicule from the tech community and press . morin himself was often a target , as was the company after it failed to really product updates , laid off percent of its staff , and then raised another million in funding with seemingly no direction in mind . it hurts , i m not gonna sugarcoat it , says morin . but i m really proud of everything this team s accomplished . what we would ask is for people to focus on the work and tell us what they think . criticism is a big part of the creative process , and we re always listening . correction an earlier version of this article stated that path talk s ambient sharing was opt out , instead of opt in . 