 motion sickness has long been the bane of virtual reality . it s associated most strongly with first person shooters and walking games , which create a stark mismatch between your real and virtual body . move too fast in the game , and your stomach won t respond favorably in the real world . yet play a game where the movements of your virtual character match your own , and you might run into a wall or your coffee table . vr game developers know these boundaries all too well , and they re now beginning to move beyond these limitations in unique and fascinating ways . the results were out in full force at last week s annual oculus connect developer conference . oculus is on the brink of releasing its touch motion controllers , which means designers building for its rift headset are dealing with more and more realistic body motion in vr . take , for example , lone echo , a new rift exclusive which uses the physics bending freedom of zero gravity to overcome the hurdles of in game motion . lone echo relies on the physics bending freedom of zero gravitylone echo developer ready at dawn relies on an ingenious method to replicate the feeling of floating in space specifically , in a mining operation within a ring of saturn . instead of asking players to move around a confined physical space , ready at dawn chose to create a system of constant motion . after all , you re never perfectly still in space unless you tether yourself down . in lone echo , players drift endlessly , moving between all manner of levers and bars and other objects . while adrift , you can steer with small bursts of air from your hands , activated by buttons on the touch controller . the sensation is disorienting at first , teetering on the edge of discomfort even with all vr s recent advances in minimizing motion sickness . yet once you ve got your bearings , lone echo s movement system feels natural . you stop worrying about the disconnect between your body and your brain , because the element of zero gravity fills the gap . after a few minutes , the thought of motion sickness begins to fade away . when you just have parity with your head and your hands , moving around is really nauseating , nathan phail liff , ready at dawn s art director , told me at connect last week . it was an inspiration for us looking at how astronauts move around the international space station . so it s a really aggressive movement model , but it s also really comfortable . moving around in virtual reality is not easy . to make it work and make it work well the headset requires quite a few strategically placed cameras . even then , without the right sensors and a large enough space , you can t really walk around inside a virtual environment as you can in the real world unless you re confined to a small , boxy room . this is a problem for vr game developers , many of whom are trying to create complex experiences that let players take a more active role instead of just stand or sit passively as objects and scenes fly at them on screen . and that s before dealing with motion sickness . the dream technology is still miles away in science fiction territorydown the line , we might have advanced wireless vr headsets that let us wander through rooms big and small perhaps even outside . software will also create intricate virtual environments that overlay perfectly on top of the real world , or in some cases mix the realities into one . oculus is working on developing such a headset , announced as a prototype last week codenamed santa cruz . of course , the dream technology is still miles away in science fiction territory a matrix or ready player one style system that would let you move your body in a simulation while laying perfectly still in the real world . so while the hardware marches onward , vr developers are coming up with clever and innovative ways to help us move without forcing us to lift our feet off the ground . lone echo is an exceptional example , because it both solved an integral problem and did so in a way true to virtual reality , by letting players experience the impossible . but other game companies with more traditional first person titles are rethinking the fundamentals of game design to help it accommodate modern vr . one of those fundamental mechanisms is teleportation . teleportation has been a neat special power in video games for decades the upcoming stealth title dishonored lets you magically blink past enemies to avoid them . in vr , though , teleportation becomes more than just a trick . it s a substitute for having to move either a controller s joystick or your physical body . epic games new oculus shooting title robo recall has perhaps the most polished movement system of any recent vr game because it uses such a fluid , freewheeling teleportation system . like other games using teleportation , instead of asking you to move via an analog stick or goofily wander around your living room with a headset on , the game lets you pick any portion of the environment to warp to . this wouldn t be exceptional if it weren t so seamless . many first person vr games nowadays rely on some type of warping method to get players from one spot of the map to another . robo recall s predecessor , a tech demo called bullet train , helped pioneer the system . the stealth game budget cuts , for htc and valve s vive headset , uses a popular mechanism borrowed from the iconic portal series to let you rip oval shaped holes in spacetime . other games , like the vr version of superhot , don t involve locomotion at all , choosing instead to let the action come at you . in robo recall , you re given an unusually polished and complex teleport system . to indicate a location you d like to warp to , press a controller stick and a blue line cascades across the map . not only can you pick where you move , by twisting the stick , you can choose which direction you ll be facing when you get there . it s fast , and with a few minutes of practice , incredibly intuitive . robo recall gives you an unusually polished teleport systemin robo recall , you re given a set of firearms to dispatch armies of rebelling androids who come at you in huge numbers , similar to an old arcade shooter . it sounds rudimentary , but in vr it s an exhilarating experience to fire at enemies with high precision and reload weapons by putting your hands to your hips . the experience is made even better by the ability to move around the map . that way , you can take advantage of the high ground in certain spots and even dispatch slow moving boss enemies by quickly jumping back and forth around them . other rift developers are using similar teleportation tricks , but with their own takes . arktika . , from metro developer a games , is another vr first person shooter with a stronger narrative focus . to keep players on track and to aid them in firefights with enemies , a games allows teleportation only between certain preordained locations . wth free choice , players can potentially put themselves in a bad spot , says jon bloch , a senior producer at a . it s true . in robo recall , a less experienced player could frantically teleport around the map without ensuring they ll be facing a strategic direction . in arktika . s gunfights , you can move closer to the action by teleporting to spots designated by the color yellow . if it s too hectic there , you can retreat to a safer location designated by the color blue . with free choice , players can potentially put themselves in a bad spot . these methods are all ways of circumventing the fact that full body movement in vr is still hard and expensive to achieve . the htc vive s room scale vr still requires a lot of workarounds , and systems that allow infinite walking , like the virtuix omni treadmill or the void s complex redirected walking system , are still incredibly niche . even so , games that get it right let players experience some of the freedom of modern video games in a way that only vr can allow without having to risk their physical body in the real world . 