 kevin is in the fetal position on a warm bed in mexico , in the throes of opiate withdrawal . suddenly , a buzzing noise enters his ear , as if a wasp is building a nest in there . it s the first sign the ibogaine he just consumed is taking effect , and things are about to get weird . this really intense energy slowly began to build in the center of my body and permeated throughout , kevin tells the verge , recalling that night . it extended down to the tips of my toes and up to the crown of my head . while the physical sensation was building up , i had my eyes closed , and i started to feel this upward momentum within my mind . he felt he was being shot up into space . there was a consistent buzzing noise growing louder and louder with each passing moment , until all perception of his body s location abruptly shattered . then , he was captured in time and space like a photograph . the ibogaine was part of his chance to free himself from addictionkevin was a year old with an intense opiate addiction heroin and oxycontin were his drugs of choice ampnbspat the time , and the ibogaine was part of his chance to free himself from the addiction . he tried the standard treatments , like rehab and the prescription drug suboxone , but they weren t working for him . he then decided to enroll in a study evaluating the psychedelic substance ibogaine , for use in kicking an opiate addiction . states across the us are facing opiate epidemics , which often start with prescription drugs , either legally prescribed or illegally bought . some people start taking opiates to treat legitimate pain and get addicted some get pills from friends . ampnbspover million people in the us are addicted to opiates , and addiction is hard to treat . data from the centers for disease control cdc shows there were , deaths from overdosing on prescription opioids and , deaths from heroin in . there s motivation in the medical community to improve addiction treatment even if it means something kind of far out treatment for addiction varies widely , and is not very effective . addicts may have to go through a supervised detox from the drug , often lasting over a week . sometimes they are then prescribed a drug , like methadone , to treat withdrawal but sometimes they are simply put on an abstinence program in a rehab facility . some facilities in the united states report treatment dropout rates as high as percent relapse rates for people who go through treatment can be as high as percent . so there s motivation for the medical community to try to improve addiction treatment , even if it means something kind of far out like a psychedelic drug . in fact , ibogaine , which is found in the root bark of some west african plants , isn t the only psychedelic substance that s being studied for addiction treatment . psilocybin perhaps better known as magic mushrooms , for instance , appears to help treat smoking addiction and alcoholism . in a study published last year from john hopkins university , of longtime smokers were able to quit with the help of the substance . a study from researchers at the university of new mexico focused on participants and found drinking can be reduced by up to percent with psilocybin treatment . ibogaine became a schedule i substance in , meaning it is said to have no currently accepted medical use and a high potential for abuse , and it was batted about as an anti abuse drug shortly before that . the possibility of using the drug for treating addiction became known a few years before , when a spry year old heroin addict named howard lotsof tried the drug in . he was just looking for another way to get high , but it changed him . the next thing i knew , he told the new york times in , i was straight . he gave it to six other heroin addict friends , and five of them quit heroin immediately . lotsof advocated for using ibogaine to treat opiate addiction for the rest of his life . he started the dora weiner foundation to educate people on the drug and push for studies around the world , and he was successful at getting trials started in the netherlands . ibogaine is illegal that s slowed the research processbut ibogaine is illegal , and that s slowed research progress . certain underground trials that were done by various unaffiliated researchers in the us in the s led to deaths . but lotsof did get the national institute on drug abuse to research ibogaine , and he received approval for an fda clinical trial . unfortunately for lotsof , the study was never done , due to a lack of funding . actually , ibogaine research isn t without encouragement in the mainstream . mark parrino , president of the american association for the treatment of opioid dependence aatod , believes there could be a place for ibogaine in opiate addiction treatment . since opiate addictions are so difficult to treat , doctors are desperate for anything that might work . it s not a widely used medication , but the general view is that if it has some helpful approach for some people who don t want to be using one of the three federally approved medications , that s great , he tells the verge . kevin is one of those people . jeff djevdet flickr around , while kevin was finishing college , he started casually taking pills like percocet , roxycodones , and oxycontin . a year later , he was cutting up pills and snorting them . kevin s addiction became bad enough that he dropped out of his undergraduate program northeastern university . he returned to school and did eventually graduate , in . by june , he was doing heroin . i was just shooting speed balls and kind of entering a psychotic state , he said . he eventually ended up getting arrested while shoplifting . he decided to go to rehab for days , followed by some step meetings . he began using heroin again shortly after he was released . for about a year , he didn t have a job he just did drugs . eventually , his mother convinced him to look into experimental ibogaine treatments . so kevin went to southern california and met with thomas brown , the leader of the ibogaine study , in the summer of . thirty people were enrolled in the study , and made it to the end a year later , says brown , who s a research coordinator at the university of california san diego . that s a high drop out rate , in part because many patients lost contact with researchers once treatment was over . preliminary data shows most people will relapse . brown argues that may be because the treatment didn t include any mandatory aftercare , like therapy or a halfway house . this kind of support is important for addicts , because it s easy for them to fall back into old habits without direct support in the first few months after treatment . most patients only stayed at the clinic about a week after the study treatment , and were clean for that time and for at least a week after . preliminary data shows most people will relapse it does interrupt the addiction for people , brown says . but brown isn t presenting ibogaine as a cure for addiction . the results suggest that ibogaine alone isn t enough , anyway . rather , he thinks it gives patients a separation from toxic mental patterns and lessens withdrawal which might allow conventional treatments to work better . kevin s treatment began with an intake interview with brown , followed by some ekgs and other tests . around pm he received the ibogaine three doses in a pill form , spaced a few minutes apart . the multidisciplinary association for psychedelic studies , which sponsored the trial did not provide the drugs they are managed by the pangea biomedics ibogaine clinic in baja california , mexico . the researchers observed the treatment in the clinic . kevin was supposed to wait until he had hit the peak of his opiate withdrawal , an evaluation he was to make , to start the treatment , but he was too eager and started before that . it didn t entirely bring me through the withdrawal , but i don t blame the medicine for that , he says . i blame myself for rushing the treatment . after a long night on the drug , he went through a tough phase of the withdrawal the next day . but ibogaine let him put the withdrawal in context he could change his life if he stayed off drugs . he followed his study treatment with a step program and has been opiate free ever since he was dosed , in . because addiction is varied , it s hard to say what people will respond best to for some , the best approach may be methodone , suboxone , or just abstinenceparrino , the aatod president , says that because addiction is varied , it s hard to say what people will respond best to for some people , the best approach may be methadone , suboxone , or abstinence . there s no single treatment that works for everybody , he says . ibogaine could be added to this repertoire but he wants to see more studies . in addition to the us ibogaine study , an identical one , using the same procedure , was conducted in new zealand . it was also sponsored by maps . that study included patients , and three dropped out before it was finished . both research groups will submit their results to scientific journals in the coming months . dr . geoff noller , of the new zealand study , says the preliminary results show the majority of their patients stayed off opiates for a year after one ibogaine treatment . there are some differences between the trials , most obviously in participants percent of noller s patients were addicted to methadone , which is an opiate that s more commonly abused in new zealand . at this point , it s unlikely swaths of addicts will be flocking to places like mexico to do psychotropic drugs like ibogaine , but ibogaine may hold potential . and what happens after the drug s administered may play a crucial role , the experts agree . take kevin in addition to his step program , he says he s avoided situations where he would be around opiates , and he hasn t had many urges to do them again . but he also describes the ibogaine treatment as crucial for his recovery . without it i don t know how i ever would have stopped , he says . correction this article originally stated that ibogaine was made a schedule i substance in . in fact , it was . we regret the error . 