 at the end of october this year , , police officials from around the world gathered in a chicago conference center for the international association of chiefs of police conference . it was equal parts political convention and trade show , with panels on crisis response splitting time with hundreds of small companies selling bomb disposal robots and guns . there were more than a dozen body camera companies on the show floor , but taser made the biggest splash , constructing a disney style amphitheater called the uss axon enterprise . the show began with a white jacketed captain , who announced he had traveled back in time from the year , where lethal force has been eliminated and police are respected and loved by their communities . to explain how to get there , he ran through a history of policing tech . approaching the present moment , he fell into a kind of disappointed sadness . in truth , law enforcement was falling behind , the captain explained . a female actress materialized on screen as the ship s computer , slightly behind her cue . oh dear , she said , exaggerating dismay . how come ? it was because they had no platform , said the captain . what kind of platform ? well , the kind taser is selling . once a simple stun gun manufacturer , taser has reinvented itself as an all in one law enforcement technology ecosystem less lethal weapons linked to cameras that automatically send footage to taser s evidence management database , where it can be edited and packaged using taser s cloud software tools . it s a single walled garden , explicitly modeled after apple s software controls , extending from the camera lens to the prosecutor s laptop . and as it grows more popular , that system has put us on the cusp of a fundamental change in the way law enforcement works in america , shaping police departments to the logic of a software startup . a protester calls for the release of lapd body camera footage from the shooting of an unarmed homeless man . david mcnew getty images it s an ambitious pitch , but a well timed one . there s never been more money or political will behind a technological fix for the problem of police violence . that pressure began with the killing of michael brown in ferguson , missouri last year , which catalyzed a national movement against police violence . more killings made national news in the following months eric garner in new york , rekia boyd in chicago , tamir rice in cleveland , sandra bland in texas , freddie gray in baltimore . as activists grasp for ways to hold police accountable , body cameras have emerged as the least controversial option . after the grand jury acquitted the police officer who shot their son , michael brown s family called a press conference asking americans to join with us in our campaign to ensure that every police officer working the streets in this country wears a body camera , a cause that s since been joined by president obama and hillary clinton . in december , president obama called for million to fund body camera systems for local police departments , and while congress hasn t approved the money yet , many police departments aren t waiting . the department of justice has helped fund camera systems in different cities , including chicago itself . the nypd is soliciting bids for up to , body cameras , and dozens of smaller cities have put out similar calls . suddenly , there s a lot of money in body cameras . the big players in the us are taser , vievu , and panasonic , all of which are currently vying for the nypd contract but even as they compete , the companies have all seen unprecedented growth . in the second quarter of , taser signed contracts for more than million in sales , driving its value over billion for the first time . over the summer , vievu was acquired by a military equipment company called safariland for an undisclosed amount . a docking station for taser s axon flex system . george frey getty images there was a huge change months ago , said the ceo of the uk based reveal , which has been selling police cameras internationally for nearly a decade . when we arrived last year it went from , maybe this is interesting , to we re doing it . it s just a question of when . that interest has been enough to draw outsiders into the game . on the first day of the conference , motorola announced that body cameras would be built into its new line of police radios , adding video to one of the most widely used pieces of police equipment in the country . if taser has maneuvered its way to the head of the pack , it s done it by borrowing moves from the consumer technology world . in a pitch repeated over and over at iacp , ceo rick smith compared the company s system to the closed platform between itunes and the ipod . itunes solved the problem of how to get music onto your mp player , smith told a crowd of police chiefs in an early morning panel . we re solving the problem of how to get footage securely off your camera . the result is a seamless , closed system that reinforces itself with the same persistence as apple products . drawing a taser brand stun gun can automatically trigger recording a dashboard or body camera , which will have automatically cached footage of the previous two minutes . from there , the footage ports directly to taser s evidence . com database , where police can edit it into clips , blur faces , and share footage directly with prosecutors . another new feature called axon live lets a police chief patch in seamlessly to the live feed of any officer currently filming , as close to a literal panopticon as you could create under the circumstances . it s possible to separate out the features pushing taser camera footage to a non taser storage system , like running itunes on windows but it s always easier not to . as with any disruption , the aim is to expand fast , then consolidate slowlylike itunes , it s also a very profitable system to run . taser s loss leader is hardware rather than software , but the ecosystem lock in is the same . once police have bought the hardware , they ll be reliant on taser to manage and store the terabytes of daily video streaming back from officers . storing and managing that video requires a monthly fee , which gets higher as you share it across more departments , or purchase features like redaction and simplified editing tools . in an investor meeting , smith hinted at even more advanced features that could be built on top of all that data , such as recognizing license plates as soon as they re captured by a body camera or dashcam . as the software develops , it s easy to imagine facial recognition being added in the same way . new features can be developed to increase community involvement or broaden surveillance powers , all depending on the customer s need . in true apple fashion , that s also come with an aggressive marketing push . the company s biggest announcement at iacp was a dashboard camera previous models could easily cost , , meant to give taser an aggressive , disruptive entry into any departments that have held out so far . the company was a platinum sponsor at this year s iacp an honor with a , price tag , and the event was full of eager sales reps meeting with curious chiefs , taking the first steps in the dance of salesmanship . sometimes that dance has stirred up ethical questions in albuquerque and fort worth , chiefs have come under fire for accepting lucrative favors from taser before signing up their departments to ongoing contracts . twenty nine major cities in the us are signed up to some level of taser s axon platform , including san francisco and washington , dc , but it s struggled to land huge departments like new york . twenty three other cities are on some kind of trial period with taser , but it s hard to say how many will convert . smith mentioned oakland and aurora , colorado as stubborn vievu holdouts but maybe taser s new dashcam or new microsoft azure partnership would be enough to make them crack . as with any disruption , the aim is to expand fast , then consolidate slowly . following silicon valley custom , taser couches that disruption in evangelical terms , more of a calling than a business . you ve got this huge societal issue , and inside of that , our company has this massive transformative purpose , taser president luke larson told me . we re not about making money . we re about getting our products in the hands of law enforcement to create safer communities . at the iacp shutting shit down byp a photo posted by kristiana rae col n kristiana af on oct , at pm pdtarrests at th and mlk happening now stopthecops fundblackfutures blacklivesmatter pic . twitter . com baw w irsd aaron cynic aaroncynic october , outside of the convention center on sunday , protesters from the black youth project formed a sitting circle , their arms linked by long tubes bearing slogans and the names of men and women killed by police . another squad of protesters blocked the skybridge over the street . visiting chiefs had to climb beneath their arms to get through . a protestor climbed the flagpole outside , replacing the american flag with a black and yellow square bearing the words unapologetically black , followed by the black youth project s twitter handle . the reality here is that the camera is not pointed at the police . the protesters did not mention body cameras , although it had been a central demand for many just a year earlier . campaign zero , an offshoot of the black lives matter movement , still lists body cameras as one of its eight demands , although it specifies that the subjects should be able to request not to be filmed and to obtain records after the fact . but there s a growing feeling among many in the movement that video feeds can t protect black communities . the reality here is that the camera is not pointed at the police . it s pointed at the public , says malkia cyril , director of the center for media justice in oakland . it won t be implemented for the purposes of accountability . it will be implemented to aid officers in the course of their investigations to gather data . that s what it s for . the real change , cyril says , comes from bystander video rather than video controlled by the police . on the second day of the iacp , a new video proved her point . it was cellphone footage from a school in columbia , south carolina , taken by three students who watched as a resource officer flipped over a young girl s desk and dragged her across the floor . within days , it was being shown in a loop on national television . most of the campaigns of the last two years have had similar beginnings . sandra bland s traffic stop was caught on dashboard video , but most others oscar grant , freddie gray , eric garner were witnessed through bystanders with phones . twelve year old tamir rice died in a public park , in view of a city owned surveillance camera . in the case of rekia boyd , killed just a few miles west of iacp , there was only a written report . the policeman who killed her was off duty . would more cameras have mattered ? it s easy to see why some activists are skeptical . in , it s hard to believe anyone suffers from a lack of ways to record something . and sold at a trade show like iacp , alongside license plate readers and mobile command centers , body cameras appeal to the logic of escalation . there are guns on the street so police need guns . there are cameras on the street , so police need cameras , too . if police feel besieged by bystander videos , you can imagine the attraction of having their own video feeds , with the footage entirely under their control . there are cameras on the street , so police need cameras , tooand whichever cameras are used , it s increasingly clear police will control the footage . in a recent survey of departments with body camera programs , only two made the footage available to individuals filing complaints against the department , and only four had systems to prevent tampering or unauthorized access . there are a number of pending state bills that would clarify policy standards , but it s unlikely the rules will get any stricter about sharing video . if anything , the current systems will cut off more radical solutions like sharing video outside the police department . we see that starting to fade , one camera manufacturer told me , referring to citizen access systems . the more you bring transparency into the process , the less need there is for that . current camera systems are only a sliver of what s possible , the sliver that s most compelling in a sales pitch to police departments . in some country , some year in the future , one can imagine police video being shared with community leaders and citizen groups through a platform like the one taser is building . distributed data would let citizens literally see through the eyes of police . that wouldn t end the violence more than it would raise the dead , but it would be a chance to build something like trust . creating that system now , in chicago or los angeles or ferguson , seems impossible . police chiefs are the only customers for these cameras , and they won t buy something that exposes their own officers . companies like taser will only make what they can sell . more than anything , that buying and selling has made body cameras into what they are . everything else the activists , the politicians , even the camera itself has just been part of the pitch . 