 the conspiracy theory around murdered democratic national committee staffer seth rich isn t weird so much as sad it drags a man s fairly recent death into the spotlight in order to promote the idea of a deep state plot , based on evidence that s either speculative or factually wrong . but it s brought together a strange coalition of well known subscribers including the internet entrepreneur kim dotcom . dotcom , founder of defunct cloud storage site megaupload , isn t just a high profile proponent of the seth rich cover up story . last week , he claimed to be at the center of it . but in promising to blow the lid off the conspiracy , he mostly succeeded in proving how much traditional political divides have shifted , and how easily you can bend political paranoia toward mundane publicity stunts . who is kim dotcom ? kim dotcom born kim schmitz is primarily known as the creator of megaupload , a cyberlocker site particularly popular with and arguably catering to pirates . in , the department of justice shut down megaupload and charged dotcom with criminal copyright infringement . this kicked off a remarkably intense extradition battle , including a police raid on dotcom s new zealand mansion , and the case remains open more than five years later . during that time , dotcom has launched another cloud storage site , released a poorly reviewed edm album , and founded the recently revived new zealand internet party . he s a reliably colorful and belligerent figure in debates over copyright , surveillance , and other tech policy issues . the platonic ideal of kim dotcom may be this video for his song mr . president , with its combination of internet friendly politics , hyper processed aesthetics , and shameless self mythologizing . what does he have to do with seth rich ? according to dotcom , lots . the central seth rich conspiracy theory posits that rich , not russian hackers , leaked last year s trove of dnc emails to wikileaks leading someone like the clinton campaign to kill him in retaliation . wikileaks founder julian assange has coyly hinted that rich was a source , and dotcom tweeted last week that he could give written testimony with evidence that proved it . this wouldn t explain the later cache of emails from clinton s campaign , or prove rich s death was related to the leak , but it would greatly contradict our current understanding of the election hacks . if congress includes sethrich case into their russia probe i ll give written testimony with evidence that seth rich was wikileaks source . kim dotcom kimdotcom may , dotcom later elaborated in a statement on his website . in late a person contacted me about helping me to start a branch of the internet party in the united states . he called himself panda . i now know that panda was seth rich , he wrote . according to dotcom , rich provided the information that dotcom mentioned in a interview with bloomberg , where he said assange would be clinton s worst nightmare during the election because he has access to information . can he prove any of this ? who knows ? dotcom says he s waiting to give his full statement to authorities , provided he s given safe passage to the us and back in other words , as long as nobody tries to hold him for a megaupload trial . he s been tweeting about clinton s downfall since , and he was hinting about wikileaks election plans before they became public . but given that he s coordinated with wikileaks in the past , he could have simply gotten information from assange . and as the outline points out , he s tweeted other bombshells that never went off . dotcom also responded to a clarification request from pundit sean hannity by gleefully declaring i m the evidence ! , which is not how most people would describe having actual evidence . what are dotcom s own stakes here ? dotcom has likened the megaupload case to obama s aggressive prosecution of whistleblowers , and hillary clinton was secretary of state when dotcom s charges were filed dotcom has repeatedly tweeted about how she signed his extradition order . democrats destroyed my business , attacked my family , stole my assets in a pay play strike for the mpaa , he tweeted last week . counterstrike trump presidency . like assange , this makes dotcom part of the coalition of people who aren t traditionally conservative , but were embittered by the obama administration and the clinton campaign . seanhannity sean this is still an ad for kim s album my guy kev kept simple may , but dotcom is also a savvy and enthusiastic self promoter , and he s getting a lot of free advertising out of this . his announcement about seth rich ostensibly a massive revelation about a political murder is buried beneath full screen ads for his album , his music videos , and a video of the police raid . do people believe him ? well , there s seth rich super investigator sean hannity , who tweeted dotcom s claims and invited him onto his show . zero hedge seemed to take the veracity of dotcom s tweets more or less for granted , and anticipation was high in the days before his statement . but the tone of discussion on places like r the donald s discord channel remains at least somewhat skeptical , with speculation that dotcom is either looking for attention , or making a play for legal immunity . what does seth rich s family think of this ? they re unsurprisingly upset . the burden of proof is on mr . dotcom to either prove he has evidence or face the consequences of damaging seth s good name and creating more emotional hardship on a grieving family , a spokesperson said . the family is not going to entertain his ridiculous , manipulative and completely non credible statements . the family is not going to entertain his ridiculous , manipulative and completely non credible statements . in a washington post story , the family also said they worried dotcom had been attempting to hack rich s email account , based on an account creation email from the mega cloud storage site that dotcom founded , but no longer runs . dotcom took issue with this claim in an open letter to the family , threatening to sue them for defamation . would suing a grieving family that s upset you ve used their dead son as conspiracy theory fodder be incredibly cruel and tacky ? yes . does he have a point , though ? sort of . as dotcom pointed out in his letter , anybody could go to mega and create an account using rich s email address , prompting the service to auto send an email to verify it . conspiracy investigators have been randomly punching information about rich into all kinds of sites and services , hoping to find new clues , so there s no reason to think dotcom is involved . but if anyone s to blame , it s the post for not pointing this out . does any of this even matter ? it is hypothetically possible that someone will open a major legal investigation into seth rich s death , in which case it is hypothetically possible that dotcom could be called to testify , and hypothetically possible that he will provide credible proof . dotcom is trying to speed the process by tweeting a link to a white house petition , despite the fact that trump has seemingly abandoned the petition site . i will spend the next hour to follow everyone who signs this sethrich petition https t . co saumuujcijtweet your screenshot ampamp sethrich pic . twitter . com qgwrtlnhem kim dotcom kimdotcom may , it s more likely , of course , that dotcom s allegations won t reach beyond his website and twitter feed but that they will cause more pain to rich s family , and polarize internet politics even further . even if we assume that dotcom was working in good faith , it s hard to argue that releasing unsubstantiated claims into an already murky investigation was going to benefit anyone except himself and other people profiting off the conspiracy . and the sad thing is that next week , most people may have forgotten he said anything at all . 