 noel biderman , ashley madison ceo , in tokyo last month . women of this generation this paris hilton , kim kardashian , i m in a sex tape kind of generation they re not going to behave like their moms . they re not going to tolerate sexless marriages . that s the bet noel biderman made years ago when he founded the notorious adultery dating service ashley madison , and that s the bet he made again last year when launching the site in japan . biderman believed that japan was rich enough in gdp , credit card penetration , and what he calls the infidelity economy for ashley madison to take off . the japanese version has racked up over million registrations since going live in july , with growth far exceeding the company s expectations . but the controversial site has run into some problems in the country , where biderman says that local divisions of google , yahoo , and microsoft are refusing to carry ashley madison advertising in search results . he contends that it s a hypocritical policy , pointing to the prominent sex industry that advertises various adult entertainment in neon lights as proof that japan has a huge market for infidelity . i have yet to come across any sexual driven services that can facilitate the economics on singledom alone , biderman tells the verge . it s easier for singles to get sex sometimes than married people , and that s the truth of the matter . a free information center for sex services in tokyo s red light district of kabukich . japan s sex trade is very visible , according to brett bull , editor in chief of the tokyo reporter , which often covers the local adult industry . i think as with a lot of things in japan it gets conveniently overlooked , but certainly entertainment areas around many major train stations in tokyo offer men everything from simple conversation at a hostess club to a blow job at a health club to full sex at a soapland . ashley madison might have expected a champagne reception from such an environment , but the reality has proven more complex . south korea and singapore have banned ashley madison outrightthe spat highlights the pitfalls companies can face when attempting to expand around the globe . japan is one of the few major markets that google has yet to dominate , with yahoo still the leader , and it s clear that mountain view is making efforts to ruffle as few feathers as possible . and while ashley madison may feel slighted in japan , the situation could be worse last week south korea banned the site outright under adultery laws , becoming the second asian country to do so after singapore last year . google japan declined to comment on ashley madison s case for this story , but pointed to its policy on adult sexual services . the company says that its adwords advertising network doesn t allow escorts , prostitutes , or erotic massage businesses anywhere in the world , but adult and sexual dating sites are permitted . that s not the case in japan , however , where adwords lists a host of specific services that are not permitted , including strip clubs , phone sex lines , used panty sales , and adult online dating services . the only other country specific restrictions cover mail order brides in south east asia . they still don t want to let someone buy the word affair . we advertise with google in countries without incident , says biderman . but here they still don t want to let someone buy the word affair . at some point they changed their mind to make it sound like japanese society cannot digest an ashley madison that instead of going to a love hotel , somehow joining our social network was going to crumble marriages . it is an absurd argument and inconsistent with google s policies in the rest of the globe . despite biderman s claims that google absolutely allows advertisements for sexual services in japan which would appear to violate the company s policy the verge could not find evidence of this in search results . after following up , ashley madison representatives said that biderman was referring to google ads for love hotels , the short stay lodges that many couples use for sex in a crowded nation where moments of privacy can be otherwise hard to come by . besides these , google and yahoo japan do also allow advertisements for prominent deai kei dating sites , which are known to act as an under the table way for users to meet escorts . a kabukich street corner . even if ashley madison isn t being singled out , it s clear that google is applying different standards in japan than elsewhere , and the softbank controlled yahoo japan differs from its american counterpart as well . the japanese internet advertising association has guidelines against permitting content that s sexual in nature or has the potential to subvert societal norms , and it s likely that companies are interpreting the language in a conservative way . the difference between ashley madison and the services that google and yahoo do allow is that the latter aren t explicitly about sex the shorter stays in love hotels are called rests , for example , and japanese dating sites can at least claim plausible deniability . the dating sites are not usually promoting prostitution as they cannot make money that way , says bull . still , the discrepancy between japan s conspicuous legal sex industry and its puritanical consensus on online advertising is hard to ignore . biderman posits that ashley madison has fallen afoul of japanese moralizing because it targets women in loveless marriages , and like anywhere else in the world , the sex industry there has overwhelmingly served men . i remember talking to yahoo who said oh , you have a woman whispering on your homepage . and she s wearing a ring . what you re really saying is women are being dishonest in marriage and we don t like that . nobody thinks women will lie about their marriage ? the famous kabukich ichibangai entrance gate . unfairly enough , there really are few sexual services readily available for a woman seeking paid sexual gratification with no strings attached or even easy ways to have affairs , wrote tokyo vice author jake adelstein in the japan times last year . there is really nothing even close to the male centered sex industry , which accounts for percent of japan s gross domestic product . the internet doesn t have an international morality police , and probably never will . that s why contentious companies like ashley madison and global corporations like google will continue to face hurdles in challenging markets like japan . but although ashley madison may have reason to feel disgruntled , it shouldn t be surprised . it s built a business on controversy and provocation , and japan s attitude to sex pinballs between permissive and prudish perhaps this is one marriage that was never meant to be . 