 the one thing you never hear about khalif diouf is how much he laughs . in general , the native new york rapper ampnbspbetter known as le f ampnbspis portrayed as a soft spoken , yet deadly serious provocateur wholly dedicated to his bawdy , politically charged party raps . he helps that image along , of course confrontational onstage , always strictly composed and mean mugging like a couture model in photoshoots , and ready to unleash a social media beatdown on anyone unwise enough to call him transphobic or make bigoted comments about his career . mutant situationswith his debut album , outspoken rapper le f aims to transcend his viral momentby devon maloney photography by alex welsh the one thing you never hear about khalif diouf is how much he laughs . in general , the native new york rapper ampnbspbetter known as le f is portrayed as a soft spoken , yet deadly serious provocateur wholly dedicated to his bawdy , politically charged party raps . he helps that image along , of course confrontational onstage , always strictly composed and mean mugging like a couture model in photoshoots , and ready to unleash a social media beatdown on anyone unwise enough to call him transphobic or make bigoted comments about his career . but in person , that all melts away with the arrival of his big , endearing exclamation point of a chortle , one that bursts loudly and often over whatever space he happens to inhabit for example , a beige booth in a midtown manhattan diner , talking to a reporter about x men . i was just into mutant ampnbspsituations , he says of his nerdy childhood , laughing over a plate of plain french toast . they were out of cinnamon raisin bread . he s ordered a pitcher of water , too , worried he s getting sick before his cmj show at williamsburg s cameo gallery later this week . i always liked iceman , but he just came out of the closet . ampnbsphe said he didn t want to before because he didn t want to deal with the double discrimination . i m like , whatever , i ve been a gay black dude my whole life . get over it . le f s own breakout story plays out like an underground rap superhero saga . in , having lost the production files in the eleventh hour for a song from his debut mixtape dark york , diouf found himself in need of a beat . he called on his friends , the production duo kinandbone , and when they sent over a track , he says , i just drunkenly rapped a new song . that song was wut , still his most well known track to date . despite its slapdash origins , it was a polished , major label quality banger that confidently showcased both his blackness and homosexuality in such a nonchalant manner that his stardom , in all its colorful glory , ampnbspseemed inevitable . in the video for wut video le f dances against an all white background like the star of an animated ipod commercial made flesh , narrating the moves of his brightly dressed backup dancers even when the lights go out , he keeps going , spinning in place while running an afro pick through his close cut , dyed violet hair . the clip doesn t even break the three minute mark , but it only took that long for le f to be officially bookmarked as one to watch . le f s video for wut the song and its video , coupled with a few fiery comments about homophobia in mainstream rap , went viral , and he quickly became a minor iconoclast , a talented artist with a fresh perspective . two years later , he was performing with choreographed dancers on the late show with david letterman . plenty of independent artists have hit late night tv stages in recent years , but for le f , it was a major moment here was a radical queer black artist performing a song about being radical , queer , and black , on national television . middle america had rarely been so visibly confronted by such a marginalized talent it was an electric appearance that the press immediately lauded as a sign of big things to come . le f s biggest hit , now three years old , has begun weighing on himbut three years ampnbspafter wut blew up , the inevitability of le f s success seems far less certain . his second most popular video , s spa day , has under half a million views while wut has been streamed . million times on spotify , his second most popular boom , has only made about , . le f s biggest hit , now three years old , has begun weighing on him . i kind of want to destroy it , he says now at the diner , grimacing . i think there are a lot of people who just see the wut video , but they ll never hear any of the ridiculous , loud , and destructive music that i was also making at the same time . and nothing pigeonholes an artist faster than becoming a one hit wonder a fact of which he s painfully aware . i appreciate that i can have a life from wut , he says . but the fact that he s continued to release new material since then , none of which has garnered the same degree of attention , is frustrating to him . it makes me think that it really wasn t about artistry at all , he says . it was about the hashtag gay black rapper . being oneself often has that sort of price , especially in pop music . but with his debut full length album riot boi , which arrives this week on terrible xl records , he s making a serious attempt to get that fee waived . at six foot three and dressed in all black , with one long , gold earring and a leather bucket hat , le f stands out in a restaurant full of tired , gray haired white men in taupe suits . but like anyone who grew up having to make the best of their misfit status , he s used to it . diouf comes from a line of classical vocalists his mother and grandmother are professional opera singers who have performed at carnegie hall and the metropolitan opera house . i m like the only person in my family who can t sing , actually , he says . instead , he found his niche in dance , a talent that eventually paved the way to boarding school at the prestigious and predominantly white and wealthy concord academy . as a teen he studied dance , design , and production frequently showing up to class wearing white plastic trench coats and uggs and used his high school s computer lab to record his own electronic and juke beats . i was listening to animal collective in dance class , and crying to bj rk at night . still , the idea of performing vocally in any capacity seemed out of the question . having this nasally , gay voice was just something totally disgusting to me as a teenager , he says . i didn t understand how to use it or what to do at all . but at some point during his time at concord a time when i was listening to animal collective in dance class , and crying to bj rk at night diouf first came across an inkling that even if he would never make it in the opera , maybe a rap career wasn t so farfetched . m . i . a . s galang video had just come out , and i saw how she incorporated her printmaking art into that music video , and i was like , yes , this is awesome ! he remembers . her voice sounds crazy , but i love it , and she is summing up all her mediums sic into one awesome thing . he was also inspired by the equally idiosyncratic vocal stylings of british rapper dizzee rascal . that was definitely an inspiring moment for me , to at least start working towards something . it wasn t until , the summer before he started college at wesleyan , that the hours spent fooling around on school software started to pay off , courtesy of his dj s roommate and their friends himanshu heems suri , victor kool a . d . vasquez , and ashok dapwell kondabolu . the trio was looking to get a rap project off the ground , and le f had been selling beats to make extra money . i basically gave them this beat , he says . i really thought i wanted to rap over it , but at the time , i wasn t feeling confident enough about rapping over anything that wasn t electro or juke . that beat became the foundation for das racist s goofy viral earworm combination pizza hut and taco bell . the favor paid off the artists remained friends , and four years later , not long after diouf graduated and returned to new york , heems released le f s debut mixtape dark york via his label , greedhead . as the buzz around le f s mixtapes grew fly zone was released in january of , tree house that fall , the press developed its own narrative , observing similar releases from the likes of mykki blanco and zebra katz and declaring a burgeoning queer new york rap scene . it was news to le f . i didn t even realize i was a gay rapper until the pitchfork article , he says earnestly , referring to an article on the music site that linked the careers of le f and a handful of other subversive new york artists . for a while , he says , it was frustrating , but he soon accepted the label if that means screaming and vogueing in a dress in the dark onstage , then great . i m already a politicized figure , just by nature of how i ve been in the press , being an out musician , he says . and he has made a bit of a name for himself as an outspoken figure on social media after macklemore and ryan lewis won a vma in for their pro lgbt cut same love , le f tweeted a lot . it saddens me out that a straight man is the voice pop music has chosen for gay rights , he wrote . in the same incident , he also called out the seattle duo s horn centric thrift shop for its resemblance to wut at the end of the day , i openly have no respect for any artists ripping from other artists , so blatantly . the way he sees it , at this point all he can do is throw his whole weight into the parts of his public reputation that really matter to him . i wanted to make a record that addresses the politics that i wanted to speak about , and not what others expected me to say , he says of riot boi . it feels like i m breaking out of being a meme and convincing people i m a musician . still , he admits , while his subject matter may be subversive , he can t help but aspire to mainstream acceptance , which of course comes with pressures to conform to certain cultural expectations . he spends a lot of time thinking about where he would fit in the pop world , should he get there . he admires nina simone , a pianist who began singing out of necessity and ended up a massively celebrated vocalist and activist , but also likes beyonc , a lifelong singer and meticulous performer . they re nearly opposite aspirations , artistically speaking , but he wants both . i m breaking out of being a meme and convincing people i m a musician . but like , the cyborg version , post human , he says , adding , that s why i put the one in my name , you know i wanted to be slightly a computer . but those aspirations are a secondary concern for now . more pressing is simply maintaining basic quality control the loss of momentum he s faced over the past couple years has limited how much he s able to do as an artist , even in keeping the elements of his show that made people fall in love with him in the first place . i love being able to work with dancers and a choreographer , he tells me later over the phone . with letterman , i just wanted to have that moment . but for the most part , i can t afford to do that all the time . i m not exactly filling up rooms , and it s hard to get promoters to want to spend that kind of money , and hiring dancers doesn t really make money for my label . he s considering upgrading his live show by paying out of pocket for dancers , in which case , he says , i ll just be broke . playing by the rules and breaking them all in the name of self expression is a never ending struggle , one that visibly frustrates him . sometimes i edit down too much , and i think i should go the opposite way , and just be a crazy person , see what happens , he says , with another laugh , this one tinged with a note of cynicism . like , what if i actually just wrote a song from the voice of mystique talking to steve jobs ? what if i actually went to those levels ? the day after lunch , we re supposed to meet again at dr . wu s , the low profile williamsburg studio where he and jake aron , his co producer and former wesleyan classmate , have been piecing together the record for the last year . he s about an hour and a half late , but aron says that s nothing in rapper time . once we were supposed to have a session with joey bada at pm , he says , and the guy didn t show up til . when he finally shows up , blunt and grapefruit slices in hand , the pair set to tweaking the backing track for grace , alek or naomi . the engineer hasn t sent the stems for any of his new songs and the show is tomorrow . they ll have to use what they have on file instead of making a new version specifically mixed for a live venue . the songs on riot boi are the result of three years , three mixtapes , and two eps worth of sonic and lyrical experimentation together they comprise a compact , meticulously crafted minute mission statement that turns le f s complicated existence as a black , openly queer , private school educated rapper into a candy coated , hedonistic , bit rave . each song is a new level in a s super nintendo game , teasing and condemning the establishment homophobic , racist white people , in particular ampnbspinto confronting the realities of his daily existence . a recent le f performance presented by boxing gym overthrow nycriot boi calls on the spiritual aid of an array of women , from grace jones to model alek wek to the damn mona lisa , as well as the literal aid of others , like compatriots junglepussy and house of ladosha particularly in swirl , a lush , wry track about the fetishization of blackness . even his mom , credited as miss geri , contributed her talents , alongside devont hynes , on the crisis of faith album closer change . on songs like cheap and taxi , he explores complicated race and class politics disguised as diary entries hippie hoodrat , product of my environment n ggas look at me must be thinkin i m mega rich . slather his signature ballroom culture vibe heavily on the front end , and not even kathleen hanna made smashing the patriarchy and white supremacy such a jam . and then there s that album title a direct nod to riot grrrl , another radical music tradition , albeit one that had its own blindspots to racial and socioeconomic issues . that aggressive ideology , that spoke to the music of the time , and still invoked all these political , progressive , necessary topics , was so interesting to me , he says . but really , in my mind , there are two lanes for cool political music that , and conscious rap . and i hate conscious rap . so the working title , to keep it in my head to not make conscious rap , was riot boi . and it just stuck . the point being that in order to be truly subversive , the music has to be , on some level , fun . i want republicans to play it , and be like , oh my god , that s cute , you know , and not realize what just happened , he said at the diner , with another endearing chuckle . at the studio , after a few minutes banter and careful grapefruit consumption , le f becomes quiet . he seems stressed about having to make a placeholder track for the show instead of using a real one . it s probably not helping that the illness he had been worrying about at the diner seems to have gotten worse . le f s video for koi but it might also have something to do with the fact that riot boi is about to put everything he is ampnbspartistically , politically , spiritually on the front line . yesterday , after an hour of more lighthearted conversation , he had casually mentioned that riot boi is dropping the same day as albums from justin bieber and one direction . he mentions it again today . yup , both of them , he says grimly . for that reason , he adds , he has no expectations for the impact it might have on his career . i m happy it s coming out . i m interested to see if people like anything . he s already released two singles , koi and rage , but the reception hasn t inspired confidence . my youtube ratio is kind of i don t know , he says . the video for koi came out two months ago and has just over , views . some people kind of like it ? i reminded him that earlier he had called himself an acquired taste . on friday afternoon before his cameo gallery gig , le f blows off his soundcheck at the last minute . apparently he s still sick , and his manager tells me he s conserving his energy . he finally arrives sometime just before midnight , after three or four acts have come and gone and his terrible xl labelmate empress of is just kicking off her penultimate set . are we readyyyyy ? cameo s backstage area ampnbspif you can call it that ampnbspis essentially a fluorescent lit storage closet . it s currently almost as sweltering as the main room , and made even smaller by too many people talking in a small space . it s too crowded even for its original purpose empress of s band don t even bother storing their gear when they finish , instead taking everything from the stage directly back out into their van . half the room looks a little too pleased to be here , but le f and his friends look perfectly at home , draped across the staircase like it s a stoop , laughing and poking fun at one another amidst the din . when he finally takes the stage wearing a massive knee length tunic open to his waist and the bucket hat from the other day , he clears his throat several times and wanders around for a few minutes . the cameo crowd has thinned out a bit , but nevertheless cheers loudly when he purrs into the mic , are we readyyyyy ? claps and horns pepper the air it s wut . without dancers or any specific choreography , he performs it like a karaoke warm up , hitting all the right syllables but obviously on autopilot . it s not long before his sickness gives way to the groove , though by the time he unleashes koi , words like chemistry and cunt drip off his tongue with his hallmark zeal . by lisa , a trap beat that s been warped like a bad vhs tape , he s in full rap posture , delivering raw lyrics like homie , you could die from a side eye with nina simone seriousness while maintaining his ball winning strut . the rest of the set , he s on firethe room has been tropically hot for hours , but le f still survives a few songs before repurposing his shirt as a headscarf and letting loose on grace , alek or naomi , dripping with sweat . the rest of the set , he s on fire , getting down in fans faces the crowd doesn t devolve into a full blown rave , but it hops until the very end . the backing track might not be perfect , but no one can tell the difference . this is the last song i m gonna put you through tonight , he assures the crowd , and goes right into rage , riot boi s first and most electrifying single . he closes his eyes and crouches at the edge of the stage during the singsong intro , but when the chorus bursts in ampnbsp rage ! ruh ruh ruh ruh rage ! rage ! ampnbsphe explodes to his feet , his energy doubling to meet the glass shattering , corrosive , saul williams style beat . the song relents here and there , returning to nursery rhyme melodies that gently explain he s just here to have a good time ampnbspbut of course , it s the fury of the choruses that really matters , the screams of frustration i ve been dealing with too much shit all these pricks is ignorant a mutant situation all his own . when he shouts , push me to the front ! pull me up ! give me what i want ! it s obvious he means it . edited by emily yoshida 