 on the evening of saturday , august th , , the volunteer fire department in prattsville , new york held its annual clambake . the event has not historically been associated with temperance , but that year , the festivities broke up early . prattsville is a sleepy town of fewer than , residents in the northern catskill mountains , about miles inland from the atlantic ocean . it s leaf peeping country , not tropical storm country . but a hurricane was moving up the east coast , and sunday s forecast called for rain . meteorologists had predicted that the catskills would get a peripheral spray , rather than the storm s brunt , which was slated for new york city and long island . still , tom olson , who was then fire chief , intended to be ready . in his late s , with an average build and short , dark hair flecked with gray , olson has lived in prattsville all his life . soft spoken almost to the point of shyness , he delivers mail for a living , and cannot help but know most everyone in town . until olson primarily associated flooding with cold weather . when he was young , the schoharie creek a gentle tributary of the mohawk river that runs along main street , past the firehouse used to jam with ice , forcing water onto the road . on such occasions , the fire department had often helped pump out waterlogged basements . he suspected that sunday might be similar . olson woke around am at his home in the hills above town . he got in his dodge ram pickup , a model that would not survive the day , and drove down to the station , where he monitored the creek . rain fell hard and warm through the humid air . though he felt no panic , at am , he decided to man the firehouse , sounding its alarm to summon to duty roughly firefighters . as they arrived , he sent them on foot in crews of three and four to knock on the doors of homes he considered likely to flood . it might be wise , he thought , to suggest to people living in low lying areas that they take shelter at the firehouse . by noon , all of them were trappedpeople living in low lying areas of prattsville , however , weren t inclined to flee . to most , conditions that morning didn t appear likely to inflict damage worse than what they d seen many times before water in the basement , perhaps some flattening of the lawn . pamela young , who graduated from high school with olson , lived in the same house where as a child she had visited her grandparents , who moved there in . she saw no reason to drag her son and nephew both nine plus two dogs and a cat , out in a downpour . peggy and jim young , who were both in their s and who have no relation to pamela had spent the night before watching the weather channel , a favorite pastime . what they saw didn t much worry them . with their adult sons , brian and john , they used the morning to move items stored near ground level in their home and their store on main street to higher , seemingly flood safe locations . scott jackson , who lived with his four young children in a rented home across the street from the creek , was perhaps the least concerned of the bunch , spending the morning with coffee and tv . but by noon , all of them , together with perhaps several dozen others who lived and worked in downtown prattsville , were trapped on rooftops and on the upper floors of their homes , as floodwaters from hurricane irene , the ninth named storm of the hurricane season , submerged much of the town . tom olson , in the prattsville firehouse . over the course of hours that sunday , between and inches of rain fell on the schoharie valley roughly percent of the region s annual average . at their height , floodwaters on main street are thought to have measured perhaps six to eight feet deep . the us geological survey later estimated the schoharie creek s peak flow rate during the storm at , cubic feet per second percent larger than what fema had projected might occur during a year flood , and more than twice as large as the previous recorded high . set off by two creek overflows , the water surged suddenly , leaving little time to prepare or react . in late morning , it began spilling through the front doors of the firehouse . olson led the roughly people inside to the second floor . through main street , the water moved in a rust colored torrent , swallowing pavement and washing away cars and trailers , so that a goulash of hazardous debris roiled below the surface . the fire department , the town s sole emergency team , had neither the equipment nor the expertise for water rescue , and their evacuation efforts came to an abrupt halt . at a certain point , we had to stop , olson recalled . because now , we re putting our people in harm s way . young s home eventually tore loose from its foundation and began to disintegratetrapped on the second floor of the firehouse in an open , wood paneled room decorated with decades worth of trophies commemorating local parades , olson watched the water rise . his truck , which he d parked near the station , was likely already destroyed flooded beyond repair . prattsville had lost power . the radio olson had been using to communicate with greene county emergency services soon went down , too . his phone rang constantly . olson s neighbors were calling , and randy omerod , at the county emergency office , was calling olson . both men understood that there was nothing olson could do , but they saw no option but to follow protocol . i got a guy with four kids in a house , omerod told olson at one point . he s thinking about jumping . well , olson replied , exasperated , tell em don t jump ! not long after declining to leave her house , pamela young realized she d made a mistake . she called olson , her old classmate , on his cell . tommy , you gotta come get me , she said . again , olson was forced to demur . i had to tell her , listen , pam , i m sorry . i can t , olson said later . he made a pea pinching motion with his index finger and his thumb you feel about that big . young s home eventually tore loose from its foundation and began to disintegrate . when she felt the house shift , young led her son , joey , and her nephew , riley , onto the the flat roof of an addition , a distinct structure . by late afternoon , young said recently , she had called perhaps times . but emergency responders outside of prattsville seemed to be just as hobbled as they were in town . young was told that boats were coming , then that a helicopter was en route , and then that the helicopter wasn t coming , after all . later , she learned that the first boat she d heard about had capsized . during her last call that day , young asked what she might use , if necessary , as a raft . the dispatcher didn t know . just don t use a mattress , he said . an abandoned prattsville home , destroyed by hurricane irene . in , the national academy of sciences published a report on the state of weather observation in the us . observing weather and climate from the ground up a nationwide network of networks indicated that the nation s radar system remained the best in the world . advances of recent years in inexpensive atmospheric observation technology and fervent public demand for up to the minute forecasts had furthermore allowed thousands of players , including small businesses , fortune companies , and local and state agencies , to enter the field . nonetheless , the authors wrote , all was not well with atmospheric and related environmental observations . while the radar , satellites , and supercomputers used by national weather service meteorologists excelled at big picture projections , they could provide only limited , low resolution information about conditions on the ground in specific locations . at the surface level , data on things like rainfall , wind , and humidity was being collected from state to state in a chaotic , non standardized fashion , using a hodgepodge of poorly coordinated networks . the report held a variety of negative implications for research scientists , but it also carried an urgent message . the us was ill prepared to track weather on the mesoscale systems that range from the size of a small city to an average midwestern state precisely the scale on which extreme weather events , like hurricane irene , occur . recent meteorological patterns make that fact disquieting . in august , shortly after a hour louisiana rain caused flooding that destroyed more than , homes and killed at least nine people , climatewire noted that in the past year alone , catastrophic rain events characterized as once in year or even once in , year events have flooded west virginia , texas , oklahoma , south carolina . such events have become more common in recent decades a spike consistent with human caused climate change , complete with rising temperatures that increase atmospheric water vapor , producing intensified rainfall . in the last years , extreme rainfall in the northeastern united states has increased by about percent , more than any other region of the country . according to a recent study published by the american meteorological society , new york is among the states most economically vulnerable to the adverse effects of weather variability . ten days after hurricane irene , tropical storm lee , a lesser cyclone , hit new york . together , the storms inflicted more than billion worth of damage statewide and left people dead . to date , in the history of new york , only the terrorist attacks of september th , rival the storms for recovery costs . the storms provided a timely , if unpleasant impetus for new york to apply the findings of the nas report , which had gone largely unheeded at the state level . the authors of the report recommended a nationwide web of interlinked state networks , each comprised of surface level observation stations the titular network of networks . in theory , such a system would fill the informational gaps left by top down apparatus , like satellites , and those unaccounted for by existing surface level stations . the state university of new york at albany has one of the largest concentrations of weather research scientists in the country . in the months after irene , chris thorncroft , who chairs albany s department of atmospheric and environmental sciences , and other scientists at the university , took the first steps toward the adoption of an observation system that might mitigate the ravages of future storms . known as a mesonet , it was modeled after one in oklahoma , which had enabled industry there to protect assets from oncoming storms , and helped public safety workers to remove residents from the paths of tornadoes . the new york state mesonet , which thorncroft now oversees , is funded by a million fema grant . comprised of observation towers , densely spaced at no more than miles apart , the new network will make data transmissions every five minutes to a wide range of meteorologists , emergency managers , and private sector partners . when it s complete , new york s statewide weather network will be the most advanced in the country uniquely well suited to respond to the sorts of extreme events associated with climate change . currently under construction , it is scheduled to be fully operational by the end of the year . a map of flood zones hanging in the the new york state mesonet command center in suny s albany campus . for the average smartphone user , the ready accessibility of forecasts understates the mysteries they seek to address . a canceler of ballgames and planner of picnics , modern meteorology is a workaday brand of divination a wholly practical magic . during the th century , our understanding of our relationship to nature was substantially more fraught . the publication of charles darwin s on the origin of species , in , was followed two years later by england s first official weather forecasts , published daily in the london times . often surprisingly accurate , they were derived , like today s forecasts , from a great mass of data measurements of temperature , wind , barometric pressure , and rainfall much of it culled from the logbooks of naval captains and explorers . the resultant predictions often aimed to reduce the risk of death at sea . but many found them upsetting a source of existential angst . in their attempt to prophesy the future , weather forecasts could seem to spring from the same heretical abandon that had induced darwin to probe the role of god in the makeup of the past . the man largely responsible for those forecasts was robert fitzroy , an aristocrat and scientist who , years earlier , had captained darwin s ship on the journey that would produce the voyage of the beagle . even fitzroy , however , struggled with the tension between science and faith . an intensely religious man , he doubted any theory contradicting the bible . he once suggested that the dinosaurs , having been too ungainly for noah s ark , must have died off in the deluge . as journalist cynthia barnett notes in rain a natural and cultural history , at the time , forecasting was widely considered an immoral pseudo science . the british press sometimes equated it with astrology , and in the s , england enacted a ban on public forecasts , ostensibly to defend against inaccurate predictions . darker motives were also at work , barnett writes . for one , the large ship salvage companies of cornwall and devon complained to parliament that the forecasts were putting them out of business . forecasting was widely considered an immoral pseudo science . if meteorology seemed to many victorians perhaps vaguely redolent of witchcraft , the obsessive measurement taking that underlay the nascent science nonetheless had an estimable pedigree . the first written reference to a rain gauge can be found in the writings of the hindu philosopher and statesman kautilya , circa bc . king sejong the great , who ruled korea from to , demanded that even his most far flung villages make use of a more advanced gauge to report back to him on rainfall . thomas jefferson also put great stock in his store of weathervanes , thermometers , and rain gauges . in philadelphia , shortly after the continental congress adopted his declaration of independence , he found time to stop off at sparhawk s apothecary , purchasing a barometer to add to his collection . in the weather experiment , an account of the birth of modern forecasting , peter moore writes of the georgian era , for many who believed that nature , after the bible , was god s second book , the quest to understand the natural world , to peek into the celestial machine , became a spiritual experience . a careful eye and inquisitive mind might bring them , for a moment , closer to god . and yet , even the most devoted atmospheric observers of the time considered weather s operation essentially mysterious beyond human reckoning . the tradition endures . in , wildfires swallowed more than . million texas acres during a long drought , destroying hundreds of homes and burning up crops and businesses . governor rick perry , who was at the time contemplating the white house , appealed to god i , rick perry , governor of texas , under the authority vested in me by the constitution of the state of texas , do hereby proclaim the three day period from friday , april , , to sunday , april , , as days of prayer for rain in the state of texas . chris thorncroft , chair of albany s department of atmospheric and environmental sciences . by the time hurricane irene reached the us , meteorologists at the national hurricane center in miami had been tracking the storm for weeks . using satellites , radar , and complex multivariable equations executed by powerful computers , they followed it from its origins , on the west african coast . while it remained hundreds of miles away from the eastern seaboard , they could predict its movements with fairly good accuracy . but once irene arrived , meteorologists were unable to judge how conditions differed from minute to minute , or from county to county . in new york , the national weather service was relying on ground level data from a mere observation stations . most were at airports , and did not accurately represent the state s varied weather or topography . transmitting measurements only once an hour , they also failed to provide information in sufficient quality or quantity . while irene bore down , new york was like a kingdom with farsighted lookouts on the ramparts , but no way of keeping track of invaders who managed to breach the castle gates . as the storm laid siege , the intelligence available to emergency managers a broad category including local firefighters , state officials overseeing road and bridge closures , and federal disaster relief czars was full of holes , making the hurricane s assault impossible to analyze holistically in real time . as the storm laid siege , the intelligence available to emergency managers was full of holesa major part of the trouble arose from the highly localized character of extreme weather even within one storm , conditions can vary vastly . irene s center , which passed through brooklyn and manhattan where subways had been closed and pantries stocked was relatively calm . its strongest winds blew to the east , bringing down trees and electrical lines on long island . irene s most damaging effects , however , came from rain , which concentrated in bands on the storm s western flank , over the catskills , vermont , and northern new hampshire . curtis marshall is the program director for the national mesonet program at the national weather service a sporadically connected network of state based programs established after the publication of the nas report . he is also one of the principal authors of observing weather and climate from the ground up . marshall told me , our capabilities for observation have not kept up with our capabilities for forecasting . in effect , the basics have often been neglected we have sophisticated models capable of providing forecasts for short term , high impact events , but the results of your calculations are only as good as the observations you feed into them . we knew that it was raining , thorncroft said of the storms . but we did not know how much it was raining , or exactly where rain was falling . we didn t know , until after the fact , that records were being broken . in the early s , when ken crawford , who was then head meteorologist at the norman , oklahoma office of the national weather service , began thinking about weaknesses in the state s system , he noticed similar deficiencies . he felt vexed , especially , by a number of recent severe floods , about which , due to a lack of data , almost nothing meaningful could be said . oklahoma relied on stations consisting of little more than a stick stuck into a rain gauge . around that time , in a meeting with several japanese meteorologists , crawford , who is considered the father of the mesonet , was shown a glossy plan for an island wide system of automated observation stations . the japanese scientists wanted to see oklahoma s equivalent . crawford felt embarrassed . his state relied on stations consisting of little more than a stick stuck into a rain gauge , he would later recall . readings were taken manually , often by elderly volunteers who made frequent typographical errors . but that meeting became the seed from which the original mesonet grew . by the mid s , crawford had developed a system not dissimilar from the one the japanese scientists showed him , but funding lagged and the network didn t go live until . since then , it has repeatedly proven its merit . in may , as several tornadoes moved through central oklahoma , the mesonet was used to divert a law enforcement caravan when forecasters determined that a cyclone would cross the highway on which the vehicles were traveling . during the same set of storms , about miles away , an emergency manager drew on mesonet data to evacuate a large mall minutes before it was destroyed . late last year , as heavy rains caused historic overflows of the grand river , mesonet measurements helped emergency managers to issue county specific evacuation warnings in advance of devastating floods . but financing for a full mesonet system remains out of reach for most states . in new york , fema s contribution covers only construction . the network s operating budget will rely on specialized services offered to the private sector for a fee . agricultural clients will receive reports tailored to mitigate damage from insects and disease , and others to optimize spraying , irrigation , frost protection , planting , and harvesting . the mesonet will supply energy producers with improved wind and solar data , as well as customized short term forecasts designed to limit profit loss during extreme weather events . additional revenue is likely to come from freight and travel related industries . to a significant degree , it is new york s sensitivity to erratic weather that will provide the mesonet s lifeblood . the office of emergency management center in albany , new york the new york state mesonet command center is located below ground , in a building on the suny albany campus . a visitor there might well be treated to a quip about the fact that the office , which is devoted to the observation of outdoor phenomena , has no windows . it can be reached through the tunnels that snake below campus , affording students and faculty shelter from inclement weather . i met chris thorncroft there on a warm , humid day in july . he wore a navy polo shirt untucked over brown khakis , frameless ovular glasses , and short gray hair . on one wall of an open , low ceilinged room , a large flat screen displayed panels in a seven by seven grid . each panel showed a feed from a camera affixed to a mesonet tower somewhere in the state westmoreland , wallkill , whiteface mountain , camden , morrisville , elmira , cold brook . it was an incomplete array . as of minutes earlier , thorncroft said , sites had been completed . finished towers begin broadcasting readings immediately . basic mesonet data is available free to the public online , and also gets transmitted directly to the new york state office of emergency management and the national weather service , whose forecasts trickle down to newscasters , weather apps , and the like . thorncroft has been working on a method for predicting , from the moment a system leaves the african coast , whether it will become a hurricanethorncroft examined another flat screen , showing a radar image of an approaching storm , and we set off for a tower in schaghticoke , about miles away . the schaghticoke tower stands on property occupied by the town s highway department . by the time we arrived , the storm had , too , and we waited out the rain in thorncroft s car . deep puddles formed in the dirt parking lot and lightning broke through the late afternoon sky , which was dark gray , urgent with swift clouds . thorncroft pointed to shreds of ashen vapor that seemed to be tearing away from one another , leaving wisps between them . when you see that sort of thing , he said , you know that there s a lot of stirred up energy in the atmosphere an ambient upset that tends to resolve itself in rain . thorncroft speaks with a clipped but genial frankness common to many people who are british and also to many people who are very good at math . thorncroft is both . his research focuses primarily on the relationship between atlantic hurricanes and the west african low pressure systems from which roughly percent of them develop . hurricane irene began as such a system . for some time , thorncroft has been working on a method for predicting , from the moment a system leaves the african coast , whether it will become a hurricane . he regards the solution to the problem as his holy grail . during a break in the storm , we walked past mounds of mulch and soil to where the tower stood , protected by wire fencing , on a patch of grass . thirty feet tall and made of bright metal , its slender frame extended arms and instruments at intervals , like a bird feeder offering various meals to different species . the meteorologists i spoke with were all quick to point out that the mesonet will work in concert with extant stations , rather than replace them . the factor by which the new network increases observational capacity , however , suggests the depth of the old one s inadequacy . a mesonet tower . the mesonet s improvements take two basic forms . the first is an entirely new kind of vertical profiling technology , present at of the towers . though its presentation is unglamorous it s a box , thorncroft says , it looks like a mailbox . thorncroft calls it a game changer . using an electromagnetic beam , the box plumbs the ether to take a kind of atmospheric core sample six miles high . each sample will show layers of temperature , humidity , and wind activity a profile of conditions in flux through elevation that represent statistical mana to meteorologists on the ground . the control of our weather is coming from above , thorncroft said . cyclones , anticyclones , fronts these exist up into the atmosphere . in order to understand how they re evolving , you need to know what is happening up there . this is particularly true for near term , extreme weather forecasts . up until now , new york has relied on just three sites for atmospheric profiles . launches in long island , buffalo , and albany send up high altitude weather balloons twice daily . but their transmissions are relatively few , somewhat irregular , and they account for only a small portion of the state . if you want to know if the next few days are going to be sunny or stormy , a coarser resolution balloon based network will give you the gist of the information you need to make a forecast , curtis marshall told me . but if you want to know over the next hours if a hurricane or a squall line is going to impact a locality or region , you need to have to have this finer resolution observational data . he continued , how levels of wind and moisture change with height in the atmosphere that tells you the most about how these smaller scale systems will evolve in time , where they will go and what they will do . it s like looking out the window every five minutes at places around the state . it s not clear whether enhanced sites will be sufficient to capture atmospheric happenings statewide , but thorncroft is optimistic . once you make a profile of a site , that information gets shifted downstream it s in a model . when you re taking a profile every five minutes , that will give you a very accurate picture of the whole state , not just of the sites . here , the distance between observation and forecast can shrink , eliminating the dizzyingly complex , variable rich intermediary equations used for longer term predictions . the resultant practice is called nowcasting , and can be useful to monitor and warn for the erratic , highly localized behavior of extreme weather . when you know how the weather has been evolving in the last hour , you can project what s going to happen in the next hour , thorncroft said . the mesonet s second major improvement lies simply in the volume , density , and quality of its uptake . each tower transmits basic measurements including rainfall , air temperature , wind speed , wind direction , surface pressure , and humidity . in cold weather , they will register the time and location at which falling water turns from freezing rain to snow , from sleet to hail . it s like looking out the window every five minutes at places around the state , thorncroft said . the sites also collect data that has been largely neglected , but which is essential to anticipating the kind of flooding precipitated by the storms soil moisture and temperature , radiation , snowpack . in addition to aiding forecasters and other decision makers in moments of crisis , both vertical profiling sites and standard mesonet towers will supply data to longer term forecasting models that fall under the canopy of numerical weather prediction . the province of the aforementioned horrifyingly complicated algorithms , numerical weather prediction addresses a range of time scales , from three days out to the vast arcs of climatic change . ampnbspnaturally , each data point , equation , model , and prediction informs myriad others . to understand that an atlantic hurricane began as a series of weak rain showers in west africa requires one kind of knowledge , predicting that storm s course over a five day period another . to say how much it has been raining and for how long in a rural county in upstate new york to know that the soil there is saturated and that soon , the rivers will flood other kinds still . entrance to the the new york state office of emergency management center . the new york state office of emergency management stands in a gray , labyrinthine office park not far from the mesonet command center , in albany . it too occupies subterranean quarters a cold war era bunker a la dr . strangelove , constructed to function as a temporary state government base of operations in the event of nuclear attack . inside , the oem s halls are decorated with framed photographs commemorating disasters both irrefutably man made and ostensibly natural the sunrise wildfire , on long island wreckage from september th and from the crash of twa flight destruction wrought by hurricane irene and hurricane sandy and tropical storm lee . one afternoon this summer , kevin wisely , the director of the oem , led me through the office s emergency operations center . during an event that requires maximal state level response a full activation the center bustles with representatives from agencies , including the department of environmental conservation , the department of transportation , the office of fire prevention and control , and the national weather service . during my visit , the center was dormant cool , dim , and empty . cnn , msnbc , and the weather channel flickered silently from wall mounted flat screens . it s difficult to summarize the activity of the oem , but wisely , a bald and solidly built man with the warm , soldierly manner of a good hearted state trooper , tried to sketch out the general order of operations information flows up , beginning with emergency managers and local executives in towns and villages , while resources , or assets , and direction move down from centralized agencies , in accordance with received intelligence . hurricane irene was what the oem calls a notice event one the state specifically anticipated . assets were mustered well before landfall sandbagging units and swiftwater rescue teams , light towers , generators , high axle vehicles , ready to eat meals , and other items . but they were deployed largely in and around the new york metropolitan area , where forecasters had predicted that the storm would land its heaviest blows . by the time the oem had received enough information to establish a reasonably complete picture of statewide conditions , travel had become difficult . long island fire crews that needed to be transferred to the catskills and the adirondacks were hampered by sinkholes . asphalt had torn away from roadbeds . long stretches of the new york thruway were closed . in prattsville , tom olson was told that he d have to wait for assistance to arrive from newburgh , more than miles away dozens of other emergency managers faced similar predicaments . rescue teams did not reach prattsville until late afternoon , when floodwaters had already largely receded . kevin wisely , director of oem . it s impossible to say with certainty how upstate new york might fare if a hurricane were to pass through next year , with the mesonet in place . every storm is different , and the chaos of extreme weather does not permit perfect planning . but by the end of , the informational gaps that plagued emergency response in will have been substantially closed . mesonet towers will equip the oem with a continually updated view of meteorological goings on statewide , so that if conditions worsen suddenly , emergency managers will know exactly when and where . mesonet intelligence should largely eliminate the sort of paralysis that occurred during the storms . to make optimal use of mesonet data , in august , governor andrew cuomo introduced new york responds , a . million initiative to supplant the patchwork of county specific emergency management software then in use with a statewide network . the new software integrates real time measurements from mesonet stations plus forecasts and models created by the national weather service from the raw data with incident reports , resource requests , and status updates from emergency managers . officials at every level can access a common operating snapshot power outages , reports on infrastructure , traffic cameras . to make emergency response nimbler , the oem has established nine supply depots across the state , whose inventories can be augmented in advance of storms . a true nationwide network of networks would provide something like a comprehensive vision of the hyper localthe advantages of the new york state mesonet and the emergency infrastructure it informs are nonetheless limited . neighboring states , visited by weather that has passed through new york , will benefit from the x rays the mesonet provides . for now , though , those neighbors have nothing analogous to offer . how many other states ultimately participate in a system like the one described in the nas report will likely depend on the benefits , humanitarian and financial , that new york derives from chris thorncroft s mesonet . a true nationwide network of networks would provide something like a comprehensive vision of the hyper local a technical apotheosis of the methods applied by sejong the great , thomas jefferson , and robert fitzroy , enabling accurate nowcasting across the country . such a system would leave many meteorological questions unanswered , like which west african low pressure systems will become hurricanes thorncroft s holy grail but it would also vastly improve the accuracy of mathematical models used to sketch global patterns , like the the progress of climate change . it s odd to consider that our understanding of historical atmospheric shifts depends on the careful tallying of minutiae . odder still to think that despite leaps in technological and analytical wisdom , parsing the relationship between humans and nature has become , if anything , more complicated . although scientists detect the force of climate change in an increasing number of extreme weather events , cynthia barnett writes , they can t tie the tragedy of any particular deluge or drought to human caused climate change . as one scientist told her , rainfall and other weather events happening today are happening in a different climate than one hundred years ago , and so they are behaving differently than they would have a hundred years ago . the question is how much . over time , the new york state mesonet will help to begin answering that question . but for many , a peek into the celestial machine now involves a reckoning with the startling power of our species . where weather wonks of centuries past sought in rain gauges and barometers something like a brush with divinity , in the pointillism that emerges from today s observation stations , we hunt , strangely , for traces of ourselves . david rikard , inside his home office . his home which previously sat on the same plat was destroyed by irene . in the aftermath of hurricane irene , governor cuomo declared prattsville one of the state s hardest hit communities . each of its businesses was damaged or destroyed . eleven homes collapsed . fifteen more were condemned . one hundred houses were so wrecked as to be unlivable without substantial rehabilitation . and yet , prattsville was lucky . by late afternoon on the day of the storm , tom olson and his crew were able to walk out the front door of the firehouse . with the help of an out of town rescue team , pamela young and her son and nephew plus the two dogs and a cat made it safely to a neighbor s house . the second storm , lee , mostly passed the town by . it escaped fatalities spring valley , new scotland , altona , and other new york towns did not . those who endured the storm in prattsville are inclined to divide their lives into two epochs before the flood , and after . i visited the town on a bright , cloudless day in june . at first , it seemed a kind of bucolic ideal in miniature . crisp american flags hung from telephone poles downtown and gnome sized lilies grew from the banks of the schoharie creek , which was running low and clear . atop a distant green hill , a red tractor stood parked beside a neat , white homestead . amid this rural idyll , the abandoned homes on main street had an eerie presence . a red x still marked the storm door of the small , green house where scott jackson distracted his children with board games upstairs as the water rose to five feet in his living room . ampnbspnearby , boards obscured the windows of a home that might have once been purple or periwinkle , its low front porch had warped with rot , admitting intrusions of tall grass . across the street , a paneless picture window looked into what had been a living room an upright piano stood at an odd angle in the dark beside an overturned couch and an overturned swivel chair and a folded stroller , all covered in dust . peggy young indicates how high the water had risen inside her home . david rikard , a lawyer , judge , and a member of the fire department , told me that the day after the storm had been very much like this one , only hotter . rikard had spent much of it on the second floor of the stationhouse with tom olson . his home was among those condemned and demolished after the storm his daughter , anastasia , had escaped from an upstairs window with the help of a water rescue team . a man of sardonic wit and robust physique , rikard had rebuilt on the same site and reestablished his practice in a first floor home office , where we spoke as afternoon bled into evening . those blue , hot , cloudless skies , he remembered . that heat . that feeling of steam coming off everything . riverbottom mud , sticky , rank , and black , had coated much of the town . volunteers , and representatives from state and federal agencies thronged main street . overhead , helicopters beat the air . things felt surreal at that point , rikard continued . it reminded me of apocalypse now . pamela young wasn t in town on the day of my visit . she still owns the land where her grandparents once lived , but their house had been torn down . she has not rebuilt there . instead , she settled closer to albany , where she works . househunting , a broker had shown her an attractive home in a country setting . around back , a small stream cut through the yard . right away , i said , no , young told me recently . the broker was surprised the stream didn t seem to her remotely threatening . i told her , i ve already seen how powerful water is , young said . it s unimaginable . and the funny thing is , after the storm happened , you would drive a couple of miles out of town , and it was like nothing . and then you come to our town , and it s like someone dropped a bomb and flew away . it s bizarre . it s just bizarre what can happen . peggy and jim young had rebuilt on main street , too , though neither their store nor their home had been as badly damaged as rikard s house . peggy is slim and blonde , with light eyes . she and i sat on patio furniture upstairs at young s agway and hardware , a few hours before closing time . taxidermied specimens of grizzly and kodiak stood close by , as did a display of casual women s wear . peggy and her family had spent most of the storm on the roof of a sturdy outdoor shed , besieged by surging water . for hours that day , they believed they would die . talking about it , peggy s eyes well up . she and her husband no longer watch the weather channel . for them , storm footage can cause an unpleasant flashback effect . besides , they are skeptical of forecasts . editor michael zelenko