 earlier this year , japan s space agency suffered a major blow when its new x ray astronomy satellite , known as hitomi , broke apart in space just one month after the vehicle had launched . but before the spacecraft met its premature demise , it was able to squeeze in a bit of valuable science . by observing x ray emissions coming from a cluster of galaxies million light years away , hitomi measured just how fast interstellar gases moved between the galaxies within the cluster . the gas is not as turbulent as the researchers expectedthe measurements defied some scientists expectations the gas is moving at about miles kilometers per second , according to ampnbspa new study published today in nature . that s not as turbulent as the researchers expected , since galaxies within the cluster are moving much faster , at thousands of miles per second . it s an interesting finding , but perhaps the most valuable aspect of this study is that it hints at all the science that the spacecraft could have done . hitomi s loss was painful for the astronomy community , as it was supposed to tell us more about the structure of the universe by observing turbulent galaxy clusters and high energy black holes . it was very exciting to get the science , but it s devastating to lose the spacecraft , study author andrew fabian , director of the institute of astronomy at the university of cambridge , told the verge . it feels like a door was opened and we can see through it and then immediately the door is slammed shut . but today s study could serve as a good advertisement for sending up another hitomi like spacecraft to fill the void the satellite left behind . the death of hitomihitomi , which translates to pupil of the eye , launched from the tanegashima space center in japan on february th . the satellite was transported into orbit by one of jaxa s h iia rockets , but the spacecraft wasn t functional for very long . the problem started with a glitchthe problem started with a glitch . hitomi had two ways to determine its position in space a star tracker , which measures the positions of stars , and a sensor that measures the spacecraft s inertia . for some reason , the latter sensor , known as the inertial reference unit iru , detected that hitomi had started to roll slowly , even though that wasn t the case . it wasn t rotating at all . normally if the star tracker and iru data don t match up , the spacecraft is supposed to default to whatever the star tracker is saying . but at this point , the star tracker had been turned off and wasn t capturing any data . an artistic rendering of the hitomi spacecraft . jaxa based on the iru data , hitomi tried to counteract this non existent spin by rotating in the opposite direction . that actually initiated a spin , which wasn t supposed to occur . as the rotation got worse , the satellite tried to go into a type of safety mode , where it uses rocket thrusters to stabilize itself and point its solar panels at the sun . how those thrusters fire depends on the position of the spacecraft s center of gravity . but one of hitomi s instruments had been extended , changing the overall shape of the spacecraft and moving its center of gravity . the flight controllers hadn t updated the spacecraft s knowledge of this new shape , so the thrusters fired in the wrong direction . this spun the spacecraft even faster . it resulted in a positive feedback situation where it kept on getting worse and the rocket motors kept firing until essentially the whole spacecraft was spinning about once every five seconds , said fabian . eventually that caused the satellite to break apart its solar panels ripped away , cutting off hitomi s source of power . on march th , ampnbspjaxa announced that it had lost communication and wasn t able to get it back . what a tragedy that was , said jonathan mcdowell , an astrophysicist working at the harvard smithsonian center for astrophysics , who was not involved in the study . and really , really unfortunate , and very much human error i m afraid . they had inadequate planning for likely failure modes . observing perseusprior to the failure , hitomi had been looking at x ray emissions from the perseus cluster specifically those coming from the hot gases that lie between the cluster s galaxies . most of the gas in the universe is found between galaxies , but the gases in clusters are particularly hot . clusters are thought to contain a lot of dark matter a mysterious type of material that doesn t reflect or emit light but has a gravitational pull . the dark matter causes compression of the gas between the galaxies and heating of that gas so it ends up at a temperature of million degrees kelvin , said fabian . the gas in clusters is also particularly dense , leading to constant collisions that emit x rays . that movement was thought to be particularly messy . at the center of galaxy clusters is a supermassive black hole , which releases a ton of energy that interacts with the gases in the cluster . this interaction , known as black hole feedback , helps keep the gases hot by churning them around . originally , it was thought to be a very turbulent process , but today s study shows that chaos to be a little less chaotic than expected . the fact that we see a relatively quiet or low velocity is telling us something about how violent this feedback process is , said fabian . the part of the perseus cluster viewed by hitomi . hitomi collaboration jaxa , nasa , esa , sron , csa today s study also shows the incredible amount of precision of hitomi s soft x ray spectrometer , which measured the x ray emissions . the researchers argue that their measurements of gas speed could vary by about miles kilometers per second . that makes their measurements pretty spot on . it demonstrates the potential of this kind of instrument , said fabian . it really can perform in space and make these precision measurements . fabian hopes that such precise measurements will inspire scientists to create another hitomi with a soft x ray spectrometer sooner rather than later . the european space agency is planning on launching a much larger spectrometer in with its athena spacecraft . and other satellites , like the chandra and xmm newton telescopes , can do high resolution x ray mapping , but they can t get the same kind of precise measurements of galaxy clusters that hitomi could capture . there s been no instrument that has a precision within a factor of to close to that of that hitomi , said fabian . new horizons mission extended after pluto flyby