 describing the path of technological progress , marcelo rinesi likes to point out an early th century drawing by a paranoid schizophrenic welsh man named james tilly matthews . the sketch , reproduced in a book called illustrations of madness , is considered to be one of the first published pictures by a mental patient . it depicts a so called influence machine , a term psychiatrists borrowed from the study of static electricity to ampnbspdescribe the elaborate mechanical contraptions drawn by schizophrenics to explain their delusions . the devices and the eerie common way that patients described them appeared to derive from the industrial revolution and humans unsteady relationship with the inanimate . matthews dubbed his own influence machine the air loom . the gas powered instrument was a device that , according to matthews , communicated with a magnet planted inside his brain . it would allow french agents to see into his thoughts and control him from afar using radio waves and other then mystical technology . it s tragic , but it s also very funny because it s basically google and wi fi , rinesi says . for him , it was a paranoid delusion . but he was describing what , for us , is daily life . technology companies don t need to pry into our brains to exploit us , rinesi says they have built windows into them , and those windows are open all the time . james tilly matthews air loom influence machine , depicted in illusions of madness . rinesi , a data intelligence analyst who lives in buenos aires , argentina , splits his time between freelance work and his role as chief technology officer for the institute for ethics and emerging technologies ieet . the non profit organization , founded in by philosopher nick bostrom and bioethicist james j . hughes , believes that technology can positively impact society only if it is evenly distributed and does not manipulate or exploit its users . lately , the ieet and rinesi have focused on the ampnbspongoing volkswagen emissions scandal . that auto software would help lie to regulators , and hide itself from car owners , is a revelation so enormous its betrayal of customers so profound that it threatens to bring down the largest automaker in the world . it s also a sign of the times we live in . rinesi says the technology industry of today has created an apparatus through which corporations can exploit consumers , thwart regulation , and maximize profit with minimal repercussions . that apparatus is founded on the consumer s decision to willfully ignore the risks of mostly free technologies , and the government s failure to regulate them on our behalf . rinesi says paranoia about the world s most powerful companies and their products is intrinsic to our ever evolving relationship with technology . but now the suspicions are moving from the paranoid to the reasonable . suspicions are moving from the paranoid to the reasonable if the last two decades have been about gifting the world technological progress in the form of computers , smartphones , and connectivity , the coming years will be about using the computer s ubiquity to connect everything else in the world . the internet of things iot is a phrase referencing a future where every object , from cars and buildings to toasters and thermostats , communicate to help us live better lives . we ll save money , the theory goes , because efficiency and optimization will be automated . we ll save resources because our infrastructure will be algorithmically driven . we may even find ourselves healthier , as more data is collected and funneled into the health care system to inform technologies designed to detect or prevent illnesses . but the downside is that we re opening up our entire physical infrastructure to the ambiguities of modern technology , which loans us products and possibilities at the expense of consumer protection . the internet of things could be a great platform to help us be smarter , safer , and so on . it s not going to be like that , rinesi says . in practice , it s going to be a platform for advertising and user tracking and charging you as much as they can for a coffee . just as google hands us an email account and the entire planet s knowledge in searchable format , and facebook offers us the ability to connect with billions of people , the real world may find itself filled with the same trade offs we ve opted into online as a matter of participating in modern society . keurig gave it a shot , ignorant to the potential aftermaththink keurig , which tried to ape the printer and ink business models of companies like hp to prevent customers of its . brewer from using third party coffee cups to brew their drinks . the company used special scanning software that would only allow the brewer to use keurig products . consumer backlash , falling sales , and lawsuits ampnbspforced a retreat . but keurig gave it a shot , ignorant to the potential aftermath . that type of behavior sets the standard for what we may expect in the future , as more companies begin tapping into the control offered by modern software to promote their own products , collect more data , and find ways around regulations . rinesi used the volkswagen scandal as a jumping off point to rearticulate his concerns in a ampnbsppost for the ieet about how the iot could give rise to machines with ulterior motives . is your self driving car deliberately slowing down to give priority to the higher priced models ? is your green a c really less efficient with a thermostat from a different company , or is it just not trying as hard ? and your tv is supposed to only use its camera to follow your gestural commands , but it s a bit suspicious how it always offers disney downloads when your children are sitting in front of it . in other words , as the march of technological progress fuses software with the physical world , the types of regulatory oversight and protection afforded to physical industries will falter in the face of software that can be manipulated . rinesi says the challenge for our legal framework is that it s based on a mechanical world , not one in which objects get their software updated with new lies every time regulatory bodies come up with a new test . the opportunity to design physical objects that operate as much against us as they do by our command will not be limited to singular bad actors . technology today has become a complex web of competing interests , forced compromises , and wary partnerships . apple and samsung compete fiercely on a smartphone s end product , but the former buys components from the latter out of necessity . could a ampnbspsamsung made iphone chip result in purposefully poorer battery life than one made by apple s other partner tsmc ? it s a conceivable situation , for both smartphones and cars if , say , mercedes begins supplying ford with adaptive cruise control software that s less fuel efficient in a focus than it is in an s class . our physical infrastructure , cars are part of it , are built assumed that they are stable , work well , and we understand them , rinesi says . as soon you marry an object to the world of computers , however , you insert ambiguity , he adds . nobody knows the full stack any more . the circuit board of a second generation nest protect smoke detector it s so bad . in fact , it s certain companies don t know all the ways their product works , says colby moore , an r ampd security specialist at synack , which deploys teams of hackers to purposefully break through cybersecurity systems to better improve them . until it breaks , they don t need to go look for it . moore says it s inconceivable for a smartphone or car manufacturer today to know everything about how their respective machines function . even within large organizations , individuals now have the leeway to betray the will of higher ups . volkswagen s us ceo michael horn said he was unaware of the mechanism inside the company s vehicles that let it cheat on emissions tests . instead , he blamed the implementation on a couple of software engineers . ampnbspwhether that remains true for volkswagen , it s a tacit admission that rogue employees anywhere could alter critical software to thwart regulations in the name of profit . it would be easier if these fears about technology were traceable to paranoia , says ian bogost , as it would imply a complex conspiracy . i d almost be better , he says . in reality , it s worst than that because it s so haphazard and random . bogost , a game designer and professor at georgia institute of technology who writes about technology for the atlantic , says there is reason to be deeply concerned that the tech sector is able to do what it pleases as it becomes more intertwined with the physical world . regulating the world of connected everythings a tipping point here is more about what are the appropriate ways to regulate the world of computational everythings , he says . in an atlantic piece titled the internet of things you don t really need , ampnbspbogost argued that the iot has been subsumed for now by the litany of kickstarter hungry startups that offer little value by connecting our cups and gas grills via bluetooth . the end goal , however , is a longer term ploy to ensure that whatever language physical objects speak in the future and the data they collect traces back to the same power brokers in the industry , the googles and microsofts and amazons of the world . if the last decade was one of making software require connectivity , the next will be one of making everything else require it , bogost wrote . why ? for silicon valley , the answer is clear to turn every industry into the computer industry . to make things talk to the computers in giant , secured , air conditioned warehouses owned by or hoping to be owned by a handful of big technology companies . this realm will be no more regulated than the world of computers and software , which bogost points out has enjoyed a lack of oversight as tech companies have replaced energy and financial institutions as some of the most powerful entities on the planet . the worry is not about whether we should put computers inside everything that will inevitably happen . it is rather about what companies will do with them and whether any regulatory body will be able to keep up . it s not really computers that are the problem . it s the particular kind of corporate action , bogost says of the willingness to act first and ask forgiveness later . it s the now publicly retired move fast and break things philosophy of companies like facebook that would sooner emotionally manipulate hundreds of thousands of users via its news feed , as it did last year in a controversial research study , than openly ask them permission to do so beforehand . facebook s , pound aquila drone beams connectivity from up to , feet in the air . can you imagine a civil engineering firm with a motto like move fast and break things ? bogost asks . it s not unreasonable to consider many of today s tech titans as infrastructure companies as much as they are software makers . google is developing self driving vehicles , and facebook is building internet delivering airplanes . meanwhile , uber is bending worldwide labor laws and transportation regulation to its will , and amazon is helping pave the way for a sky filled with drones . facebook s new motto , unveiled last year , is move fast with stable infrastructure . with the iot , the stance is similar . one thing that we absolutely believe is that though that we hear the conversation around policy , we don t want policy to get in the way of technological innovation to solve some of these challenging problems , says rose schooner , intel s chief strategist for the iot . we don t want policy to get in the way of innovation . bogost says there may be a movement afoot among governments to reclaim regulatory power . it s seen in ampnbspeurope s push back against google in both antitrust and privacy matters and bolstered by efforts in the us to ampnbspreel in potential labor abuses in the sharing economy . the volkswagen incident , too , will have ripple effects , if only because of the reported financial devastation it will cause the car maker and the influence it will have on future emissions testing and corporate misconduct . rather than this amorphous , anonymous worry , it s an invitation to reflect on the fact that we do have infrastructures for that type of control , we used to employ them , he says . instead , we ve allowed the erosion of regulatory intervention in the tech sector , in part because it s easier to accept a rosy picture of the future than it is to warn about the risks . the tech sector is very much in support of that erosion , bogost adds . there is not much that can stop technology s absorption of the physical world . your next car , whether it s a volkswagen or a honda or a tesla , will look and feel like a motor vehicle . but it will contain more computers . in fact , it will have dozens of them , controlling nearly everything about the vehicle and , in due time , driving it for you as well . and those computers will operate thanks to software relying on protocols you ve never heard of , taking commands from algorithms you will never understand , and communicating in a language you don t speak . some of that software may not be in the best interest of you or society , and you will likely not know it s there . that is , until someone finds it . 