 i am the beginning of girl power . deal with it ! carrie fisher is not shy about princess leia s groundbreaking place in star wars and movie history . during yesterday s star wars the force awakens press panel in los angeles , moderated by mindy kaling , she and the cast and crew of new film naturally had to tiptoe around spoilers and plot details , even with the film s release less than two weeks away . but if there was one theme to the panel , it was carrie fisher handing the baton to a new generation of women , who are creating a stronger , more female driven version of the space opera saga than george lucas ever dreamed of . princess leia had a strange arc in the original trilogy . we were introduced to her as a strong leader that took no bullshit , but by the time return of the jedi rolled around the actress was forced to starve herself down to pounds to wear the infamous slave leia costume . she s recently mentioned being forced to lose weight for the force awakens as well , something co star mark hamill also reportedly had to contend with . recounting her time on the original films , fisher described how she was the only girl on the all boy s set . things are clearly different this time around , and fisher highlighted the strength of daisy ridley s rey as an example . she takes the physical power , and then i scream at the men until they pass out . daisy ridley and j . j . abrams . she transcends gender . she s going to speak to men and women , too . ridley , who was cast out of relative obscurity to take the starring role in the new film , said she did hope that her character becomes a symbol of empowerment much like princess leia had to an earlier generation , but stressed that focusing simply on gender roles is almost missing the point . rey doesn t have to be one thing to embody a woman in a film . and for me , she s not important because she s a woman . she s just important , ridley said . it just so happens that she s a woman . she transcends gender . she s going to speak to men and women , too . the diversity of the casting in the force awakens despite some fleeting moments of shameful internet idiocy has been a welcome step forward for a franchise that has historically struggled not only with gender roles , but with racial diversity . but ever since kathleen kennedy took charge as the new president of lucasfilm , she s repeatedly voiced the importance of having bigger , better roles for women in the star wars universe . felicity jones is playing the lead role in rogue one , for example , and according to the los angeles times , the company may also finally be finally backing up the talk behind the camera by hiring female writers and directors for some of the upcoming star wars spin offs . people want to see a more diverse reflection of society . but it was game of thrones gwendoline christie who has only appeared in the trailers in a chrome plated helmet and armor that provided the clearest reason for why changes like this are so overdue audiences want them . i think jj has been open about the fact that he wanted to respect the origins of the films and celebrate them , but to bring them into the modern day , and confirmation of that seemed to be to me in this amazing character of captain phasma , who is star wars first on screen female villain , she said to applause . this is a character who , so far , we have related to due to her choices , due to her character , and not due to the way she has been made in flesh . and conventionally , that has been how we have related to female characters . so this to me felt very progressive , and the response from the audience and the fans has been so celebratory , it makes me think that this is the kind of thing people want to see . people want to see a more diverse reflection of society . from the way she spoke about the character , it certainly sounded like christie will get a chance to take phasma past the end credits of the force awakens . without horribly ruining everything for everyone , i think it s interesting to see where my character may go , she teased , shortly after kennedy had referred to several of the actors on stage getting ready to head to london to begin shooting episode viii in january . kennedy tapped boyega on the shoulder when she made the comment , but the way the cast was seated , she may have meant oscar isaac and christie as well . take that as you will , spoiler fans . oscar isaac and gwendoline christie . it was almost impossible to avoid hints and plot details during sunday s panels , and the cast and crew often found themselves in an awkward position of having to talk about something that they really couldn t talk about . that secrecy is another hallmark of this new star wars era , one abrams has tried to uphold from the beginning . while we were working on the movie i realized how engaged with the fans and forthcoming lucasfilm had always been , and my nature to just keep things quiet was something i was certain we were going to have fights about , abrams said . but disney , to my shock , was arguing to not ruin , not reveal , not show every story beat . we have so few things that surprise us anymore when we walk into a movie . having the chance to go into a movie fresh , without having major twists or turns revealed ahead of time , isn t just uncommon in the era of overeager trailers and tweet heard round the world instant reactions it s almost impossible to achieve . we have so few things that surprise us anymore when we walk into a movie , kennedy added later . it s all told in the trailers it ends up online way in advance . i ve even had people say to me i don t want to read anything at all so they can get in the theater and actually have a pleasant surprise . the last time i went to see a movie that i didn t know anything about was boxing helena , isaac said , referring to jennifer lynch s film in which an obsessive surgeon removes the limbs of his ex lover so he can keep her in a box and prevent her from leaving him . make sure they know that does not happen , kennedy prodded . that doesn t happen , isaac said . no jar jar . no female limbs cutting . 