 last month , the american astronomical society s rd meeting featured the announcement of a few breakthroughs using the kepler space observatory , researchers had discovered a planet roughly the mass of earth orbiting a star beyond our solar system , and with the hubble telescope they had provided the first detailed look at the weather of a super earth ampmdash a planet larger than ours but smaller than neptune ampmdash in our galactic neighborhood . astronomers found that gj b , like much of the earth on any given day , is cloudy . these similarities to earth are tantalizing . but despite them , these planets respective solar systems look nothing like our own . rather than circling a big , hot , yellow sun like ours , they spin around small , cool , red stars called red dwarfs . kind of like krypton . although not visible to the naked eye from earth , these red dwarfs are the most populous stars in the milky way . and over the last year , a flurry of research has shown that red dwarf stars are also the best targets in the search for exoplanets that might support life . right now the chances that a red dwarf star has a planet orbiting in its habitable zone , an astronomical goldilocks area neither too hot nor too cold for liquid water , are better than for a star like our sun . research also suggests that these planets and maybe life on them behave in ways that , from our earth centric view , seem bizarre . the first planet on which we ll be able to discover signs of life is most likely going to be orbiting a red dwarf , says courtney dressing , an astronomy graduate student at harvard . dressing and her advisor david charbonneau kicked off the series of recent discoveries last february with a look at data from nasa s kepler telescope . using what dressing calls conservative estimates for the habitable zone around red dwarfs , they came up with an occurrence rate of percent ampmdash meaning that one in six of the most common type of star in the galaxy had a potentially habitable planet . that s no small result , but it proved to be only a starting point . i just jumped out of my chair . i thought that particular number was pretty low , says ravi kopparapu , a researcher at penn state . he recently published a paper that more than doubles the habitable zone boundaries that dressing and charbonneau estimated . i just jumped out of my chair , kopparapu recalls . no matter how many times i did it i got the same number . according to kopparapu s findings , first submitted in march , around percent of red dwarfs should have a planet in the habitable zone . a consensus was forming a study by eric gaidos at the university of hawaii study soon came up with a similar number , which also matched a european paper . an artist rendering of planet gj b . eso but subsequent research from cal tech s tim morton and jonathan swift , which appeared right after kopparapu s in march , suggests even more habitable planets around red dwarfs . to find out exactly how many more , the two looked at the original numbers from dressing and charbonneau , and revised them based on the original study s completeness . accounting for completeness , according to cowan , is like a dark art . finding it requires that researchers first take a close look at results , in this case the number of habitable zone planets circling low energy stars . then , given what they know about how good or bad the approach was , account for the number of planets that weren t found . it s akin to taking the us census and extrapolating the total number of undocumented workers in the country , or any other group unlikely to participate , from the few who did . starting to get really close to a hundred percent . as it turns out , the small planets with long orbits that kepler was finding were the ones it was least disposed to find . morton and swift adjusted the numbers in dressing s original paper and came up with an estimate of percent occurrence . they then took into account kopparapu s extended habitable zone , and came up with an estimate cowan says is starting to get really close to a hundred percent , where for every red dwarf out there you should expect there to be a habitable rocky planet . furthermore , research exploring these planets suggests weirdness ampmdash and lots of it ampmdash in what life they might harbor . for instance , the dim light coming from a red dwarf may not be enough for plant photosynthesis like on earth . this may lead plants to be black instead of green in order to absorb more available light . even weirder , these planets likely don t spin as they orbit . since red dwarfs are smaller and cooler than the sun , planets circle them at close range , creating greater tidal forces than on our planet . while the tidal force on earth moves the ocean up and down a few meters , that force on a red dwarf planet would be so strong it d gradually slow down the rotation of planet completely . the result ? one side of the planet would face its star in a permanently sunny day , while the other side would face the stars in an endless night . dream up from scratch the ideal scenario . these tidally locked planets hardly seem like good candidates for habitation . but in july , cowan at northwestern and colleagues at the university of chicago showed that these planets had more potential for life than previously thought . they did this by applying sophisticated climate models to red dwarfs orbiting exoplanets . the models offer a new , detailed view of how clouds would act on tidally locked planets around red dwarfs . if you were to dream up from scratch the ideal scenario to maintain temperate climes on one of these tidally locked planets , says cowan , this would be it . cowan and his team found that the day side of a tidally locked planet would be covered in highly reflective clouds , which would bounce off much of a red dwarf s heat . the night side , by contrast , would be clear of clouds . it s like a radiator fan on the night side , says cowan . winds would carry heat from the sunny side to the night side , where much of it would be released into the cloudless sky . the result is a habitable zone around red dwarfs even wider than previously thought . the james webb telescope will continue the hunt for habitable planets . nasa but whether there s a planet in the habitable zone for every single red dwarf , or one for every other , it s still a little early to pack a bag for gj b . first there s the danger from radiation . although relatively cool , red dwarfs can still be active , flaring out x ray and ultraviolet radiation . if radiation flares are affecting the atmospheres on these planets , life will probably have a hard time , says kopparapu . more fundamentally , the stats on the stars kepler surveyed , namely their size and brightness , could be off . astronomy , cowan explains , deals in magnitudes of difference a bright star might be thousand times brighter than a faint one . but when judging habitability , a difference of or percent in the brightness of a star is the difference between life and death . nonetheless , red dwarfs remain the best targets for finding life . the next big step comes in , when nasa and mit launch the transiting exoplanet survey satellite tess . this two year mission will look for planets around stars in our immediate galactic neighborhood , including around red dwarfs . some of the exoplanetary targets tess identifies will be examined in greater detail by nasa s james webb space telescope , the premier observatory of the next decade , which will start its mission in . it would be fantastic to try to find a planet like the earth orbiting a sunlight star , and look for signs of life on that planet , dressing says , but i think that s a much harder problem than searching for life around a red dwarf . we need to practice first . 