 the university of iowa is home to almost a century of fandom history . its library s special collections house everything from s dime novel reviews to t shirts that were auctioned off in protest of the farscape cancellation . in , though , it acquired one of the most valuable resources yet the library of james rusty hevelin , a lifelong science fiction superfan and prolific collector of books and fanzines dating back to the s . last year , the hevelin collection was chosen as the first target of the university s fan culture preservation project , a massive effort to digitize some of the most vulnerable and ephemeral pieces of science fiction history . now , that effort is starting to take shape . in july , ui digital project librarian laura hampton officially began the long process of archiving the hevelin collection . the library is partnering with the fan run organization for transformative works to collect more zines for eventual digital archival , but hampton is currently focused on material from the s to s , spanning the rise of zines and the golden age of science fiction . the vast majority of the images will stay offline , but an accompanying tumblr has given outsiders a peek into the roughly , zines that hevelin donated and into the communities that helped create science fiction as we know it , from fandom clashes to fan fiction . three and issues of the science fiction fan , produced with hectographic printing . hevelin collection it s impossible to talk about the history of sci fi , or modern popular fiction more generally , without talking about fandom . h . p . lovecraft , ray bradbury , robert heinlein , and many other seminal authors were shaped by and participated in fandom , whether through letters , early science fiction conventions , or fanzines . zines were home to some of these writers first stories later in the th century , they were central to the rise of fan fiction . but for a variety of reasons , they were usually meant to circulate through a community , fade away , and fall apart . fanzines feel almost designed to resist archival . creators were working with what they had , often within pretty tight budgets , and producing fantastic images with relatively cheap materials , hampton tells the verge . many of hevelin s zines were hectographed copied by pressing paper to an inked gelatin pad . the medium produced brilliant purples and blues that can still be seen in some of the illustrations . but it favored cheap , highly acidic paper , and images could fade within hours under direct light . there are rusty staples , tape all these material things that make a fanzine a fanzine are also what make them difficult to preserve . each zine is photographed page by page as quickly as possible , supported by a specially designed cradle , until it can go back in storage . all these things that make a fanzine a fanzine are also what make them difficult to preserve . a few hectographic images are showcased on hampton s hevelin collection tumblr . they re the epitome of bizarre s pulp a metal claw handed giant bat apparently breathing fire on the capitol dome , a robed man being again , apparently attacked by an alien octopus while trying to inject something into the arm of a semi nude woman . other tumblr posts are strikingly timeless , like illustrator alva rogers s covers for lovecraft tribute zine the acolyte . and some photos highlight the writing of early fandom , including snippets of short stories and nonfiction columns . one of the things that surprised me most about the fanzines is their personal nature , says hampton . while some editors primarily published fiction , so many of the fanzines are personal accounts of cons , events , reviews of other publications , reviews of pulps . there is a dialogue that emerges , between publications and across years . s covers for the acolyte and le zombie , drawn by alva rogers and dorothy les tina . hevelin collection the s was a foundational period in science fiction , and as communities tried to define what the genre stood for , that dialogue wasn t always friendly . the first world s science fiction convention , held alongside the new york world s fair , was also the site of a feud between two fan groups the queens science fiction society and the rival futurians . according to later accounts , their struggle for control culminated in an aggressive leafleting campaign and the banning of several prominent futurians from the convention , including future award winning author frederik pohl . they showed up anyways , hobnobbing with attendees including a teenage ray bradbury outside the official venue . the fight is referenced in one hevelin collection photo , which captures a con goer s recollection of a number of nasty things . digitizing the hevelin collection is a long term project , but it s merely a part of the university of iowa s whole fandom archive . and the archive itself captures only pieces of fandom history . zines still exist , but future archivists will face the challenge of collecting stories , videos , podcasts , and art spread across hundreds of fan sites and larger repositories . they ll have to decide what to preserve and how to present it the equivalent of fanzines personal conversations might now take place in a livejournal comment section , or the reviews of a story on fanfiction . net . fandom itself has been dealing with these questions for years , and the organization for transformative works runs its own fiction archive and fandom wiki . but libraries have to work with longer term solutions in mind , ones that aren t dependent on outside hosting services or current computing platforms . this is one of the central questions of the profession today , and answers are varied and ever changing , says hampton . the science fiction fan s account of a chicago fan convention in . hevelin collection even with these limits , the fan culture preservation project is stopping a key part of fandom history from disappearing . but in doing so , it s using the zines in a way that their creators may never have envisioned or intended , and the effort hasn t sat well with everyone . as the project progresses to newer material , it will also shift into more sensitive territory . where early zines might have published gossip and reviews , later ones circulated the first slash fiction stories , often explicitly sexual , about romances between male characters . i don t want my fanzines included in any way , wrote one commenter on the organization for transformative works announcement post . i keep in print those i want to keep available , and some have purposefully been taken out of print and allowed to quietly fade away . if i wanted them made public and accessible , i d have done it . post internet authors have an understanding that their work will be found now . pre internet authors did not . practical concerns exist an erotic fanfic author might not want to risk being outed to family or friends , and an author who fears copyright crackdowns might worry that companies will see the archives as a form of public distribution . but there s also more general discomfort with a niche hobby suddenly coming under academic or public scrutiny . there is a vast difference between publishing to a fairly known community and having your work suddenly available to a very different community in both outlook and number , another commenter wrote . post internet authors have an understanding that their work will be found now . pre internet authors did not . some of the complaints hinge on how accessible the zines will be . while the archives are being digitized , only small pieces like the tumblr photos are being put online . a group of volunteers will transcribe the text and upload it into a searchable directory . if researchers want specific material , they can visit the library or request scans of limited portions , a standard archival practice . to some people , that s enough to others , it s tantamount to letting someone photocopy and redistribute their zine . a story in san francisco zine the thing . hevelin collection hampton says that anyone who is uncomfortable with their work being digitized can contact the library , and they ll try to work out a solution . but she also says that there hasn t been much resistance to the project . she hopes that some creators might even want to make their zines publicly available , something the university is in a uniquely strong position to do . and for every hesitant author or editor , there was one enthusiastic about the project . sure , i m slightly embarrassed , in an amused way , by the zines i published up to years ago , wrote a fan who said they d seen at least one of their old zines in ui s library . but i published them typos , grammatical infelicities , naivet , and all for people who might enjoy them , and that still holds . 