 i m standing between two boats one intact , one cracked into two jagged halves . they re each about the size of a conventional canoe , but they have masts , rumpled sails , tiny handrails around the edges , and little decks connected with miniature stairs . both ships are spangled with bright orange , yellow , and red spots , but up close , the spots resolve into tiny autumn leaf decals , meticulously applied to every surface in thick layers . these are two of the sets for laika studios new stop motion film kubo and the two strings , and when they appear in the film , they look immense the japanese child warrior kubo and his animal companion monkey leap and roll across those decks , fighting an enemy who hovers above them in midair , in the middle of a violent storm that rips leaves off the ships and tosses them around on surging waves . it s a big scene . these are , comparatively , little boats . but the detail on them is spectacular . standing next to them , it s easy to see how many hours of work went into constructing them to look like real sailing ships made of leaves , even through the lens of an ultra high def canon d mark iii positioned inches away from the decks . kubo s production manager , dan pascall , says the most time consuming part of making the ships isn t even immediately evident the design crew had to map every leaf thousands of them , each individually laser cut and about the size of a human thumbnail and reproduce the exact same pattern on both ships , so they d match from shot to shot within the film . it s a lot of effort for something most people wouldn t notice . god knows , pascall sighs , there are easier ways to make movies . watch our short documentary on laika s innovative team that refrain there are easier ways , but we challenge ourselves to take ultra detailed , time intensive routes instead came up repeatedly during my visit to laika . from their hillsboro , oregon warehouse , just west of portland and at a comfortable remove from hollywood and silicon valley , laika has positioned itself as a studio that has the time for those routes , and is scaled to afford the extra effort . where other studios are increasingly moving to a make or break , blockbuster only model , laika s roughly employees , are quietly turning out a film every two or three years , making million features that bring in around million at the box office . focus features handles their distribution , and until this year , even their marketing has seemed home grown , focusing on sizzle reels and modest , tasteful videos about how their hands on aesthetic makes them stand out in a digital marketplace . the ethos of this whole place is that we are artists first and foremost , says ceo travis knight . when we started laika years ago , we could see the writing on the wall . stop motion animation was basically taking its last , dying breath . we had to come up with a way , if we wanted to continue to make a living in this medium that we loved , to bring it into a new era , to invigorate it . when we started laika , stop motion animation was taking its last , dying breath . when he mentions the dying breaths of stop motion , he s talking about famed stop motion house will vinton studios , the claymation house responsible for the tv show the pj s , as well as the california raisins and other advertising hits . knight interned there , working as a young animator , and when the company had major financial problems , knight s father phil , founder of nike , became the majority shareholder and installed travis first as a board member , then as ceo and president . the knights rebranded the studio as laika in , and moved it away from advertising and into feature film production . kubo is the first film travis knight personally directed , but he s been a hands on animator on all three of its previous feature films s coraline , s paranorman , and s the boxtrolls . that s him in the post credits scene at the end of the boxtrolls , personally animating two characters from the film having a wink wink meta conversation about being controlled by invisible hands . it s no wonder that laika has few peers these days in a film industry that favors quick turnaround and endless scalability , stop motion is an inherently slow , difficult way to tell a story it involves moving characters around on set by hand , shooting tiny movements individually , at a rate of individual frames of action for each actual second . that s particularly challenging with an expansive , epic fable like kubo . the story features more than separate sets , some complicated water effects , and a lot of fast paced physical action . but laika s version of stop motion is particularly striking because its characters and backdrops are rendered in such detail , and move so smoothly , that its films could be mistaken for wholly cgi creations , instead of stop motion with digital assistance . and its processes are striking because they re all built around the idea that technology has to service art rather than the other way around . if a director wants a particular visual effect , even if it s never been done in animation before , it s up to the fabricators and artists to figure out how to make it happen . knight appears to be a true believer in the artistic singularity of stop motion animation . in person , he comes across as a visionary who talks entirely in enthusiastic speeches about laika , art , creativity , the storytelling tradition , buddhist teachings , and the japanese concept of beauty in impermanence . at the same time , he can be disarming and self effacing . we wanted kubo to be a stop motion david lean film , he explains . to be myth in miniature . and to make a small scale movie that s shot on a bunch of gussied up tabletops in the middle of a crummy warehouse look and feel like a big epic fantasy on an endless majestic vista , that s a real challenge . so it took all of our tools to make that happen . knight isn t kidding about the gussied up tabletops , or the crummy warehouse . what i saw of laika studios was mostly one , foot , sweaty , high ceilinged space partitioned off into individual overheated little rooms by floor to ceiling black curtains . the remaining kubo sets and puppets including a wriggling robot eyeball plant controlled with a bowling ball sized trackball mouse dominate the little makeshift rooms they re placed in . but they d probably dominate any room . the sets are fantastically detailed little worlds , built from foam , paint , wood , and resin , and designed to look seamless when assembled , but to pull apart easily so animators can access any point of them for a scene . according to pascall , the art department had to build multiple sets for each animator who worked on kubo . the animators time is the most precious thing that we have , he says . so we need three sets for each of them one they re currently animating on , one ready and waiting for the next scene , and one that s being prepped . more facts from the set of kubo textures inspired by the japanese woodblock artist kiyoshi saito are worked into kubo s sets , costumes , and characters to unify them . even the digital raindrops in the storm scenes have their own saito pattern . laika doesn t use painted skies anymore they re all digital , because the paintings would have to be huge to entirely cover the sets from every angle . laika doesn t destroy elements from its films . it has auctioned them in , one coraline puppet sold for more than , and sent pieces out for exhibitions . otherwise , everything the studio has constructed since coraline is kept in storage . the sisters fluttering feathered capes were one of the biggest challenges . they re lined with a heavy lattice of criss crossed piano wire that holds it rigid in a wide variety of elaborate poses . kubo s tiny shoes were hand woven out of period authentic grasses , then cast in rubber for durability . the moon beast , kubo s primary antagonist , is laika s first entirely d printed character . laika beta tested a new resin printer from d printing company stratasys in order to build it . the delicate gold flecks visible on moon beast s chiton are mylar party balloons from a local grocery store . to achieve moon beast s otherworldly glow , the animators shot each frame of its scenes twice , once under normal light , once under ultraviolet flight . then the frames were digitally composited . the giant skeleton puppet s long , pointy fingers turned out to be a problem when the animators realized its hands couldn t close . they wound up cutting off the fingers bit by bit as the hand tightens . one of laika s ideals is that only one animator should work on a given scene at a time . we don t double up on animators per shot , pascall says . we ve tried it in the past , and it doesn t work . they work at different paces , so it slows them down overall . he says they sometimes shoot layers or characters separately , then composite them digitally , especially if the characters are far apart in a shot , and the depth of field would keep one of them out of focus for the camera . but for instance , in a scene where kubo stands in a wooded area and a wind blows through the trees , that s the work of a single animator moving every leaf and branch separately . the process is incredibly laborious on kubo , animators worked simultaneously on their own scenes , each trying to achieve the company goal of . seconds of animation per week , and more often , only hitting about three seconds per week . and before they can even get started on a scene , other teams have spent many months assembling all the materials the animators are going to use . according to puppet fabrication supervisor georgina hayns , an individual hero puppet can take four to nine months to design and build , so the fabrication team starts its work some to months before shooting on a project begins . each shoot requires many copies of the same puppet , again so multiple animators can work simultaneously there were separate kubo puppets on this shoot . each puppet requires a complicated custom body , handmade clothing , and a rig that can hold the tens of thousands of d printed faces the animators swap in and out . a quick sequence at the end of laika s paranorman shows a sped up version of the complete puppet fabrication process . because of the wear and tear on the puppets caused by constant handling , the fabrication department includes a maintenance team that re tightens the puppets joints after every shot . and because the wires in the puppets fingers are so fine and fragile , each puppet requires a backup library of hands . the fingers can break mid shot , hayns says , so she has one crazy little department that just makes spare hands if we ve got puppets out there , we probably have pairs of hands . each puppet also represents a lot of problem solving , both for costumes and for particular character traits . on kubo , one issue was how to give kubo s ally monkey muscles that moved , and fur that could be fluffy , or matted , or soaked for individual scenes . she was definitely the biggest challenge , because we had never made anything like her before , hayns says . we built her an a completely different way , with a completely different approach , from the inside out . but she was a huge success as well . hayns team eventually built the character as a rigid armature with a muscle suit around it that could squash and stretch to suggest the body under the silicon infused fur . kubo s costumes are similarly individually rigged in hidden layers , with latticeworks of wires and weights to let them hold consistent folds and wrinkles through months of handling . they re the result of intensive research into traditional japanese robes and laika s first experiments with silk costumes , but they re driven by engineering as much as traditional costuming . from each show , we learn new techniques , and we have new groundbreaking things happen , hayns says . but we re always looking to see what cool new technology is hitting the market . you can get d printers that are actually making fabrics at this point . it s just not quite small enough for us yet . we re not afraid of technology . we embrace it . we love doing something new , and making our movies as bright and as bold as we can with whatever s out there . one new thing in the case of kubo and the two strings is a greater reliance on cgi , especially to handle water effects and fill out crowd scenes . in a scene where the kubo character tells a story to an admiring audience , most of the viewers are digital creations rather than physical ones . laika doesn t have a problem with digital assists they ve been necessary from the beginning , to erase the rigs that hold up the puppets , and the seams between the upper and lower face plates . even laika s first feature , coraline , had some computer animated effects . it s such an overwhelmingly collaborative process . but the company addresses the cg characters in the same hands on , aesthetics driven way it addresses the physical ones . computer generated characters go through the same design processes as the puppets , with the costume department providing the vfx team with fabric swatches to scan , and the fabrication department building physical character models for the effects team to manipulate , then copy into a digital environment . the advantage of the physical maquettes for vfx supervisor steve emerson is that his team can put them on the sets to study how they interact with the lighting systems , in order to build more accurate digital models . with a typical film production , by the time you re talking about visual effects , the camera team , the sets , all that is done , emerson says . they ve all moved on , and you re picking up the pieces and figuring it out . what s great about the work we re doing is , not only are we collaborating , we re running in parallel . we re not developing in a vacuum . it s such an overwhelmingly collaborative process . laika s processes have to be collaborative , because of that emphasis on artistic choices first . when a director calls for a marionette skeleton with a foot arm span , big enough to grab or stomp on the normal character puppets , it s up to the fabrication department to figure out how to build it . on kubo , that skeleton was built in pieces , with its legs as a separate set , being animated in a different room . and it s up to the rigging department to work with them to hang the skeleton s top half from the ceiling in a way that will give the animator full motion control . here , animation rigging supervisor oliver jones and his team were able to build a sliding system of pulleys that let animators move the skeleton s arms smoothly and freely , then step on a floor pad to lock them precisely into place for each shot . and when a thorny issue crops up in pre production , it s never clear which department is going to solve it . emerson says that as the head of computer effects , he s used to keeping his mouth shut in meetings , to make sure the fabrication , rigging , d printing , and artistic departments have first crack at each new issue . we re not purists about stop motion , knight says . but he does prefer creative technological problem solving over one size fits all software solutions . within these walls , you have giant , throbbing , nasa size brains that are inventing technologies , and then you have luddites , people who are still working with their hands like artists and craftspeople were a century ago . i love that convergence of different types of methodologies and people . i think it creates a ground for innovation . for laika , kubo is the result of years of satisfying , fulfilling workthat innovation is going to continue to be necessary if knight s going to meet his next goal , of getting laika to a one feature a year release schedule . it s going to take some getting to , pascall says . right now , we re at an month turnaround , and that brings a lot of challenges . we re doing three things at once marketing on kubo , shooting the next film , and pre production on a third , and we re doing it all with the same crew . the studio is also expanding beyond its , foot confines into the building next door , which brings its own set of logistical headaches , especially with production currently underway . every department has to move . there have been lots of sleepless nights . but there s also huge incentive to expand , not just because the studio s end products are so unique , but because of the hands on , intensely cooperative process that creates them . knight is enthusiastic about laika s future not because kubo is perfect , but because it s the end result of years of satisfying , fulfilling work . the entire film is filled with all different kinds of imperfections and failings , and it s always something you have to come to terms with , he says . sometimes it s maddening to work in this medium , because of the imperfections . but that s one of the things that makes it inherently beautiful . we really embrace that side of it , because it makes these films human . photography by vjeran pavic