 the enlightenment sages who wrote the first amendment into the us constitution in created the most secure legal foundation for a real democracy in history thus far . by refusing to grant government the power to shut anyone up , no matter how obnoxious , the authors of the bill of rights ensured that even if the worst , most corrupt idiots managed to grab power they wouldn amprsquot be able to silence their political enemies in stark contrast to ampldquothe divine right amprdquo of kings , who dealt with the opposition by throwing it into a dungeon . it amprsquos just words ampldquocongress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion , or prohibiting the free exercise thereof or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press or the right of the people peaceably to assemble , and to petition the government for a redress of grievances . amprdquowhat the first amendment really grants is the power of society to maintain its own standards over those of government . over centuries , sometimes despite the most furious opposition , individuals have increased their participation and added the force of their lives , their words , and their ideas to the culture . and so the principle of free speech is growing , slowly and unsteadily , into the truth of its logic each person , each member of the press , each citizen can believe , think , and speak independently and without fear of oppression . the same is true of amendments two through ten the bill of rights is a political structure built to safeguard a democratic state , but its implications in the personal lives of that state amprsquos citizens are immediate and profound . because of the ironclad protection of the first amendment , it has proved very difficult for government to control what we can read , listen to or see . a few curbs have been put up , though , notably by the federal communications commission fcc , the regulations of which largely determine what kind of material is bleeped out of radio and television broadcasts . there amprsquos a temptation to believe that even so mild a form of censorship as broadcast bleeping is a curtailment of that freedom , but the truth is more complicated . bleeping can also be understood as a vivid illustration of the first amendment in action . the bleep of censorship invariably draws attention to the material it was intended to conceal circles it , if you like , by loudly omitting it . bleeping also serves as proof that there is a watcher someone looking out for us in advance . in the bleep lies the evidence that you are being ampldquoprotected amprdquo ampmdash but by whom ? why ? and from what ? lt ! j document . ready function j body . addclass toggle on if j body . hasclass desktop layout edit this name j . write toggle button . last . after show redacted j toggle button . click function e e . preventdefault var body , button buttons j toggle button body j body if body . hasclass toggle on body . removeclass toggle on body . addclass toggle off edit this name buttons . text hide redacted else body . removeclass toggle off body . addclass toggle on edit this name buttons . text show redacted gta politician in your living roomin a tower in babel , media historian erik barnouw describes the invention of bleeping at the dawn of the radio age . or proto bleeping , i should say , since the earliest system didn amprsquot produce a censorship sound , but rather provided the engineer with a switch to a nearby phonograph that could be flipped to play music in case any troublesome content should appear over the live microphone . this innovation seems to have been prompted by the appearance on newark amprsquos wjz of one olga petrova born muriel harding in , a famous vaudeville actress and singer known and feared for her strong views . petrova was ampldquoa fanatic on birth control and always making speeches about it , amprdquo according to barnouw . she was friends with margaret sanger , who founded the american birth control league , the organization that would later become planned parenthood . one night in , petrova , then engaged at a newark theater , went to the local radio station wjz to perform . the great war had just ended , during the course of which the government had forbidden the use of private radio equipment . after the armistice the navy tried to retain monopoly control of radio , but congress put a stop to their power grab . wartime restrictions were lifted , but the pioneers of broadcasting such as those at wjz were mindful of potential government interference , and petrova had a reputation as a firebrand . she disarmed her hosts by announcing that she would be performing her own versions of mother goose rhymes , and then proceeded to read the following there was an old woman who lived in a shoe , she had so many children because she didn amprsquot know what to do . the comstock laws , which banned the distribution of ampldquoobscene amprdquo materials , including information about contraception , were still in force petrova had , arguably , kind of broken the law . the means for censoring broadcast content came years before the emergence of the first national broadcast network ampldquothe staff was terrified , amprdquo barnouw relates . ampldquothey were certain there would be trouble from washington . westinghouse then owner of wjz executives were already nervous about possibilities of this sort , and had wondered what to do if a red got on the air . an emergency switch was provided for the engineer in the shack . amprdquo thus , he could switch to that ampldquophonograph beside him ampmdash on his own judgment or on a signal from the studio . amprdquothus it was that the means for censoring broadcast content came years before the emergence of the first national broadcast network , nbc , in , and the federal radio commission in . by then , the technique was well established . petrova recounts an episode that took place in she amprsquod been reading a scene from her play , hurricane , on radio station wor when the red on air light suddenly went out . afterward , she learned she amprsquod been cut off the engineer told her that ampldquoradio audiences were very mixed amphellip it wouldn amprsquot do to offend any of their listeners . amprdquo ampldquoone would suppose that radio audiences must be completely paralyzed , amprdquo petrova observed dryly , ampldquoand therefore unable to turn off the switches of their own sets the instant their ears were shocked amphellip by what they heard . amprdquothe tug of war in the courts , in congress and in the media over restrictions on free speech in broadcasting has altered very little since then . justice william brennan was still making petrova amprsquos argument in his dissent in fcc v . pacifica foundation , the supreme court case involving george carlin amprsquos ampldquofilthy words amprdquo routine ampldquowhatever the minimal discomfort suffered by a listener who inadvertently tunes into a program he finds offensive during the brief interval before he can simply extend his arm and switch stations or flick the amplsquooff amprsquo button , it is surely worth the candle to preserve the broadcaster amprsquos right to send , and the right of those interested to receive , a message entitled to full first amendment protection . amprdquodecades later , stephen king repeated the sentiment in a interview ampldquoif howard stern is saying stuff that you don amprsquot like , if it offends you , you got a hand , you reach out , take hold of the knob , turn it off . he amprsquos gone , goodbye amphellip you don amprsquot need a politician in your living room to say you amprsquove got to put a band aid over that guy amprsquos mouth . amprdquowhat the bleep ? society is often compared to a single organism , ampldquothe body politic amprdquo or ampldquothe hive . amprdquo the increasing interconnectedness of people , of groups and nations , makes this analogy seem truer and more obvious all the time . if the hive has a mind , it has also an id the primitive , unconscious , instinctive part of our collective nature . it is also as uncontrollable and strange as the id of an individual person , that dark wild substrate of the psyche freud called ampldquoa cauldron full of seething excitations amphellip filled with energy reaching it from the instincts . amprdquo ampldquoi could kill you amprdquo is the standard illustration of the id in a single mind the fleeting , instinctive impulse that the superego effortlessly represses . the collective id is limitlessly more complicated it contains all our boundless shades of darkness and all our craziest , most selfish impulses . it is the total of all we are ashamed or alarmed or unhappy to feel , and everything we would prefer to keep behind the curtain . the collective id is what is bleeped or censored out of our media , which is really just another way of saying our shared consciousness . society amprsquos relationship with the dark side of its own nature is complex and contentious it amprsquos a struggle that is always clearly visible in our comedy . stand up comedy in particular is intimately concerned with ampldquocrossing the line amprdquo in order to confront us with the truth about ourselves . lenny bruce might be the best practitioner of this kind of stand up he was like a firehose for the collective id , like the role played today by kanye west , lewis black , or lady gaga . bruce amprsquos personal life was very troubled , but it was also his consummate skill in shocking the establishment that led him to be repeatedly harassed , arrested , and jailed . by the way , are there any niggers here tonight ? in a whisper ampldquowhat did he say amprdquo ampldquoare there any niggers here tonight ? amprdquo ampldquojesus christ , is that cruel . does he have to get that low for laughs ? amphellip amprdquoare there any niggers here tonight ? i know that one nigger who works here , i see him back there . oh , there amprsquos two niggers , customers , and ah , aha ! between those two niggers sits a kike ampmdash man , thank god for the kike ! amphellip the point ? that the word amprsquos suppression gives it the power , the violence , the viciousness . dig . if president kennedy got on television and said , ampldquotonight i amprsquod like to introduce the niggers in my cabinet , amprdquo and he yelled ampldquonigger nigger nigger nigger nigger nigger amprdquo at every nigger he saw , ampldquoboogey boogey boogey boogey boogey , nigger nigger nigger amphellip amprdquo amplsquotill nigger didn amprsquot mean anything anymore , till nigger lost its meaning ampmdash you amprsquod never make any four year old nigger cry because somebody called him a nigger in school . this routine is years old , but it still is very moving , still has the power to create discomfort , even anxiety . it amprsquos hard to say how much grief lenny bruce would have been given for writing and performing it today ampmdash one imagines he would have faced a lot of criticism from both extremes of the political spectrum ampmdash but it would be possible to watch on cable now , and on the internet , at least for the moment . still , this performance couldn amprsquot appear on ordinary television , at least not without so many bleeps as to render it entirely incomprehensible . luckier performers have made a success out of flouting conventional morality . in a notorious appearance on late night with david letterman , madonna whom letterman introduced by dryly observing that she had ampldquoslept with some of the biggest names in the entertainment industry amprdquo smoked a cigar and said ampldquofuck amprdquo times . letterman faux innocently asked , ampldquoyou realize this is being broadcast , don amprsquot you ? amprdquoyou might say that our relations with the cultural id provide a simple , accurate litmus test for what , in the end , separates the liberal from the conservative in matters of social policy , and determines his real attitude toward speech rights . social liberals are in a state of d ampeacutetente , or perhaps even on speaking terms , with the beast within , while social conservatives still seek to shame , repress , and somehow eradicate it . that amprsquos part of the reason why bleeping itself is inherently so funny . the bleep is the shock of a hidden truth revealed an explicit illustration of the superego amprsquos casual strangling of an unwanted , unworthy impulse the knowledge that this struggle is always going on beneath the relatively untroubled surface of daily life . first it was unconscious , and now it amprsquos not . my name is amphellip comedic meta bleepshortly after it became a familiar convention , the bleep became the subject of comedy in its own right . this kind of humor has a long pedigree . there amprsquos ampldquoelderly man river , amprdquo a lovely bit from stan freberg amprsquos radio show in which a persnickety censor , mr . tweedly of the citizens radio committee , noisily and self righteously bowdlerized a performance of the song ampldquoold man river . amprdquothe writers of arrested development are masters of this comic technique , repeatedly pushing the envelope . they snuck the word ampldquofucking amprdquo past prime time television censors by putting half the word at the beginning of the show , and half at the end . it amprsquos in the nature of certain artists to bend societal restraints to their own endsbut it was with the aid of censor bleeping that arrested development reached the summit of its satiric genius . the show amprsquos creator , mitch hurwitz , told neda ulaby of npr , ampldquowe realized , you know , it amprsquos more fun to not know exactly what it is that we amprsquore saying amphellip it becomes kind of a puzzle for people . and i think it amprsquos about , you know , letting your imagination do the work . amprdquoit amprsquos in the nature of certain artists to bend societal restraints to their own ends . in amprsquos ampldquomy name is amprdquo eminem needlessly substituted the phrase ampldquohi kids , do you like primus amprdquo for the original , ampldquohi kids , do you like violence amprdquo in the ampldquoclean amprdquo radio friendly version of the song . this produced a new , veiled joke . primus , who composed and performed the south park theme song , is well known for a certain penchant for all things frowned on by the fcc . if eminem wasn amprsquot to be permitted to tease the youngs for their attraction to violence , then he would surreptitiously tease them for liking ampldquowynona amprsquos big brown beaver . amprdquoa more recondite instance of the comedic meta bleep came in the inaugural episode of that deceptively moronic comedy central sitcom , workaholics . it amprsquos a layered , nuanced comment on the different kinds of mediation and restraints between performer and audience technical , editorial , societal , legal . in one scene , our slacker heroes discuss the dubbed profanities in a cable broadcast of die hard . adam yo , kyle , what amprsquos up ? kyle it amprsquos almost the ending , bro . it amprsquos die hard . adam did they just say , ampldquoclucking amprdquo ? blake yeah it must be on cable , so they switch the swear words out ? adam oh carl winslow , i amprsquod forgot about him ! karl ssshhhh ! anders did you know reginald veljohnson wasn amprsquot actually originally cast ampmdashkarl shut the cluck up . anders snatches kyle amprsquos snacks away , kyle says ampldquofuck amprdquo ampmdash and it is bleeped out . the fantastic confusion produced by south park amprsquos depictions of mohammed resulted in the collision of the meta bleep with the real thing in ampldquoepisode . amprdquo in this episode , the people of south park have to trade mohammed to tom cruise and his gang of angry celebrities in exchange for their dropping a class action suit , but nobody has reckoned with the ginger separatist movement , and it just gets crazier from there . there could be no doubting the real danger in making critical portraits of islam after dutch director theo van gogh was gunned down by a radical islamist in amsterdam in for having made a documentary film censuring the treatment of islamic women . so , shortly after the airing of south park amprdquoepisode , amprdquo when a group called revolution muslim threatened violence against the show s creators , matt stone and trey parker , in a blog post claiming that the two would ampldquoprobably end up like theo van gogh amprdquo for their comic portrayal of mohammed , comedy central wasn amprsquot prepared to take any chances . the studio added its own real censor bleeps to the comic ones written in by parker , and additionally bleeped out three long speeches in their entirety . to this day the uncensored version of ampldquoepisode amprdquo is not available to stream or buy . censorship , in practicethe supreme court has revisited fcc restrictions governing radio and broadcast television a number of times federal laws don amprsquot govern cable television , which is regulated locally . the federal laws guide ampldquoobscenity , indecency , and profanity amprdquo the fcc provides a handy fact sheet outlining the differences . in order to be considered obscenity , the material in question must pass a three pronged test first , it has to ampldquoappeal to the prurient interest , amprdquo or be be liable to turn the average person on sexually secondly , it must describe sexual conduct ampldquoin a patently offensive way amprdquo and finally , ampldquothe material taken as a whole , must lack serious literary , artistic , political or scientific value . amprdquo the last is how both ulysses and lolita slide out of being considered ampldquoobscene . amprdquo so , fuck em . i still have a job , and they don t . indecency , as defined by the fcc , is a much broader category , and can be anything that offensively describes ampldquosexual or excretory organs or activities . amprdquo so , pooping , farting , mentioning of the peen . and profanity is just ampldquooffensive language , amprdquo expletives and the like . but because the community amprsquos word is the real law , the fcc can amprsquot decide on its own what is offensive and what isn amprsquot not because they are sensible or thoughtful or even have half a brain , but because freedom of speech is the law . hence the fcc must rely on actual complaints received from members of the public in order to take action or levy fines against anybody . otherwise they would likely be sued , and they would lose . though cable networks aren amprsquot directly affected by fcc indecency regulations , they still must answer to audiences and advertisers . this is how the first amendment is supposed to work strategies for arriving at a consensus must be developed by the community itself . hence the modern censors of the cable era the standards amp practices departments at each cable network . these departments comb through every second of material broadcast , and try to make sure that the work is suitable for their wide audiences . this work requires a lot of sensitivity it amprsquos a balance , and is about making material available to interested audiences , as well as forbidding that which is likely to offend . robert pondillo amprsquos book , america amprsquos first network tv censor the work of nbc amprsquos stockton helffrich , documents early network censorship . when cher received a lifetime achievement award at the billboard music awards in , aerosmith amprsquos steven tyler introduced her , shouting gleefully , ampldquoshe amprsquos got patents on her ass ! amprdquo and when she took the stage , she said i amprsquove worked really hard , i amprsquove had great people to work with amphellip and amphellip oh , you know what ? i amprsquove also had critics for the last years saying i was on my way out every year , alright ? so , fuck amplsquoem . i still have a job , and they don amprsquot . this moment , among other similar ones , was described in the supreme court filings in fcc v . fox television stations , inc . . they weren amprsquot worried about steven tyler amprsquos ampldquoassless pants amprdquo comment , only about the single word , ampldquofuck , amprdquo that cher had nonchalantly dropped . in the years of bush ii , congress and the fcc broadly expanded their indecency policies , eventually deciding that networks could be fined up to , for ampldquofleeting amprdquo indecencies such as the inadvertent flash of a boob , or a casual expletive like cher amprsquos . but the court held that the fcc couldn amprsquot reasonably fine broadcasters for ampldquofleeting expletives amprdquo and ampldquomomentary nudity amprdquo after the fact , because their regulations were ampldquounconstitutionally vague , amprdquo so that broadcasters could not be sure of exactly what to avoid in advance . the judges stopped short of saying that the fcc amprsquos indecency regulations violate the first amendment they just said , y amprsquoall need to figure this out . if the supreme court ever decides that the fcc has no right to enforce indecency regulations , there will never be another bleep . it amprsquos quite possible that the day will arrive , if the outcome of hustler magazine v . falwell is any indication . here , the supreme court considered the matter of a satirical ad in hustler , claiming that moral majority leader reverend jerry falwell had lost his virginity to his mother in an outhouse while the two of them were ampldquodrunk off our god fearing asses on campari . amprdquo hustler amprsquos publisher , larry flynt , spoke about the case in an interview with ken paulson of the first amendment center . paulson falwell sued you , and at the lower court , he actually won in a very strange way . not for libel , because no one could believe that there was any truth to it , but because you were , in effect , mean to him intentional infliction of emotional distress . flynt they wanted me to pay reverend falwell , because i hurt his feelings . my attorney says ampldquopay it , amprdquo because he was suing me for million . he said it will cost you million to take it to the supreme court . i said , ampldquowell , that amprsquos where we amprsquore going , amprdquo and we lost in the fourth circuit . it wasn amprsquot looking very good then , and no one thought that the supreme court would ever grant cert , and they did . and their decision was unanimous . i remember justice rehnquist amprsquos words even so clearly today . he said , ampldquosimply because the government finds speech offensive does not give them the right to repress it amphellip and i don amprsquot think it was the supreme court siding with me over reverend falwell . i think that they were looking at the practical implications of the decision if they would have ruled the other way . amprdquoadventure time at san diego comic conmaria bustillos the fcc indecency regulations , as i understand them , are to do with sexual activity and excretory functions bodily functions , basically . how much do you have to think about these regulations as you go about your work ? adam muto supervising producer , adventure time a lot of it amprsquos done internally , actually . we have our own s ampp standards amp practices department at cartoon network . so it never has come to the fcc ruling against us . the tone of the material is really dark , but that amprsquos not the hard stuff to get through . the hard stuff to get through is the more obvious , like , scatological targets . kent osborne head of story , adventure time the poop is always internal . eyebrows raised around the table mb well , hmm , eventually , though ampmdashko it becomes external . mb these regulations are very much about what children should or should not be exposed to to protect their innocence , you might say . your stuff is pitched at children what do you think about exposing them to nihilism , the end of the world , the apocalyptic themes you guys go in for ? it amprsquos serious business . am yeah it amprsquos serious , but i don amprsquot think it amprsquos beyond the pale , or that it amprsquos something that they amprsquore not seeing anywhere else . childhood amprsquos sort of amphellip i mean , i was a really depressed kid , at times . wouldn amprsquot you want to see that reflected in what you amprsquore watching ? dead airthe petrovas of today , should they come on the radio and make reckless remarks , might be dealt with by means of an eventide bd broadcast obscenity delay , also known as the ampldquodump button . amprdquo the dump button delay system is different from bleeping in that the edit is concealed completely from the audience . before the invention of the dump button , this kind of hidden cutting was often done with tape delays . as sound engineering consultant gary mcauliffe explained at part , a low power radio broadcasting forum take two identical recorders , place side by side amprsquo apart assuming ips tape speed . record on one machine , but run the tape to the take up reel on the second deck , which plays the tape . this gives you about seconds to catch the s word . we used to do this all the time on any call in show back in the amprsquo s . you need closely matched machines , otherwise , you wind up with either tape on the floor or broken tape amphellip back then the fcc was really strict , so we took no chances amphellip amphellipthe dump button provides a relatively insidious , more censorship like form of editing , because its alteration of the original broadcast has been actively concealed . if we are to have disagreements about what constitutes acceptable media for a civilized general audience ampmdash and we should ampmdash they should be aired in every possible way . through a very loud bleep , for example . and through litigation , and yes , complaints to the fcc . through arguments at dinner tables and letters to the editor . a bleep is honest , immediate , noisy . it amprsquos the cultural superego in motion , calling attention to a difference of opinion regarding the offensiveness of the bleeped material . here is this questionable thing think about it for yourself , investigate if you like . in this way , the bleep is a literal demonstration of first amendment principles the khz sound of a community actively engaged in the process of establishing standards , and struggling to understand itself . 