 in its first eight years , the xbox established the company as a powerhouse in the games industry , and one of the best options for streaming apps like netflix , hulu , and pandora . as entertainment trended away from physical media and cable subscriptions , the xbox felt like a test run for microsoft s plan to one day control the living room . save pointhow microsoft plans to make the xbox great againby chris plante photography by daniel bermannobody was more surprised by xbox s fall from grace than microsoft . in its first eight years , the xbox established the company as a powerhouse in the games industry , and one of the best options for streaming apps like netflix , hulu , and pandora . as entertainment trended away from physical media and cable subscriptions , the xbox felt like a test run for microsoft s plan to one day control the living room . with each opulent press conference announcing a new product , microsoft seemed more confident . when it launched the kinect motion controller in , wired called the event the most lavish product launch in video game history complete with cirque du soleil performers , an animatronic elephant , and an xbox orb large enough to crush the front row . by the time the company announced the xbox s successor xbox one three years later , the company was riding a tsunami of success . in theory , the xbox one was an improvement on everything fans loved about the xbox a more powerful kinect , new hardware that merged the console with your cable box , and lots of talk about the cloud . microsoft only forgot one thing the games . during the hour long kick off presentation , six minutes were allotted to new game announcements . video by miriam nielsenfans felt betrayed and poured their fury into forums and game blogs critics dubbed the event a disaster . leadership tried to pivot , using subsequent press events to announce the return of beloved franchises like halo and killer instinct . but the messaging remained muddied and unfocused , requiring constant backpedaling . because of the kinect hardware , the xbox one cost more than its closest competition , sony s playstation . when microsoft finally debuted the system on november nd , , it landed with a thud . it s been trailing playstation ever since . microsoft hasn t abandoned xbox , though . if anything , it seems to be doubling down by investing hundreds of millions of dollars , and adopting an audacious strategy to turn hundreds of millions of windows users into xbox customers . but first , microsoft has one priority win gamers back , at all costs . shannon loftis , general manager of microsoft studios this year really felt like i came home , says shannon loftis . as general manager of microsoft studios , loftis is in charge of producing the next crop of microsoft video games . employees talk about loftis the way soldiers brag about a takes no shit commanderwe re sitting in a break area on the third floor of xbox s headquarters in redmond , washington . a life sized halo statue , guns ready , stands in the lobby beneath us . it s mid morning and quiet a couple dozen employees pass by , but all you hear is the mechanical clack of the coffee machines and the dull pop of a virtual grenade detonating in a testing room a few doors down . in an industry dominated by men wearing ratty graphic tees and sneakers , loftis is chic and professional . she embodies confidence . xbox employees talk about loftis the way soldiers brag about a takes no shit commander . she has a reputation for being fierce and protective , demanding a threshold of quality and timeliness , but shielding studios from forces that threaten to impugn creativity . a year microsoft veteran , loftis has seen the company through good and bad , multiple times through . she was there in the late s when microsoft used games to entice home computer owners to windows . in the early s , she produced games for the original xbox , and was involved in that console s efforts to connect console gamers via the internet for the first time . she oversaw european game development for xbox , including beloved brands like crackdown and fable . and when microsoft began work on the kinect motion controller , loftis headed an internal studio that produced a batch of games and core tech . most recently , loftis served as general manager of xbox entertainment studios , a defunct group assembled around the xbox one launch to produce documentaries , films , and television shows around gaming franchises . today , loftis , like microsoft at large , is refocusing on producing games a large part of her job is finding the developers to create microsoft s next big franchises . not every game made by microsoft is made by microsoft . instead of producing games entirely in house see nintendo s super mario bros . or banking on third party providers like activision s call of duty , microsoft often relies on what some have come to call second party partnerships deep collaborations between console makers and outside studios . it s a win win relationship microsoft studios taps ready made , talented teams of developers , and developers get financing , marketing , and support from microsoft s internal team of producers and engineers . both parties walk away with big credits under their belt and bags of cashthe approach has proved remarkably successful dance central state of decay and gears of war , one of xbox s biggest franchises , began as second party games . both parties walk away with big credits under their belt and bags of cash in their bank accounts . to revive xbox , microsoft needs to land the next big franchise . to do that , the company must persuade game developers with all of their talent and experience to collaborate with them . and to do that , outside developers and potential second party partners must believe in microsoft . that s why loftis first action as general manager of microsoft studios was so crucial she immediately consolidated the small groups that made up the organization into a single entity , streamlining workflow . i see our primary role really as being the proof point , loftis says . we prove to gamers why it s worth playing on the microsoft platforms . we prove to game developers why it s worth making games for our platform . collaborating with microsoft studios needed to be faster , easier , and better . the company s future depended on it . a screenshot from quantum breakmicrosoft is betting big on three properties for recore , crackdown , and quantum break . all three began under previous leadership and company battle plans none has felt the changes of the last few years more acutely than quantum break . a third person shooter , quantum break puts players in the snazzy dress shoes of jack joyce , one of two people given unique time warping abilities during an experiment gone sideways at a fictional , mit like university . as time collapses around him , joyce must use his powers to stop the malevolent paul serene , a man who can see into the future . the story lives in a high brow , low brow greyzone , somewhere between the films of christopher nolan and roland emmerich . judging from teasers , it could break in either direction , but there s no denying the sheer awesomeness of every raw gameplay demonstration . in a demo screened last year , a humongous boat crashes into a bridge , and time stops as the hero leaps across pieces of debris to safety . gameplay from quantum break s demonstration at gamescom but behind the scenes , quantum break has had a bumpy road . one of the two new games announced at the xbox one reveal in , quantum break was initially a poster child for microsoft s push to make the xbox a multimedia convergence point . streaming television and playing games wouldn t just happen in separate , discrete apps . in games like quantum break , they d blend together . in quantum break , the third person shooter would be intercut with a live action video from the villain s point of view . that means the team behind quantum break had to learn the ins and outs of tv production with help of teams in los angeles and redmond , thousands of miles from the developer s office in espoo , finland . quantum break includes a television show four episodes , minutes longthen in , microsoft shifted gears . microsoft entertainment studios was shuttered , and the kinect was no longer automatically bundled with xbox one . quantum break creative director sam lake compares the iterative process of the console s development to that of making a game . step by step , lake says , certain things that had been more important for xbox one became less important , where others turned out bigger than in the original plan . he says at times microsoft s adjustments affected the kind of important and strategic benefits of certain features in the game . quantum break still includes a television show four episodes , minutes long , complemented by some shorter cut scenes but much of its marketing has emphasized its place in the shooter genre . players will even have the option to skip the tv episodes altogether . lake sounds happy with where the project ultimately landed at its core , it s always been a traditional third person shooter . first and foremost , it s this big , story driven , cinematic action game , says lake . it is a core game , in many ways . with some trial and error and experiments along the way . i think that s where xbox one as a console has landed , too where games matter . the evening before i meet loftis , i sat down in a windowless meeting room with chris novak , xbox s design architect . he has two decks for me a powerpoint presentation and an actual , physical deck of cards . this , novak tells me , is the presentation an outside developer gets when microsoft is considering a partnership for a new game . novak is implacable in age , sporting a pressed t shirt , a leather jacket , and gelled hair . he could be or he has the energy of a teenager with the tenacity of someone who works in an industry where million dollar projects go belly up in a month . when we have a company meeting , it takes up a stadium . novak cues up powerpoint . the goal of this presentation , novak explains , is to get the developer to really understand what we can bring to bear , to help them make the game they ve always wanted to do . the meeting is equal parts sales pitch and bonding exercise . novak emphasizes microsoft s sheer scale when we have a company meeting , it takes up a stadium and stresses that partners get to lean on a , person strong tech and entertainment company with competitive knowledge and access to everything from dark fiber networks , to office complexes full of servers , to an extensive user research division that pushes through tens of thousands of people each year . we are a huge company , he tells prospective developers , think about how to wield us . novak then fans the deck of cards across the table . written on each card is a cheeky headline followed by a short blurb . a lot of the cards seem like obvious ideas gameplay gameplay is king while others point to merchandising campaigns and cross media productions . a handful of cards are labeled showcase these represent the most expensive and expansive gambles , the pie in the sky plans xbox wants to emphasize with its new generation of games and hardware . novak asks me for a game idea , and i blurt a series of unrelated words a massively multiplayer zombie bunny adventure like destiny but cuter . unfazed , novak immediately lifts a card labeled cloud computing . we have this thing called azure , novak says . it s billions of dollars invested in data centers all around the planet . novak is off , explaining how cloud computing can enable the zombie bunny adventure game to rethink the traditional mmo . how would the game look if it had a shelf life of one year , five years , a decade ? what is it we really want to do ? what is our big ambition ? zombie bunnies is going to solve cancer . somehow , we start discussing cancer . our vision is that this solves cancer , says novak . zombie bunnies is going to solve cancer . okay great , how can we do that ? we need the cloud architecture to not only enable matchmaking in the mmo , but also to do the dna supercomputing crunching in the background . novak doesn t actually believe xbox or any of its games will solve cancer . what he s really after is the core purpose of a game any game . novak wants to know why you want to make a game , and how xbox can help . in my experience , says novak , there s a card in here for every team . on occasion , microsoft studios goes directly to a developer with a card in mind . for instance , novak says , we wanted to take billions of dollars of risk in order to make cloud gaming happen . but we needed a dance partner to kick those things off at the game level . we were effectively waiting for that person to show up . that person eventually showed up , and his name was dave jones . he is the creative director at reagent games , the lead studio developing crackdown . a screenshot from crackdown crackdown is flabbergasting to watch . players come together to fight crime as well as destroy an entire futuristic city piece by piece , from the newsstands to the skyscrapers . architecture splits into thousands of brittle pieces , and entire skylines fall in catastrophic domino effect . but what looks like an explosion fest from the outside , is , against all odds , an investment in microsoft s global cloud computing ambitions for real . crackdown is an investment in global cloud computing for realdave jones is a godfather of the now ubiquitous open world genre . in , he founded dma design the developer of the first grand theft auto . in , he took the genre online with the original crackdown . jones has also co founded numerous video game developers and tech companies . his latest startup , cloudgine , intends to improve the responsiveness of cloud computing . if it works , video game developers won t have to rely on customers to buy the latest expensive hardware instead more and more computing will happen on far away servers . an early demonstration of the tech shows two identical skyscrapers bursting into pieces one , running on traditional hardware , slows and stutters until it becomes a glorified slide show . the other , taking advantage of additional cloud computing , runs smoothly as chunks of building break and scatter across the screen . because crackdown doubles as a research and development opportunity , microsoft is able and willing to toss in its support . when jones team needs to better understand cloud infrastructure , microsoft provides access to data centers . when the cloudgine team has questions about cloud infrastructure , microsoft s experts give answers . if crackdown sets a precedent , jones tells me , it could revolutionize the entire industry . and both xbox one and microsoft , with years of experience already under its belt , would be positioned to benefit immediately . frankly , says novak , we are changing the way that microsoft cloud computing platform azure s functionality works because of his game . a screenshot from state of decaynot every game that comes through microsoft is a multi million dollar gamble spanning multiple studios across the globe , nor is every game expected to reach the masses . at least not at first . i actually love this notion of finding seed ips , says loftis , and helping game creators realize their very first vision . the more we can engage with that developer , the more releases we can put into the marketplace , the more likely that it might become one of these franchises . loftis points to state of decay . initially released as a downloadable title for xbox in , the open world zombie game sold over , copies in its first hours , and broke the million mark within its first year . the game didn t always run reliably , and bubbled over with bugs . but its core mechanic the player embodied many survivors , all of whom could die permanently was fresh to the genre . it was very much an experiment , says loftis . in , microsoft studios signed a multi year , multi game contract with the studio behind state of decay , undead labs . loftis would not comment , but rumors around the project describe a substantially larger , more ambitious , and presumably more expensive production for a massively multiplayer online game . the seed model encourages creativity while minimizing financial risk similar to piloting a tv show before ordering a full series . downloadable games have no cross country shipping fees , no disc manufacturing , and no partnerships with any brick and mortar storefronts . thousands of developers have left their jobs at thousand person studios to make smaller , more personal projects , giving microsoft a bounty of talent to partner with . concept art for recorerecore is the youngest of microsoft s big titles for , announced just this summer . if quantum break represents xbox one s early ambitions , and crackdown points toward the future , recore fits snugly within the company s current games above all else ethos . little is known about the project developed by armature studios , an austin based developer formed by the heads of the metroid reboot for nintendo , and comcept inc . , an osaka and tokyo based developer founded by keiji inafune mega man , onimusha , dead rising . pressed for details , armature co founder and game director mark pacini humors me recore , at its heart , harks back to a different era in gaming . recore , at its heart , harks back to a different era in gaming , pacini says , and trying to put a new spin on it , based on games that myself and inafune san have done in the past that aren t really being done anymore . he name drops games like metroid and zelda as possible inspirations . when pacini first met with microsoft to discuss collaboration , he was skeptical . he d been disappointed by the xbox one s reveal , particularly the emphasis on film and television , and was unsure he had interest in the console . big publishers , he explains , also have a stigma of being too controlling , gradually expunging creative freedom from their partners with endless demands . microsoft came with a clear idea a game for gamers . if recore really does turn out to be the metroid zelda like throwback pacini hints at , then microsoft will get what it wanted . pacini says microsoft studios has been involved but not prescriptive , a relationship that benefits from a mutual understanding of what both parties wish to create and an abundance of resources . where the development of quantum break evolved with the changing strategies and leadership at xbox and microsoft studios , and crackdown constructed itself around its proprietary technology , pacini describes a much more streamlined approach for recore . that means a pure gaming experience , free of distractions like kinect and smartglass . the runway s been cleared . we can just concentrate on making a really good game those things just kind of get brought up less often , says pacini , and all of a sudden they re never brought up in a conversation anymore , and it has nothing to do with anybody fighting for one thing or another . it s just a natural part of consumers responding to certain things they like or dislike about the hardware . it feels like , for us , the runway s been kind of cleared . so we can just concentrate on making a really good game and putting features in that make sense for this game . are things easier , i ask , with xbox s new leadership , like loftis and xbox head phil spencer ? with a lot of publishers , pacini says , the immediate group that you re working with the publisher development group they re always kind of trying to get it past marketing people , past the businessman , past whatever . our group has to get it past the team at microsoft studio . that s a huge difference . this team , pacini explains , has a history of making games they know what a successful one looks like . back in the quiet corner of xbox hq s break area , i have a question for loftis that is so obvious and so big that i m a little embarrassed to ask why ? why does microsoft bother making games ? the company makes billions off windows and enterprise software , and xbox is a comparably small portion of the profit pie that , as of late , has attracted a good deal of bad attention . xbox headquarters in the redmond campus is surrounded by countless other buildings , many larger and with more complex and lucrative sounding names on their signage . i think one of the best reasons for microsoft to continue to engage in games is just because gamers are also consumers , says loftis . that loyalty , the passion that they bring to their gaming and entertainment experiences , the communities that they build . loftis offers kinect as an example . the motion controller began as a peripheral for games on the xbox , but even before microsoft released an official version for windows , hackers and do it yourselfers began finding other uses for the device , from art installations , to medical applications , to interior design tools . these incredible experiences , loftis says , were so far beyond anything that anybody that worked in the kinect program had ever visualized . it created a fly wheel around a creative ecosystem . that s just good for the world . what s good for the world is obviously good for microsoft . the hard truth is that microsoft s renewed focus on xbox and games and the gamer is bunk if nobody owns the hardware to play them . but the solution isn t and can t be as simple as selling more xbox ones . microsoft s big mistake with the launch of xbox one was ignoring how the typical person consumes media . at launch , the hardware brought together our various forms of entertainment on a singular device . you could play a game , have a skype call , and receive fantasy football stats all at once , and in the same place . this was a jetsons like fantasy years ago , in the era of the original xbox . in , we expect media to follow us wherever we gobut our media habits are neither as static nor as constrained today as they were in . when we read a kindle ebook or stream a netflix show , we may start on a laptop at work , switch to a smartphone for our commute , and finish on a tablet or television at home . in , we expect media to follow us wherever we go . enter minecraft . a little over a year ago , microsoft acquired minecraft , along with its developer mojang , for a reported . billion . yes , billion . if you haven t heard of the lego like online game in which players construct entire worlds with friends , ask the nearest child or parent . for them , the game is inescapable . minecraft has sold over million copies , making it one of microsoft studio s most popular brands . the most successful call of duty sold . million copies . the most successful grand theft auto sold million . minecraft has sold more copies than halo through combined . minecraft s global domination stems from its extreme availability . you can play it on xbox one , xbox , windows , and a dozen other platforms , including microsoft s competitor playstation , apple s ios , google s android , and even amazon s firetv . an acquisition like minecraft , says phil spencer , the head of xbox , makes so much sense because minecraft is so pervasive both as a service , as video , obviously as the game across so many different devices it really is a manifestation of what i think gaming can be . you can t help but wonder if phil spencer was created in some unmarked moonshot laboratory to be equally palatable to both board members and customers . at public events , the man who oversees the future of xbox hardware and software wears indie game t shirts under a blazer . his conversations seamlessly weave between corporate strategy and ornate opinions on forgotten video games of the s . he also sits on the board of windows . it gives me a real good insight into what we re doing with the service and how gaming can show up in windows itself . i feel good about the early steps there . it opens up a ton of opportunities , i think most importantly for our development partners . in the months after minecraft s acquisition , the company has begun merging xbox and windows , not in half steps , but leaps . microsoft has begun merging xbox and windows , not in half steps , but leapsa new xbox app for windows lets xbox one owners stream their games onto their computers , allowing them to play in a different room . features like messaging , voice chat , and activity feeds are included . it s a work in progress , spencer says , with plenty of additions and updates to come . over a billion computers run windows , and over million devices run windows . they re about the only numbers in software that dwarf minecraft s . as we embrace windows users as an active part of the xbox community , it opens up opportunities for our first party games , says spencer . he calls xbox s proximity to windows beachfront property . as of its fall system update , xbox one now runs on windows . along with an improved user interface and the option to play over a hundred xbox games on the hardware , the shift also made the xbox experience , in the words of my colleague tom warren , so much faster . both spencer and windows leadership have talked about the streamlining of development the operating system provides , painting a future in which apps created for one windows device work on all other windows devices . in april , microsoft ceo satya nadella told investors that windows will be a service across an array of devices and will usher in a new era where the mobility of the experience , not the device , is paramount . the initiative has already begun to seep through microsoft studios . lionhead studios , responsible for the fable series , is developing the next fable legends for xbox one and windows . rare ltd . is developing its multiplayer adventure game sea of thieves the same way . core franchises are making their way to pc , too . albeit slowly . gears of war ultimate edition , a polished remake of the original , is scheduled for release on windows in the future . when i ask why the latest halo isn t available on windows , the head of industries and the halo franchise , bonnie ross , points to the headway the franchise has already made away from consoles halo mobile games the halo waypoint social platform and the upcoming halo wars , a real time strategy game for both xbox one and pc . it s being deliberate , says ross . so yes . we will , of course , play a critical role on windows , as i think that we re an important ip for the company . it s doing the right thing at the right time . if and when the time comes for new halo games to appear on windows , the thinning line between console and computer will have all but disappeared . if the xbox one launched with a catastrophic lack of focus on games , it s fair to ask whether this windows strategy doesn t also presage yet more problems , another move to minimize console systems . i love that console experience , says spencer . it s obviously the core of what xbox is about , and xbox one is our most important gaming device inside the company . there s no doubt about that . we also know there are millions and millions of gamers who access microsoft in other ways , whether it s windows , their phone , skype it could be many different things every day . loftis wants to make gaming more inclusive across the board . as head of gaming inside of microsoft , i think about how we make sure that all of those customers feel as supported and engaged as the xbox fans do who own a game console . loftis describes the expansion as broadening their demographics and making gaming more inclusive across the board . most of the games that we ve announced , says loftis , and that we ve talked about so far are obviously very controller centric , says loftis , but believe me we are exploring as many ways to make all of our experiences relevant across all of our platforms as we possibly can . as televisions , computers , and smart devices become the all in one devices that seek to displace consoles , does xbox just become an app or a storefront or a brand ? no , spencer says , i fully expect that you ll see another console from us our best customers are xbox console customers , and i want to keep those people engaged both on the xbox one and anything we might do in the future . i m percent committed to that . i don t want to dilute what the xbox console customer feels , says spencer . i want to expand what we re able to do for more customers . before we wrap our interview , i ask loftis about making games in the pre xbox era . we were a little bit of a renegade group , she says , making games back in the mid s for windows . in those days microsoft was aware that windows was a huge phenomenon but that in order to keep windows relevant we needed to make sure that we were continually pleasing consumers . not just back offices , but to have windows at home as well . that was really our initial purpose . there was this emerging thing called gaming at home let s latch onto that and see what we can do . two decades , multiple leadership shuffles , and billions of dollars later , microsoft s original game plan comes full circle with a twist court gamers , regardless of where one finds them . windows or xbox , work or home , somewhere in between . wherever you go , there microsoft is . a couple weeks after my visit to redmond , shannon loftis got another promotion . though technically her title remains the same , she now shares leadership of microsoft studios with hanno lemke , the general manager of microsoft studios in europe the same studio where spencer and loftis first worked together along with the company s first party studio heads . loftis now has even more say over bigger games . loftis will also become a public face for the company . in years past , former microsoft studios vp kudo tsunoda and spencer made appearances on stage at xbox s biggest and most lavish events . now loftis will get her chance . maybe she will bring back the swagger and spectacle of the past . you can imagine it now loftis is lowered to the stage on a literal xbox shaped cloud . she steps up to the podium , and with a confident grin , proudly announces the latest entry in a property she nurtured from a small downloadable game to aaa blockbusters . you can play it this fall , she ll say , on xbox one and all windows devices . correction a previous version of this article stated that gears of war ultimate edition was scheduled for release on windows this holiday season . the article has been amended to reflect that the game s release is scheduled for an unannounced future date . edited by dieter bohn , michael zelenko