 how do you price a bottle of milkshake ? everyone from ayn rand to karl marx will give you a slightly different answer , but the majority of solutions boil down to some combination of cost , competition , popularity , and good old trial and error . that basic formula hasn t changed for centuries . the modern rise of supersized , sell everything stores has , however , fundamentally altered the method of calculation . with over different varieties of canned tomatoes on walmart shelves , the complexity of putting a sticker on any one of them has exploded . to take the guessing out of this process , big store chains are now turning to data . data of the scale and breadth to match their football pitch sized supermarkets . big data . this past week i visited the offices of dunnhumby , a company that started off as a charming husband and wife operation in and has since grown into one of the biggest customer analytics firms in the world . it specializes in collecting and making sense of the masses of information supermarkets collect on a daily basis both about their own operations and their customers particular shopping habits . it s all about ensuring logic at the shelf , says vp sean dangler as he walks me through a demo of the kss retail pricestrat software . kss retail is a subsidiary of dunnhumby , which is itself owned by tesco , the uk s dominant supermarket chain and the world s second largest retailer after walmart . tesco recently deployed pricestrat across its uk stores , meaning that the system i was looking at was the very same that sets the price of a loaf of tiger bread . million loyalty cards can tell you a lot about the way people thinkdangler takes me down the virtual yogurt aisle to demonstrate his concept of shelf logic . we see no fewer than varieties to choose from . he needs to set a price for each one that coheres with every variant nearby and makes sense to the browsing shopper . it s not enough to simply know that a pack should cost less per item than a six pack , nor that branded yogurts should command a price premium . this system is aware enough to tell its user by exactly how much each of those prices should vary . dynamically and in real time . the key to all of this is your store loyalty card . dunnhumby got its big breakthrough with the introduction of the tesco clubcard as the uk s first customer loyalty card in . today , it continues to manage all the incoming data from the roughly million clubcard members and it s that additional insight that the pricestrat software taps into . knowing customers names , addresses , family situation , and shopping habits , it can detect such nuanced things as your yogurt flavor preferences and internal hierarchy of brands . it s capable of identifying the precise price point at which you would switch between brands or how much incentive you d need to buy the bigger pack . it s this extra layer of personalized data , which is combined with two years worth of checkout receipts , that makes pricestrat formidably knowledgeable . even if you ve never stepped foot in a tesco store before , your shopping habits are now predictable to the big supermarket chain , which can synthesize a model of your preferences by referring to demographically similar shoppers . anonymous data is good , but it only provides an average . the customer specific tracking that comes from the use of loyalty cards is exponentially more valuable in adding social and economic dimensions to what stores know about their customers . it also sets the stage for pricestrat s next big trick forecasting sales as prices change . pricestrat can simulate the impact of any pricing change to a percent certainty . once dangler has set up his basic pricing rules , he s ready to start testing out potential discounts and special offers to try and improve sales . he goes for an aggressive price cut on the own brand natural yogurt , cutting the profit margin to a few pennies , and the volume of predicted sales balloons as a result . it turns out that people are really price sensitive when buying cold desserts . alas , a large proportion of the gains is offset by a drop in branded sales , meaning the idea would probably result in worsening relationships with suppliers in exchange for a modest increase in profits . we keep searching for the optimal solution , with every small change having an immediate trickle down effect on related products . it s like a chaos theory testing suite , with each price being a flap of a butterfly s wings . the only thing missing is a button to make the system automatically optimize everything , you still need humans to input scenarios . it s like a chaos theory testing suite , with each price being a flap of a butterfly s wingsalong the way , i discover phenomena like asymmetric cross price elasticity an eight pack s price affects sales of four packs more strongly than vice versa and the fact that a buy one , get one free offer is more cost efficient than a straight percent price cut that s because some people will still take just one . melding such insights with seasonal trends and household specific behavior tracking can lead to incredibly accurate predictions of the price a supermarket needs to set to get its next shopper to buy yogurt . dangler tells me that the pricestrat sales estimates are consistently within percent of the actual numbers no matter what weird and multilayered scenario you throw at the system . i notice that almost none of this sophistication addresses the classic considerations of cost and competition , and dangler tells me that s quite intentional . companies like his are trying to invert the traditional structure of looking at per item profit margins and competitors prices first , choosing to take customer preferences as their starting point . his software includes price comparisons and direct costs , but only as pieces in the greater puzzle of organizing a vast array of goods and products in an economically optimal way . the amount of information we produce , not just consume , was the subject of a recent blog post by new microsoft ceo satya nadella , who believes we re on the brink of an era of ambient intelligence . with the use of digital devices becoming ubiquitous and generating an ever expanding data exhaust from each individual , nadella thinks that the future of computing lies in correctly interpreting and learning from that mass of information . ibm , which offers a similar degree customer analytics platform to pricestrat , reported in that percent of the world s data had been produced in the previous two years . though nadella and guys like those i met at dunnhumby are universally optimistic about this trend , it does create an obvious privacy concern . what scares me , remarked lord maclaurin , tesco s boss at the time of the launch of the clubcard , is that you know more about my customers after three months than i know after years . what scares me is that you know more about my customers after three months than i know after years . in an act that is simultaneously democratizing and disquieting , supermarkets are starting to place the customer at the center of their pricing strategies . they know more about who we are , what we like to buy , and how we tend to buy it than ever before , and they re reaching out for even more . tesco has successfully rolled out its hudl android tablet and a clubcard tv online service as a pair of extra incentives to encourage its users to volunteer more of their information . in many ways , it s just an effort to keep pace with data driven online companies like amazon and google , whose profitability relies on knowing as much about their users as possible . my experience with the pricestrat software has been a study in better profitability through science it s a mathematical system that accounts for a wide spectrum of consequences , but takes no regard of ethical or socioeconomic considerations . nonetheless , the actual functioning of the software , the vast databases it can harness , and the oftentimes counterintuitive insights it can produce are undeniably impressive . it might never be smart enough to determine the fair price of a milkshake , but it can certainly figure out the most profitable one . 