 the world cup is the biggest single sporting event in the world , and that means one thing for the tv industry it s the biggest opportunity to sell new sets . there s no better way to show off your inch panel than calling your friends over to shout for the usa against germany , or england versus italy . we expect the demand for tvs to increase considerably due to the upcoming world cup matches , said samsung vp simon sung on the company s last earnings call . samsung believes that the uhd tv era will unfold this year and this is a year in which tv makers have been pushing upgrades harder than ever . ultra high definition uhd , or k , sets dominated ces , and are now becoming available at reasonably affordable prices . we believe that the uhd tv era will unfold this year , samsung tells the verge . sony agrees it finds opportunity in the world cup as a vehicle to introduce our new technologies . a new tv format on the market in time for this year s world cup in brazil sounds like perfect timing . there s just one problem you can t actually watch the world cup in k . at least , not in the way you would want and expect . only three matches will actually be filmed in the format , with sony handling the production these will form part of the official world cup documentary movie , which you ll be able to download at some point after the tournament is over . brazilian network globo will also screen these games on outdoor k displays in rio de janeiro . but there won t be any live streaming or broadcasts to the home , meaning anyone planning to watch the tournament on their new k set will have to make do with regular p channels . sony declined to comment on the specifics of its k broadcasting technology and world cup plans , except to say that uhd sports production is an important strategic area for the company . sport , and the major events like the world cup and olympics , is a huge driver for take up of new technology , says dave gordon , a sports broadcasting consultant who led the bbc s coverage of major events for over a decade . however it has to be live and you need a huge amount of capacity to distribute it . that s the main issue broadcasters just don t have the bandwidth right now . even p , the native resolution of most tvs sold today , is seen as too much of a strain to send over the air for regular programming . it s an altogether different situation from two years ago , where tv makers and stations alike were pushing d for the olympic games in london . the bbc s efforts in this space were not a real success , with limited viewing , says gordon . we only did so because we had to be seen to be at the cutting edge of all technologies for a home games and we would have been criticized by the industry if we hadn t . this time around the bbc is conducting experimental k broadcasts to closed locations , but decided against public screenings because of logistical issues . samsung is touting a soccer mode on its tv lineupit s understandable that those in the market for a new tv would want to future proof themselves with a k panel , so companies aren t letting the lack of native k content dissuade them from pushing uhd tvs alongside the world cup . sony tells the verge that it expects the tournament to boost sales of p sets as well as k models . samsung , meanwhile , is touting the soccer mode on its lineup , which it says delivers crisper picture quality to ensure the viewer experiences a greener shade of grass , more lifelike details of the players , and vivid sound that makes people at home feel as if they are actually at the stadium . that may not be the most convincing pitch , but k tvs can still deliver better than hd results by upscaling the content to fit the higher resolution at least in theory . unlike sony , samsung has no solution for providing native k content , but instead is claiming its upscaling technology as a selling point . in the short term , due to the shortage of available uhd content in the market , the need for upscaling content is quite high , says a representative . this is where samsung has excelled , with our upscaling technology receiving high praise . still , none of this is likely to excite many people into buying a uhd set , and broadcasters have been slow to announce solid plans for upgrading their infrastructure . the best bet may be streaming over the internet netflix made waves at ces with its push into k content , letting those with the right hardware watch shows like house of cards and breaking bad in the higher resolution . but the company is unlikely to expand into live tv any time soon , says chief product officer neil hunt , who believes netflix s advantage is in on demand content with a long shelf life . once you ve broadcast it once , a second or a third showing falls increasingly on starving ground , he says . you ve used up the audience who were prepared to tune in , the audience gets more and more scattered and dispersed , so it s hard to reach them . so the long shelf life content is where we think we have an advantage . the rights for live sports events are also hugely expensive to acquire , so it may not make sense for the likes of netflix to get involved just yet . instead , the company is representing sports with content like this is not a ball , a documentary about the history of the soccer ball that will premiere on june th . live k becomes possible once super fast , high capacity broadband is rolled out to every home that s not to say the internet won t play a role in getting k content into the home . the bbc and japan s nhk collaborated on k broadcast experiments for the olympics , using university network janet to beam super hi vision live images into theaters around the uk , with nbc taking a feed to the us . once super fast , high capacity broadband is rolled out to every home , then live k and k coverage of sport in living rooms becomes a real possibility , says gordon , though he doesn t have an estimate of what kind of speeds would be needed . but he believes the experimentation was truly sensational it set the standards for the future and could very well be the big idea for the olympics in tokyo . six years is a long time to wait to get the most out of a tv , though , and k remains very much in the realm of the early adopter . the documentary film may be the highest profile uhd content to date , and samsung believes that world cup footage will accelerate the uhd content standardization process . but it s far from a curtain raiser for the new technology , and if anything highlights just how far we have to go until k reaches the mainstream . if you re happy enough with your regular tv , rest assured that when the world cup kicks off next week , you re not going to miss out on much . 