 today s big tech news might be the fancy looking surface studio pc , but microsoft also decided to make a major virtual reality announcement during its windows event a whole new line of vr headsets with built in tracking sensors , starting at the surprisingly low price of . manufactured by microsoft partners like asus , acer , lenovo , hp , and dell , the headsets were shown briefly , and in little detail . but we saw just enough to raise a lot of questions about how they ll actually work and what they ll mean for virtual reality . we re partnering with top pc makers to build a range of innovative vr headsets starting at . coming in . microsoftevent pic . twitter . com pmnfbjfze windows windows october , what is inside out , six degree of freedom tracking , and why is it a big deal ? the major selling point of microsoft s new line of devices is what s known as inside out , six degree of freedom tracking and if they pull it off , it could mark a legitimate breakthrough for virtual reality . six degrees of freedom refers to motion tracking that can tell when you re moving through space , not just turning your head . right now , it s the key difference between a high end headset like the oculus rift , and a mid range or cheap one like the gear vr or google cardboard . but in order to enable dof , systems like the rift require an external tracking system that makes the whole setup more complicated and less portable . this is where inside out tracking comes in . instead of having an external camera read the position of leds on your head which is how the rift works , sensors built directly into the headset will detect how the wearer is moving and adjust their in vr position to match . as microsoft executive vp terry myerson puts it , this means people would have zero need for a dedicated vr room they d just put the headset on and start moving around . how is this different from hololens ? hololens is an augmented microsoft prefers mixed reality headset , which inserts holograms into reality . virtual reality headsets totally overwrite your view of the world , using magnifying lenses and a flat screen to project an image around your entire field of vision . you can load the same d objects in both , but a vr headset will display it in a completely virtual environment , while hololens will project it on top of whatever you re already looking at . that said , there are some significant similarities , including the fact that hololens uses inside out tracking to pin its holograms in place and in fact , myerson tells us that the headsets will be leveraging all kinds of hololens technologies . how much will you actually be able to move ? this is a serious , and unsettled , question . the ultimate promise of inside out tracking is that you can pretty much create the holodeck as long as you have physical space to move , the headset will be able to tell where you re going . but that requires hardware and software that can track location accurately over long distances . hololens lets people move around entire rooms , but the consequences for a hologram drifting a little which , in my experience , does happen are a lot less severe than having your entire world slip out of place . in today s demo , nobody moved more than a couple of steps , going from one end of a closet sized room to another . even this would be a marked improvement over non positionally tracked headsets like the gear vr , because being in a world that doesn t react to your motion at all can be jarring or even nauseating . but it s not equivalent to the experience you d get in most high end vr headsets . what kind of computer will this require ? from what we ve seen so far , the headset also isn t self contained like hololens it s wired to a windows computer of some sort . myerson knocked the rift and vive for requiring expensive pcs , and a press image showed the headset alongside what looks like a lenovo yoga laptop , not a supercharged gaming machine . this would make it a more accessible device , although it could also mean its graphical capabilities are limited . on the flip side , it s worth noting that hp and dell are both working on powerful vr backpacks , through their respective omen and alienware gaming brands . right now , they effectively only support the htc vive , but they d also be a perfect fit for the headsets microsoft is describing . how will you interact with the headsets ? controllers are a bigger and bigger part of the virtual reality equation . htc has its trusty remotes , playstation vr uses the aging move controllers , oculus touch controllers are coming out in december , and google designed a simple remote for its newly announced daydream headset . microsoft hasn t shown us a dedicated physical controller , and on stage , people seemed to interact with the headset via voice command , like hololens . if microsoft s partners are using hololens camera tech , we could see them adopt the air tap hand gesture as well . this is far from the most robust interface out there , but it neatly solves the basic problem of interactivity without requiring any new hardware . for more complicated interactions , people could turn to mice , keyboards , gamepads , and other existing systems . where was oculus ? a year ago , microsoft and oculus seemed to have a tight relationship oculus shipped its headset with an xbox one gamepad , and microsoft announced that you d be able to play xbox games on your rift . but that latter promise still hasn t panned out , and neither oculus nor the rift apparently merited a shout out at today s event . in fact , myerson implicitly trashed the headset as less immersive than microsoft s new lineup . you could argue that this is because microsoft is treating inside out vr as a totally separate category from the rift and vive which is also sold through the microsoft store , but wasn t mentioned today . but there s still one odd wrinkle oculus announced its own inside out headset , called the santa cruz prototype , just a few weeks ago . it s not quite the same as what microsoft showed off for one thing , it s totally self contained , not tethered to a laptop . but if there was ever a time for the two companies to work together , this was it and oculus was nowhere to be seen . when will these come out , and how much exactly will they cost ? we still don t know what individual microsoft partners headsets will look like or be named . microsoft says that they ll be coming in , and they re described as part of the windows creators update , a big d focused upgrade to the operating system . if they re released exactly at launch , which is by no means a given , that narrows it down to next spring . microsoft is supposed to be providing more details soon at the winhec conference in shenzhen , china . as for pricing , the headsets start at , compared to the playstation vr , oculus rift , and htc vive . but we don t know the upper price range , or how much the price will vary based on manufacturer and specifications . myerson tells us that some of those headsets being worked on are just fantastic , and won t be at lower price points , but some will be at these low price points . microsoft has promised something that doesn t yet exist in mainstream vr , at a price that s potentially very unusual . almost every major vr headset release so far has slipped by several months at least , and prices have often ended up higher than people expected . so until we have firm launch details , you should consider these headsets next generation products , not just around the corner competitors to the rift or vive . that said , they re certainly an exciting idea and we ll be eagerly awaiting more news from microsoft s partners . microsoft s wednesday event recapped