 elon musk laid out his plan to colonize mars at a conference on tuesday , but it was during the q ampampa session that a woman asked one of the key questions who will be chosen to embark on a risky trip to colonize a harsh planet ? if normal people want to travel to mars , do we need some specific requirements ? she asked . can normal people go ? the spacex ceo had two answers to this line of questioning . we re trying to make it such that anyone can go , he said , with maybe a few days of training . however , the trip will be dangerous . the risk of fatality will be really high . there s no way around it , he later said . it would be basically , are you prepared to die ? if that okay , then you re a candidate for going . but choosing a candidate for a mission to mars might require a bit more than that , and sending anyone to space sounds like a recipe for disaster . astronauts who go into low earth orbit have to pass a strict vetting process . living in space , in a confined environment under high stress situations , takes both physical and mental tolls . so , we re left wondering how much training do you really need ? what personality traits should these spacex sponsored mars colonists have ? should the crews be all male or all female ? the verge spoke to experts to try to fill in the holes in musk s plan and figure out who would be the perfect candidates for this mission . first off , is it true that anyone with a few days of training can undertake a trip through deep space ? let s break this down . on a purely physical level , it s true that you don t need to be a world class athlete to be selected . a reasonably fit person without health complications could be cleared , according to sheryl bishop , a researcher who has worked at the mars desert research station , which simulates life on mars for scientific purposes . select people who are excited and can live with others without getting into fightsnasa requires astronaut hopefuls to pass a space physical that is basically a military physical . it also requires good vision , good blood pressure , and a certain height range . none of this is out of the realm of possibility for most people . nasa doesn t require extraordinary strength or speed . physical fitness , however , is only one part of selection , and it s arguably the easiest part . for nasa , you also need to have a technical degree math , engineering , etc . and at least three years of relevant work experience says anne roemer , the agency s manager for astronaut selection . technical skills and personality traits will limit who gets chosen , much more so than physical requirements . since , only about astronauts have been selected . barry wilmore , for example , first applied to be an astronaut in . he wasn t chosen until , despite having two master s degrees in technical fields and having worked as a navy pilot . wilmore says he was challenged by how rigorous and stressful the technical training was training could have five major systems on the simulation shuttle failing all at once . what kind of personality traits are important ? will all mars colonists have to be gung ho adventurer types ? not exactly . of course , all candidates need to be cool under pressure . a lot of nasa astronauts come from the military , and have flying or combat experience . wilmore , for example who has spent days in space , mostly on the iss flew in operation desert storm during the gulf war , so it was clear that he could perform well under high stress situations . when you are flying , you gotta minimize being within your own mind , says wilmore . you can get flustered and you gotta push that back and be able to clear minded because your life and that of the crew hangs in the balance . good astronauts have an adventurous spirit , but they also need to be disciplined and able to work well with others . life on a space station , or a spaceship , can be boring . people live in a tiny confined space and need to figure out things like how to divide up the housework . when it comes to putting together a crew , a mix of technical skills is also important . you need doctors to keep everyone healthy , engineers that really understand how the ship works , and scientists who can conduct research experiments . all men groups aren t a good ideathis has changed since the early days of spaceflight . the first astronauts we had were stereotypical explorers , the kind of people who want to walk across glaciers and do fieldwork , bishop says . but those first space trips were short , so it was okay to have personalities that don t play well with people over prolonged periods of time , bishop says . going to mars , however , will take months , so it ll be important to select people who are excited and can live with others without getting into fights . do any past expeditions resemble what a trip to mars would be like and what can we learn from them ? mars trips resemble expeditions to antarctica . these explorers have the drive to survive a punishing environment , but can still collaborate with a few people in a remote area for a long time . they might make some of the best possible recruits for a mission to mars . life in the south pole , for example , can be highly regimented , says lauren wise , a laboratory specialist who investigates the contaminated areas of antarctica . she gets up around am every day . there are set meal times , she had to write on a board when she was leaving station limits , and pay very close attention to instructions . life can also be physically and mentally challenging , says wise . she s a small person and sometimes walking in the stronger winds can be quite difficult , she says . she misses activities back home like yoga and swimming and the lack of fresh fruit is a challenge . sharing the small , remote research station with different types of people also requires her to be tolerant and prepared for anything . the ever changing conditions mean that sometimes what you have planned doesn t always occur or happen in the way which you would like it to , she says . you also have to be able to think a little outside the box as you can t just pop down to the hardware store or shop if you need something . so , spacex wants to send people on the first trip . what kind of group is ideal ? all one gender ? coed ? all men groups aren t a good idea . women typically are more supportive than men in their interactions with other group members , and all male groups can be more competitive , says namni goel , a researcher at the university of pennsylvania who has written about sex and gender in space adaptation . other studies show that mixed gender crews do better than all men because adding women to an all male crew can make men less territorial and rude . there s less research on all female groups , and studies from space and other isolated and confined environments often use small sample sizes . it is also important to consider individual differences when thinking about group composition for space missions , adds goel . according to bishop , it s possible that all female groups aren t as good as mixed gender groups because women tend to focus very much on building interpersonal relationships , and having men around might make them focus more on the specific task at hand . there should be a range of ages too because younger people tend to be more flexible in their thinking , while older ones have more experience and perspective , according to bishop . skillset diversity is also important , though large groups of more than people tend to break off into small groups , she adds . this creates an us and them mentality for example , us scientists versus everyone else or us engineers versus everyone else . leaders will need to be wary of this situation and make sure people feel a strong sense of common purpose . what about the psychological challenges ? space is beautiful , but it is also lonely . when you re stuck on a spaceship , you can t just go visit friends and family . wise , the scientist working in antarctica , has some experience with homesickness . her grandmother died while she was stationed , and that was a hard time for her , she says . but she could call her family at least once a week and keep in touch by email . spaceflight is far more than you can imagine during a trip to mars , communication with earth would probably have a to minute delay . not only does this mean no more immediate communication with mission control in emergency situations , weekly calls to loved ones are also out . the people who go will need to be extra resilient to loneliness . there s a lot we still don t know in terms of the psychological challenges of a mission to mars . on the international space station , for example , astronauts can gaze out the window and look at the earth . on a trip to mars , there ll be a time when our planet will look like a tiny star . no one knows how people might react to that . but flying in space can also be a positive experience , of course . astronauts who have viewed the earth from space have reported deep psychological changes , which is often called the overview effect . it s been described as a sense of mental clarity and a feeling of a new kind of perspective and self awareness . looking out at the earth over the course of a year and seeing the impacts that our presence has on the environment , especially on some parts of asia , you know makes me feel like there s more that everyone can do , including myself , to make earth a better place for the future inhabitants , says scott kelly , who spent days on the iss the longest any american has lived in space . wilmore , another nasa astronaut , says that spaceflight is far more than you can imagine . think about leaving the planet and circling the entire globe in minutes you see how it changes and it s just amazing , he says . there s a weightless feeling you feel like superman because you can fly and move heavy objects . it s truly thrilling . 