 on may th , , a package containing , in cash arrived at a fedex store in palo alto , california . the bills had been washed in lantern fuel , as per instruction , then double vacuum sealed and placed inside the cavity of a stuffed animal , which was then gift wrapped . the store had been chosen carefully it was open all night , and located just feet from a caltrain station . the package was general delivery , to be picked up at the store by a man named patrick stout . the dragnethow a man accused of million dollar fraud uncovered a never before seen , secret surveillance deviceby russell brandom illustrations by cam floyd on may th , , a package containing , in cash arrived at a fedex store in palo alto , california . the bills had been washed in lantern fuel , as per instruction , then double vacuum sealed and placed inside the cavity of a stuffed animal , which was then gift wrapped . the store had been chosen carefully it was open all night , and located just feet from a caltrain station . the package was general delivery , to be picked up at the store by a man named patrick stout . the money was being closely watched . the package had been prepared by a criminal informant , working in cooperation with a joint task force of agents from the fbi , irs , and us postal service , who were investigating a tax fraud scheme . the informant had been arrested and flipped months earlier , betrayed by yet another informant . now they were after the mastermind . two officers tried to follow stout , but he recognized the tail and slipped awayaround o clock the next morning , the target appeared . a wiry white man in a dark hoodie came in through the back entrance , presented a driver s license in the name of patrick stout , picked up the package , and left the same way he came in . he tore open the package near a dumpster behind the store , pocketing the stuffed animal , and headed toward the train . two officers tried to follow , but he recognized the tail and slipped away . agents rushed to the station but couldn t find him among the early morning commuters . the trains could have taken him anywhere from san francisco to san jose , with connections to each city s airport . just a few minutes after the pickup , stout was gone . it was as close as the cops would get for months . from there , every lead seemed to dry up . stout s driver s license was fake the address didn t exist and the id number belonged to a woman in bakersfield . stout kept talking to the informant , joking that he was becoming paranoid . he didn t know who he d spotted following him at the fedex store , but he was shy about setting up another cash drop . a few weeks later , stout had , in gold bars mailed to the same fedex office , but by the time investigators found out , the pickup had come and gone . the informant led the task force to a nest of bank accounts where he d been instructed to deposit money , but they were all in false names sam blat , benjamin cohan , aaron johnson . there was more than , spread across the accounts , all of which could have been shuttered and seized using evidence the task force already had but that would just have spooked the target . they wanted to catch him , not to scare him off . their best lead was the ip address stout used to file the fraudulent returns , which traced back to a verizon wireless aircard registered under the name travis rupard . rupard or were rupard and stout the same person ? had bought it through another post office box with another fake id , kept active just long enough to receive the device . the whole point of an aircard is to provide internet access that s not tied down to a fixed address , which made tracking down the owner tricky . when rupard used the card , verizon knew which cell tower he connected to usually somewhere around san jose but they couldn t tell much more than that . three months after the fedex episode , on august rd , the task force descended on an apartment complex near the san jose airport , rented in the name steven travis brawner . agents caught rupard outside the complex , and served a search warrant on his apartment and storage unit later that day . they found , in us currency , ounces of gold , and ounces of silver , along with the dark gray hoodie tying him to the drop at the train station and a verizon aircard tying him to the bank accounts . by the time the case was over , the agents would recover more than . million . working from prison , rigmaiden unravelled decades of secrecythe suspect was charged with counts of wire fraud , counts of aggravated identity theft , and three other miscellaneous charges enough to keep him in jail for the rest of his life . taking his fingerprints three days later , the police finally worked back to his name not rupard , or stout , or brawner , or aldrich , or any of the others . his name was daniel rigmaiden . but there was something else , something that wasn t reported on the seizure affidavit , the complaint , or any of the documents that followed . to track rigmaiden down , the investigators had used a secret device , one that allowed them to pinpoint their target with far more accuracy than verizon could . they called it a cell site simulator , or by its trade name , stingray . neither term was found in the court order that authorized its use . the device had to be kept secret , even from the courts . the stingray had worked perfectly . agents traced the suspect s aircard back to his apartment and now had more than enough evidence for a conviction . but in the years that followed , that open and shut case would turn into something far more complex . working from prison , rigmaiden would unravel decades of secrecy , becoming the world s foremost authority on the device that sent him to jail . by the time he was finished , a covert surveillance device and the system that kept it secret would be exposed to the public for the very first time . this past october , i met with rigmaiden in phoenix , where he s lived since he was released from a nearby federal prison in . in person , he looks like a scrappier j . j . abrams , with thick , black glasses and spiky , black hair . intensely private , he declined to meet at his home , preferring a shopping center some blocks away . it was a mild day and the sun was low , so we decided to go on a hike in an expansive park south of town where the flat plain of the city rises into rocky hills . he doesn t get out much these days , but the trail brought out his old outdoors instincts . as we climbed , he guided me away from brittle rock faces and possible snake pits . normally i wouldn t even come out without a full pack , he told me . you re not really supposed to . rigmaiden has spent much of his life coming to terms with authoritythese days rigmaiden is primarily concerned with the typical worries of a newly released prisoner finding a good job and an apartment willing to rent to an ex con . he likes his probation officer and seems to be adjusting well to life on the outside . but the world has lots of ways of reminding rigmaiden of his time locked up . as we came down from the hills , a city of phoenix maintenance truck rolled toward us , the driver wearing a uniform we couldn t quite place . when we crossed in front of the truck , the driver rolled down the window and pulled out a camera , training it up the mountain and above it , to the sky . were we accidentally trespassing ? neither of us was sure . rigmaiden has to make an official report for every interaction he has with the police , so even minor mistakes can become dangerous . but the official didn t seem to care about us , and we walked past without being stopped . it was a tense , awkward moment , but rigmaiden is used to the feeling . a natural outsider , he has spent much of his life coming to terms with authority , legal and otherwise . i tried the non participation way for years , then i spent five years in jail , he told me . now i ve made the transition to try to change things for the better . born in seaside , california , rigmaiden left home just after high school , living in a string of college towns up and down the coast . he became an expert at forging fake ids and did a good business selling them to beer happy college kids online . eventually , he decided to get off the grid entirely . i just didn t want to be attached to the whole society system , he recalls . i needed to take a step back and take a break from it all . he traded the college towns for seaside motels , or a tent and remote campsites . it was peaceful . what i liked about it was , you had to do everything yourself , he says . he spent one summer in big sur , an isolated stretch of the california coast famous for its massive redwoods and dramatic precipices . he set up camp deep in the forest and developed a taste for free climbing , scrambling over the area s boulders and cliffs . he liked the exertion , the independence , but most of all the heightened sensitivity that came with danger . it s not panic , he told me . it s almost like you re glued to the side of the rock . it s that calculated . because you know if you fall off you re going to die . once , looking out over a foot dropoff , the ground gave way beneath him . he found himself sliding down the face of a cliff . i was grabbing saplings to slow myself down but i ended up just pulling them out . it was this burnt stump that saved me , he told me . eventually , i got back by swinging sapling to sapling . those adventures cost more money than he could make from selling fake ids , so he hit on another scheme , filing tax returns for the recently deceased . he liked the scam , he told me , because he saw it as relatively victimless . he didn t have to steal from anyone who was still alive . all he got was whatever refund money would be coming back to the deceased , often thousands of dollars for a single return . it proved incredibly lucrative , pulling in far more than he needed to survive . rigmaiden developed a rhythm working his id and tax return businesses for six months , squirreling away the extra money , then taking the rest of the year off . each step of his scheme was painstakingly arrangedhe was meticulous about hiding his identity . his name changed constantly , with a new driver s license for each new storage unit or post office box . each step of his scheme was painstakingly arranged from the computers that filed the returns to the post office boxes where the refunds were delivered , to the couriers that picked them up and the bank accounts where they were deposited . he approached it like a mental puzzle . as far as he could tell , there were no links that could trace the money back to him . except for that aircard . he didn t think police had the expertise to trace it , but he knew enough about the physics of wireless signals to be sure it could be done . in radio terms , the aircard was noisy , blasting out data in all directions like a barking dog on a busy street . by the time the signal reached the cell tower , it was mixed in with noise from thousands of other sources but in theory , a person with the right equipment could always trace the bark back to the dog . for years , the weakness of the aircard was a hypothesis but the moment federal agents arrived at his apartment in the summer of , he knew it was real . when he was arrested , rigmaiden s first thought was that the aircard had given him away . the task force had used some device , some device no one knew about . his second thought was that he didn t want to take on all the work that would be necessary to prove it . but even then , he knew there was no other way . i knew i was going to have to learn the legal system to get out of this , he told me . it was two months into his stay at the florence correctional center that rigmaiden discovered the law library . since his arrest , he had been trying to plead his case while scrambling from prison to prison first a local penitentiary in california , then to florence in arizona where the case was being tried . he did his best to keep a low profile at florence , steering clear of mentally ill inmates and making do through random shortages of staples like toilet paper . he wrote note after note to his lawyer , scribbling on the back of prisoner request forms with the inch golf pencils issued by the prison , but it didn t seem to change anything . he was facing a federal case , represented by a public defender . making noise about invisible signals and secret surveillance devices was only going to get him in trouble . still , he knew the government was hiding something . he had seen the warrant for the raid on his apartment , but it gave no sense of how they had tracked him , attributing the information to historical cell tower information and other investigative techniques . but a single cell tower serves thousands of phones at once . even detailed records couldn t have been enough to pinpoint a single apartment complex . there had to be something else . if he was right , it meant the agents had lied to the judge , which could be enough to get the case dismissed . but the key to his argument was buried in murky technical details that only he understood . his lawyer didn t know the first thing about cell tower data . neither did the judge . he found himself drawn to the prison library s open hours , the three hours a week when he could actually get answers . he fired his first lawyer , then a second , then finally got permission to represent himselfhe made a valuable new friend at the library , a disbarred lawyer who was serving time for fraud . rigmaiden learned about the rhythms of a trial , the motions and requests each side uses to stake out territory . eventually , rigmaiden opted for a strategy of total legal war , flooding the court with motions and proposals . when you hire an attorney , he says , they have to pick and choose the things they re going to challenge because of time and resources . but i just challenged everything . he fired his first lawyer , then a second , then finally got permission to represent himself , which let him bump up his library time to five hours a day . he worked six days a week , sometimes hours a day . when he couldn t print the motions , he wrote them out by hand , using the same nubby half pencil . meanwhile , he was also poring through records for any evidence of the mysterious device that had caught him . in october , the court gave him access to his discovery file , , pages of documents that laid the groundwork for the prosecution s case . in the second to last box , he saw the word stingray , scribbled in one investigator s notes . he thought it sounded like a brand name . the prison library didn t have internet access , but the prison s case managers would google search for you if you asked them . eventually , rigmaiden found a stingray brochure from harris corporation , advertising exactly the capabilities he d suspected . now he just needed to prove police were using it . he found what he was looking for in the minutes of a maricopa county board meeting a unanimous vote to buy police equipment paid for by a federal grant . because there hadn t been an open bidding process , the department had been required to submit its invoice for public consideration . the invoice was for a cell site simulator device , built by the harris corporation . in , a hacker named kevin mitnick broke into a software company called netcom , stealing email archives and security programs . he concealed his location with a modem connected cell phone , a hacked together version of rigmaiden s aircard . to zero in on mitnick s cell phone , police used a passive cell site simulator combined with a silent sms from the phone company that forced mitnick s device to check in . it was primitive , but they were employing the same technique that would catch rigmaiden more than a decade later . researchers knew the system was broken , but everybody else had moved onin , rohde ampamp schwarz created a device called the ga , which bundled the ping and capture functions together , effectively masquerading as a cell tower . driving through a neighborhood with your ga , you could see the unique subscriber id for everyone within range , akin to seeing everyone s cell phone number . if one number was particularly interesting , you could drive around the corner and take another reading to triangulate exactly which house or car it came from . the device exploited a fundamental part of how cell networks are built . mobile phones rely on constant communication with nearby cell towers , always listening for signals from a tower that might be closer or less congested than the current connection . as soon as the phone hears a signal , it spits back an identification number . but crucially , the signal doesn t have to prove it s coming from a tower . there s no authentication for the first stage of the process , so a device like the ga could slip right in . security researchers have been concerned about that flaw since the s , some even accusing phone companies of keeping it open just to allow law enforcement to exploit it . but by the time those flaws were being used against rigmaiden , the topic had largely faded from view . researchers knew the system was broken , but everybody else counted it as a theoretical attack and moved on . meanwhile , devices like the ga were gaining popularity in the law enforcement community . in , harris corporation unveiled the stingray , a sleeker , smaller version of rohde ampamp schwarz s earlier model , and it came with an aggressive push into the us market . intelligence agencies began using them overseas to surveil targets or identify their devices . us marshals put stingrays in planes and flew them over cities , collecting tens of thousands of phone numbers in search of a single fugitive s phone . over time , the devices trickled down to local police departments , where they could be used to track down anyone from murderers to purse snatchers . but purchasing the device came with a catch . every time an agency bought a device from harris , they signed an agreement to keep it out of public court records . if stingray methods were ever entered into evidence , harris argued , criminals would catch on , rendering the device useless . agencies still got court orders to use the devices , but they usually looked like a vaguely worded request for phone records . in most cases , the judges never knew what they were signing and defendants never knew how they d been caught . he was a self represented prisoner chasing a mythical surveillance device sure signs of a crankbut they couldn t hide every trace . rigmaiden found signs of harris stingray device in random corners of the web . he searched through harris patent filings , which gave him far more insight into how the devices worked . he filed requests for information on the devices under the freedom of information act , but departments locked up , citing confidential methods . he studied the fugitive game , a page study of the mitnick case , scouring for clues on exactly how police had tracked the rogue hacker . there was no public evidence of the device at the federal level , no documents or statements indicating it was in use . he turned his attention to local departments , hoping they would be less careful . when his library time was up , he would take the documents back , poring over them in his cell . over more than two years , he built a file that sprawled to hundreds of pages , including every last trace of the stingray he could find . rigmaiden needed allies , so he sent his file to half a dozen different privacy organizations , but never got back more than a form letter . not only was rigmaiden a self represented prisoner chasing a mythical surveillance device , but he had filed hundreds of motions these were sure signs of a crank . a normal person would take the plea deal and resign himself to his sentence . rigmaiden s phonebook sized file was testament to how unusual he really was . eventually , rigmaiden sent his file to christopher soghoian , then a phd student who had published work on wireless spectrum surveillance . there was something unhinged about the file , to be sure , but soghoian knew that what rigmaiden was proposing could very well exist . my reaction wasn t , what is this strange device . it was , oh i read about this in graduate school . but i read about it as a thing that was possible , not a thing that the police in baltimore were using , soghoian says . he became convinced rigmaiden was right . soghoian passed rigmaiden s file along to privacy groups like the aclu and eff , many of the same groups who had ignored the package the first time around . but the breakthrough came when he sent rigmaiden s sprawling file to jennifer valentino devries , a reporter for the wall street journal s digits blog . the next month , her story hit the front page of the paper , revealing stingrays to the public for the first time and presenting the unchecked , widespread adoption of the technology as a direct challenge to constitutional rights . when a copy of the paper made it to his cell , rigmaiden was surprised . for the first time , he had reason to think his discovery would matter for more cases than just his own . i knew that it wouldn t be a front page story if it wasn t such a big deal , he told me . he kept up his barrage of motions he filed different motions to continue trial rigmaiden s legal situation , however , hadn t changed . arizona prosecutors wouldn t drop his case just because of a fudged warrant , and while the stingray news weakened their case , they were determined to see it through . he kept up his barrage of motions he filed different motions to continue trial , forcing the prosecution to adapt to his unusual speed . one filing was entirely concerned with the use of the word preliminary in testimony describing a handwriting analysis . after the fbi started ignoring his foia requests , rigmaiden launched a civil suit against the bureau , eventually filing almost two dozen motions on that case before it was dismissed . the criminal docket sprawled to more than , entries . in , prosecutors finally offered a plea deal on his criminal charges . rigmaiden believes the deal had more to do with his persistence than the merits of the case . the reason they wanted to get rid of the case wasn t because they were worried the stingray was going to get exposed more , because at that point it was pretty much already out there , he says . the reason they wanted to get rid of me was because i was doing all that work . i was giving them so much work to do and it was pushing their resource limit . he was still reticent to take the plea which waived his right to appeal but prison was wearing him down , and he ultimately decided he could do more on the outside . in april of , after nine months of deliberation , he took the deal and walked out of florence a free man . in the four years since the first journal article , stingrays have turned up everywhere . they ve been documented at agencies spread across states , used in major cities like new york and chicago as well as smaller departments in memphis , durham , and san jose . in a review , baltimore police admitted using the device more than , times , sometimes for crimes as minor as a stolen cell phone . the us marshals have even lent the devices out to mexican officials hunting down cartels . in each case , the departments had been using the devices for years , long before rigmaiden came onto the scene . meanwhile , an informal network of defense attorneys has cropped up , with public defenders sharing notes on how to spot and deal with stingray cases . because of the intense non disclosure agreements around the stingray , most prosecutors will drop cases rather than defend the use of the device in the face of a well versed lawyer . rigmaiden has become a kind of in house expert for those lawyers , tracking surveillance issues on twitter and consulting behind the scenes . when washington state started drafting a law to limit use of stingray devices in late , someone passed the bill along to rigmaiden . for a month and a half , he spent each morning going over a draft of the legislation , demonstrating the same obsession to detail he d shown in planning his tax fraud scheme and criminal defense . working with a local aclu chapter , he recommended tweaks to the bill , specifying the language and expanding the rules to cover passive surveillance devices and other variants that are still secret . in september , the justice department issued a new policy on cell site simulators , instructing all federal agencies to get warrants before using the devices . for a lot of privacy groups , it was a victory the first clear federal policy on stingray use , openly instructing agents to play straight with courts . rigmaiden was less optimistic . a lot of it is just putting a new face on what they ve been doing all along , he told me . in my case , they had a warrant . the problem was the information on the warrant . rigmaiden now lives a modest life . he gets no money from his legal work , and when i visited , he had just quit a telemarketing job in favor of a slightly friendlier web development gig . he has no car his record also makes auto loans difficult , so the telemarketing job meant a long walk to a bus to a train . last year , he spoke at a defense attorney conference at the university of arizona , an experience he d like to repeat if he can . for now , the terms of his probation stop him from leaving the phoenix area . it was exactly the kind of crowd where you might want to use a stingrayafter climbing down from the hills , we drove to another park , this one a flat stretch of lawn closer to the center of phoenix . it was quiet , empty except for a few couples and about a dozen people gathered near a stage for a benefit event . it was , as rigmaiden pointed out , exactly the kind of crowd where you might want to use a stingray . he had an app on his phone called snoopsnitch , which looks for telltale disturbances in the network , one of the open source stingray hunting projects that s sprung up since the device became common knowledge . that day , the data showed two disturbances , both silent pings from the phone company . neither was necessarily suspicious , although we ll never know why they went out . rigmaiden suspects police have moved on from stingrays to passive receivers , which sniff signals out of the air without disrupting the network at all . it s the kind of thing you could build yourself with open software and no fcc violations at all , although you d need the phone company s help to connect the signals to actual cell numbers . cell site simulators are now at least years old , a long time for any one trick to stay secret . police had been using the devices in secret for years by the time they were trained on rigmaiden . from there , it took another eight years to drag them into the light . even that was only possible because of the chance alignment of a stubborn defendant , a legal shortcut , and a sympathetic judge . if we hadn t picked up the scent on this , they could have gotten another five or years out of it , soghoian says . this is the logic of surveillance , an arms race between police and criminals , but also between police and the legal systems meant to keep them in check . after years off the grid and five years in jail , rigmaiden is now on the side of those systems privacy groups , lawyers , judges . it s a strange place to find himself . how did he make the turn from dodging surveillance to actually fighting it ? he s still not sure , although it probably has something to do with getting older . you have to realize when you re in a situation where you can make a difference , and grab onto it , he told me . i don t think those opportunities arise very often . edited by michael zelenko