 how do you sell a phone without giving away the data on it ? if you ve used a phone even briefly , it s filled with all kinds of sensitive data , including passwords and login tokens alongside personal texts and photos , all of which need to be erased before you can safely put the phone up for sale . the standard answer is a factory reset , which wipes the memory and restores the phone s setting , but there s a growing body of evidence that , for android phones at least , the factory reset isn t enough . a study published last week revealed methods that can dig up incredibly sensitive data from supposedly wiped phones , including the login token used to sign into google accounts . the core of the problem is flash memory , which limits how often a given block of memory can be overwritten . as a result , a factory reset will often designate data as logically deleted that is , available to be overwritten without actually overwriting it , so as to prolong the life of the hard drive . using a variety of database recovery tools , two cambridge researchers were able to scan the wiped phones for portions of the hard drive that had been designated as logically empty , recovering photos , passwords , and chat logs . in theory , the factory reset is supposed to wipe all that data , but thanks to the quirks of flash memory , it wasn t being wiped all the way . wiped android phones aren t being wiped all the waythose flash memory issues aren t new , but combined with the way mobile apps handle logins , they have serious consequences for android users . once you ve logged into a mobile app , the phone preserves that login with a local authentication token essentially a password that only your phone sees . if that token falls into the wrong hands , attackers can use it to log in , just like a stolen password . since those tokens all live in the memory of the phone , they re a prime target for thieves and if the factory reset doesn t erase them , thieves could use those tokens to compromise every app on your phone . the quick fix for this is simple encrypt the data on your phone before you get rid of it . you can find the option at settings gt security gt encrypt phone , for any android version since . . adrian ludwig , the lead engineer for android security , recommended preemptive disk encryption for anyone giving up their phone . if you plan to resell or discard your device and you haven t already , encrypt it and then perform a factory reset , ludwig said , when asked for comment on the cambridge paper . if the phone s hard drive is encrypted , any unerased data will be scrambled and effectively useless . disk encryption mostly protects against attackers with physical access to your device , so it s often overlooked in favor of network based security measures like two factor authentication but for this attack , it s the single most important protection you can have . it s not complete protection , since it s possible to use brute force to crack the simpler disk encryption passwords , but the more complex a password you choose , the more difficult and expensive it will be for attackers to break through . if you plan to resell . . . encrypt it and then perform a factory reset . disk encryption is also why , for the most part , iphones are already protected . iphones use the same solid state memory as android phones , but ios devices have provided full disk encryption since , when ios . was deployed . more importantly , that encryption is supported by apple s own hardware . today s iphones have a co processor devoted entirely to security measures , known as the secure enclave , which manages keys and performs the grunt work of actually decrypting the data . in theory it would be possible to recover scraps of encrypted data and decrypt it through brute force , but it s a risky and difficult process , enough to scare off all but the most determined attackers . that s why , when security companies dive into the problems with factory resets , they generally pick on android rather than ios . when the security company avast tried to dig up data from wiped android phones last year , they were able to search for specific patterns that would indicate photos , texts , or other sensitive data , resulting in nude male selfies . but the iphone s encryption scrambles those patterns , leaving researchers back at square one . ios forensics is much harder to do than android , as you have to deal with encryption , said jarom r ho ej , a researcher at avast . you might be lucky to recover the key to unlock the encrypted files , but the key may or may not work as the encryption algorithm is not public . ios forensics is much harder to do than android . google built similar protections into the nexus and , but providing that level of security across android has proved significantly more difficult , despite significant support in the codebase . encrypting the entire file system means the phone has to actively decrypt any data it wants to use , which can seriously hurt performance if the phone doesn t have enough processing power . the iphone solves that with a dedicated co processor , but setting aside that computing power is expensive , and many cheaper android phones simply aren t equipped for it . google had initially planned to make full disk encryption a default setting in lollipop , but backed off the promise earlier this year when the performance issues proved too difficult to overcome . that s less of an issue if you re encrypting the phone before a factory reset , but when a phone is lost or stolen , the default setting can be the only thing keeping your data safe . it s a classic security quagmire , playing off the intersection of hardware vendors , application security , and android at large , with no easy solution from any angle . the good news for users is that harvesting data from factory reset hard drives is slow work , and most of what s recovered is low value data like texts and contact lists . for now , criminals seem to have decided it s not worth the trouble . the cambridge researchers have also been working with google to plug up the security holes from the android side , so hopefully the attacks will become even more daunting as time goes on . it s good to see the improvement in android . , said ross anderson , one of the cambridge researchers . we hope that phone resellers will take appropriate procedural measures to manage the residual risk . 