 to get to mars , we need better space toilets if humans are going to go to mars , or mine asteroids , then recycling is going to matter . and that means recycling everything including human waste . nasa has put some effort into solving the problem , because recycling is such an essential part of building a spaceship that can get people to mars or anywhere else . interplanetary missions won t be able to get supplies from earth . resources will be limited , and that means closing the loop you can t afford to throw away anything , not even human poop . any spacecraft design has to take that into account . you have to start with a life support system and build a spacecraft around it , says marc cohen , president of astrotecture , a consulting firm that specializes in space architecture . the story so farfirst a few facts about human poop . a healthy person produces about grams of feces per day , or about . kilograms pounds in a year , according to the medical literature . for a mission to mars that might last two to three years , a crew of six as posited in the martian would generate pounds of feces . in the apollo era , the toilet was a plastic bag attached to the astronaut s buttin the apollo era , the toilet was a plastic bag attached to the astronauts butts with an adhesive . urine was collected with a condom like device and vented to space . famously or infamously the last mercury flight in actually suffered system failures because the urine collection bag leaked . clearly , the bags didn t work . floating human waste is also a health hazard , since one can inhale tiny bits of urine or feces as they float around . don rethke , also known as doctor flush image provided by rethke enter don doctor flush rethke , a retired engineer from hamilton standard , now utc aerospace systems . rethke goes way back with nasa he worked on life support for the apollo mission . he designed a commode that takes in urine and feces separately . it used suction essential because in zero g , liquids turn to spheres and float around , and solid waste won t just fall into the bowl . urine was collected in a cup like contraption , while the solid stuff was sucked into a container and exposed to the vacuum effectively freeze dried and compressed . we called them fecal patties , rethke says . a variation of his design is on the international space station , with two big differences one is that the urine is now treated so that the water can be removed and reused , and the other is that the new system doesn t freeze dry the feces . the iss recycling system also takes in moisture from the air , which is largely astronauts sweat and exhalations . as for the solid waste , during the shuttle era it was just brought back . on the iss , it s stored in plastic or metal containers . when those fill up , astronauts load them onto a used russian progress vehicle , unlock it from the iss , and let it fall to earth to burn in the atmosphere , along with the rest of the iss s garbage . think of that the next time you see a meteor shower . the space shuttle s waste collection system thomas j . stapleton et al . throwing feces out an airlock is not an option , for a couple of reasons . one is that anything jettisoned from the spacecraft won t go very far away without a substantial push . so if you throw something outside , it will simply follow your trajectory any waste thrown away would follow you all the way to mars . pushing it away would mean something like opening an air lock with some air still in it , to provide a kind of explosive decompression . that would waste air . then there s that trajectory problem even if the waste moves some distance away , blocks of it might drift to various points around the ship , entering unpredictable orbits . during the shuttle and apollo eras , it wasn t unusual for the spacecraft to meet clouds of urine ice crystals that had been vented previously . dumping out a container behind the spacecraft is , as a result , quite dangerous . when you near your objective you re going to make a sudden stop , says john w . fisher , of nasa s ames research center , who has written several papers on recycling waste in space . if you slam on the brakes , it s going to hit you in the rear end . a pound bag of anything hitting a decelerating spacecraft can pack a lot of force . the second problem is that some human feces now freeze dried in space would probably settle back on the ship absent a substantial push , the turds will just hang around . the poop , now in a powdery , crystalline form , would get on the windows , says fisher . it would foul optical sensors as well . unlike bird droppings on a windshield , there s no way to squeegee it off . so you have to store it , rethke says . in the early days of the shuttle commode , they thought of refrigeration to keep the bacteria from growing . that takes energy , and you have to back it up with a redundant system , he says . besides , throwing feces away is actually the last thing space crews want to do there s too much useful stuff in it . about percent of it is water , along with bacteria from our guts and human cells . some percent of the solid mass is organic molecules , which means compounds containing carbon . about a quarter of that is bacterial biomass , another quarter is protein , another is undigested plant matter mostly the fiber , and a smaller percentage is fat . organic chemicals and water are like gold in space . on mars , human poop , at the very least , would make a good fertilizer to grow food , rethke says . i would put it into a mushroom patch let mars take care of it . reuse , recyclehuman feces aren t the only thing you need to recycle . people produce a lot of garbage . all this adds complexity to the problem of recycling and reuse . any machines for doing that have to be light , because launching anything into orbit is pricey , thousands of dollars per pound . those machines also have to be small , because there s only so much room in a space module . and they have to work reliably and be easy to fix , because there s no calling for help between earth and mars . waste collection system on the iss stapleton et al . jay perry , lead aerospace engineer for environmental control and life support systems at nasa s marshall space flight center , says designing such systems is complicated . take urine , for example separating water from urine is relatively straightforward on earth , but in a zero gravity environment , the situation changes . for example , weightless astronauts bones lose mass and density , since there s no loading on them . this is why current astronauts on the iss have a strict exercise regimen . the bone mass gets excreted as calcium in then gets into the urine . that places a limit on how much water can be pulled out , because eventually the remaining stuff is a concentrated brine , unpleasant stuff to deal with . a study by united technologies aerospace systems noted that the calcium forms small kidney stones , which can clog up the valves on toilets . human feces pose similar challenges , both because of zero gravity and figuring out which chemicals you want to save . in addition there s the question of the necessary energy and the complexity of the system you want to build . the united technologies study , for example , noted that current space toilets use machines to compress the poop . that adds complexity instead , the study proposes a manual lever , which requires no power except that provided by the crew member s arm . while there are a lot of useful chemicals in poop , separating every one of them isn t easy . chemical toilets and septic tanks would be useless . chemical toilets don t really work because the very compounds used to break down waste would still need to be sent up with the astronauts . you d also need hundreds to thousands of gallons of that blue dyed stuff for a years long journey , and most of it is water effectively you d be adding tons of water that would only be used in toilets , which isn t very efficient . septic tanks depend on gravity to work and you still have to store the feces somewhere . rethke says he favored using natural biodegradation simply allowing the fecal material and whatever else menstrual waste , vomitus , it s all in there from the commode to ferment in a metal container with some activated charcoal to stop the odors . the container could release gas almost all would be carbon dioxide which the spacecraft s scrubbers could handle well enough . he even built such a device . i put it on my desk for several months , he says . nobody noticed . once astronauts get to mars , the stuff in the containers could be fertilizer . the down side is the storage the volumes would start to add up . weird as it may sound , poop may make for good radiation shieldingweird as it may sound , poop may provide good radiation shielding . in space , there are two sources of ionizing radiation that could harm astronauts . one is the background of galactic cosmic rays or gcr . the other is a solar storm , known as a solar particle event or spe . both consist of charged particles , mostly protons . these sources of radiation are less of a problem for iss astronauts because they are still inside the earth s protective magnetic field . but once astronauts leave that field , the spe could cause acute radiation sickness , while cosmic rays increase the risk of cancer . soyuz waste collection system stapleton et al . the most efficient shielding is solid hydrogen because the element more easily deflects flying particles . but solid hydrogen isn t available outside of a gas giant , and liquid hydrogen is difficult to handle , needing high pressures , cryogenic temperatures , or both . the next best thing is water , which has lots of hydrogen in it , or polyethylene . metal shielding like lead , which provides good protection against gamma and x rays , is actually worse than no shielding at all , because the protons hit the atoms in the metal and create cascades of other particles , creating even more harmful radiation . jack miller , a nuclear physicist at lawrence berkeley national laboratory , along with michael flynn and marc cohen of nasa s ames research center , conducted an experiment funded by a grant from nasa to see how well human waste would work as radiation shielding . he and his colleagues couldn t use real feces instead they used a simulated poo made out of miso , peanut oil , propylene glycol , psyllium husks , salt , urea , and yeast . the goal was not to exactly duplicate the actual chemicals in feces they wanted something roughly like it that held water and absorbed radiation and particles similarly . they put it in a particle beam to see how well it absorbed the energy of flying protons . the beam was about as energetic as particles typically found in space . the fecal simulator absorbed a measurable amount of the energy , and the team found that the thickness matters . too thin and the problem gets worse for the same reason that metals are bad shielding the spaceborne particles make cascades . however , they were able to calculate that a fecal shield about to inches thick would cut down the radiation dose a lot . that was a good result , though miller noted that the situation is more complex . remember , there are two kinds of radiation in outer space the spes and the background radiation from cosmic rays . cosmic rays carry five times as much energy as spe particles do , and they re the ones that can increase the risk of cancer . nasa rules say the increased risk to astronauts shouldn t be more than percent above the general population . the fecal simulator wasn t as good at stopping those , but that was expected . the energy of gcr is so high it will punch through just about anything , miller says . so you try to balance getting the risk as low as reasonably achievable . you can t simply put the feces in sealed bags or metal containersanother issue is that you can t simply put the feces in sealed bags or metal containers because the co and other gases they generate could make them explode , absent some breathing mechanism as in rethke s vision of making fertilizer . so sterilizing the waste might be a good idea . to do that , some proposed systems effectively burn the waste , without oxygen present , a process called pyrolysis . this also allows for more immediate use of the water . advanced fuel research , a company in east hartford , connecticut , is exploring a variation called torrefaction which takes less energy to do than straight up pyrolysis . the waste gets heated to around degrees fahrenheit , degrees celsius . what s left is something compact and dry , mostly carbon . at the same time it retains a lot of hydrogen . rethke notes one trade off with pyrolysis or torrefaction is what to do with the leftover carbon . if it s a brick that s one thing , he says . but powder is harder . remember there s no gravity , so any particles are going to float around and could foul air intakes . so you d need some way of compacting the carbon to store it . russian toilet module on iss stapleton et al . torrefaction has other challenges too , says michael serio , the president of advanced fuel research . he s authored two papers on the subject , and has more work involving bird and dog manure forthcoming . while some materials will reduce to ash , others won t . cotton , for example , contains hemicellulose , which doesn t break down as well . a cotton t shirt would just look like a burned t shirt , he says . one could just make all the waste into bricks , serio says . you take all the garbage food wrappers , human waste , everything and heat it up enough to melt it into a brick . this reduces volume and detoxifies the waste . that s good for making partial radiation shields or even , serio says , bricks for a martian or lunar habitat . serio is working with other companies to see if there s a way to build some kind of heated recycling into a commode itself . the big challenge would be making it compact and fast enough so that it doesn t put the toilet out of commission for extended periods . these recycling technologies are all promising enough . cohen , though , expressed some frustration at the way nasa has approached funding . cohen , a co investigator with miller and ray flynn of ames on the radiation shielding experiments , says there has been little development beyond simple demonstrators . nasa isn t planning a mars mission explicitly the closest they ve come is a road map . there s been such deep cutbacks it s difficult to get anything funded , he says . even so , nasa will have to come up with something if the agency is serious about going out of earth orbit even if only to return to the moon . what nasa would like is you drop a bag of poop into a canister maybe process it right below the commode , says serio . rethke added that whatever system is in place also has to have built in redundancy and some way to fix it . natural bacteria , he notes , do a fine job of breaking stuff down , don t need complex machinery to operate , use no electricity , and produce some very useful chemicals in the process . carbon dioxide , for instance , can be burned with hydrogen to make methane and water . that s one reason he likes natural biodegradation . it s all about how much power to use for reclamation , versus storage , versus the weight , rethke says . i like to keep things simple . 