 apple and ibm are now partners . having once defined the opposing sides of the personal computer coin , the two american giants are now uniting in a wide ranging partnership to transform the business world . playing to their strengths , one will provide iphones , ipads , and excellent customer support , while the other will help craft made for business apps and add device management , security , and analytics for enterprise clients . it s an overt assault on blackberry s last bastion of strength , the phone in every suit pocket , and should strike fear into the hearts of other mobile contenders like samsung , google , and microsoft . the scariest thing about this deal , though , is how simple and obvious it is . enterprise is notoriously complicated , whereas this move rectifies one of apple s most enduring weaknesses in a straightforward way . mobile devices have transformed our personal lives . and soon , they ll transform the way we work . apple is not a company with too many problems . ceo tim cook will happily recite the stratospheric revenues and profits generated by his company on a daily basis , however there s no hiding from the inevitable slowdown in growth as the market for tablets and smartphones matures . that trend has manifested itself in a percent drop in ipad sales over the last quarter and apple must look to new sales avenues and a new customer base if it is to maintain its appeal with growth hungry investors . the obvious answer of targeting developing markets is partially addressed by the cheaper iphone c and discounts on older ios devices , however none of apple s current ipad models are particularly suited to an entry level market . so what the company needs is to appeal to a deep pocketed demographic that can buy its products in volume . hello , enterprise . ibm s reasons for entering this partnership are slightly more prosaic . the former pc maker has morphed into a leviathan software and services company that furnishes corporate it clients with big data analytics , project planning and consultancy , and the hardware infrastructure and maintenance required to run massive server farms . ibm continues to do well financially , but the hardware component of the business has proven to be a drag on its profits and it most recently agreed to sell part of its server operations to lenovo for . billion . as it moves away from selling hardware itself , ibm remains conscious of the need to ensure it remains the predominant service provider for enterprise clients , which means playing nice with those who will be selling the next wave of mobile hardware upgrades . hello , apple . floating big business into the mobile cloudboth apple and ibm appear convinced that the future of business computing mirrors our present use of personal technology mobile devices plugging into a cloud of supporting services on the web . mobile and the cloud is also the mantra underpinning microsoft ceo satya nadella s new strategy , though the apple ibm tie up isn t an immediate threat to what microsoft is doing , if only because microsoft has had so little success in the mobile market . all the corporate clients that are finally coming around to upgrading their windows xp machines to the latest microsoft software will do so irrespective of what apple does . in fact , apple s new enterprise initiative is as much post mac as it is post pc . in a press release spanning over words and a separate splashy website dedicated to the new partnership , there isn t a single mention of os x or the mac . the business desktop machine is a battleground apple long ago conceded to microsoft , but now the mac maker is setting the foundations to genuinely compete in the next phase of innovation , which is the shift toward mobile devices as the primary computing platform . the windows experience has been gradually moving closer to that of a portable device like the ipad laptops are booting faster , come with touchscreens , and can often turn into tablets themselves and now ios is meeting that challenge from the other side by growing more enterprise friendly . it s hard to overstate the value of ibm s deep expertise and high reputation among corporate clients . like most business decisions , the acquisition of new it equipment is a risk averse affair where making the best choice is less important than making a justifiable one that won t get you fired . ibm s name will help scrub away some of the reluctance to embrace ios for business purposes , and further reassurance comes from the lucid and comprehensive plan that the two partnering companies have announced . whereas microsoft s vision for the future seems obfuscated in a fog of war and platitudes , apple s proposal to businesses is clear eyed and focused . apple and microsoft are two of the companies best positioned to replace blackberry as the standard bearer around which most enterprises rally for their mobile needs , but as has been the case in the past , apple is communicating that premise in a much more compelling fashion . crafting apps for industry will pose a challenge of fragmentation that apple hasn t yet facedthe challenge of completing the project envisioned by apple and ibm should not be underestimated . in spite of habitually citing the fact that over percent of fortune companies use ios devices , tim cook concedes that the penetration of these businesses , and in commercial in general for mobility is still low . yes , a few execs might carry an iphone or an ipad in almost every business on the planet , but apple still only has a limited number of big clients that actually run thousands as part of their it systems . to make them more compelling , tim cook and his close ally in this deal , ibm ceo ginni rometty , propose to tailor apps and services for every industry . but the specific app required by a bank of america employee will have to address different needs to those of a citigroup professional , meaning the truly compelling service would have to be customized on a per customer as well as per industry basis . and that s just banking . consider the fantastic fragmentation of us healthcare providers for an even better sense of the scale of the task faced . apple knows how to write ios apps better than anyone else , it builds wonderfully tactile hardware and delivers consistently great customer service . ibm is the preeminent provider of analytics , consultancy , and system support for corporate clients . ginni rometty describes the pair as the gold standards of their respective fields while tim cook considers their combination profound , landmarked , and historic . there s no overlap , there s no competition , they re totally complementary , says the apple boss in describing just how different the apple ibm relationship is today relative to years ago . for once , the dramatic language of a big new announcement is not exaggerated . the world s most popular personal devices can become its most relied upon business computers as well . apple has turned what was a trickle of business oriented additions to ios into a comprehensive strategy for storming the walls of big enterprise . in seeking to address their few weaknesses , apple and ibm could be setting the agenda for how we all do business for years to come . 