 if you ve played a video game , you ve probably seen the end of the world . the medium is saturated with post apocalyptic scenarios , from the nuclear wasteland of fallout to left dead s zombie ravaged rural hellscape . no matter the cause of the catastrophe , though , these games tend to have a lot in common violent , action packed affairs where you can t go far before someone , or something , tries to kill you . but everybody s gone to the rapture envisions a different kind of doomsday . what if everybody just suddenly disappeared ? and instead of trying to save what was left of the world , you were just trying to find out where everyone went ? i really liked the idea of , well , what would normal people be doing if the world ended , says dan pinchbeck , creative director at rapture studio the chinese room . is there a game in that , rather than the same old kid of heroics ? rapture takes place in a small english village in the s , and at the outset you whoever it is you play as find yourself all alone , not long after the rest of the townsfolk have mysteriously vanished . like the studio s previous games , including dear esther , rapture is an experience that plays with your expectations of what a game is all you really do is walk around , looking for clues and listening to flashback sequences . from this simple base you re able to slowly piece together not only the events leading to the end of the world , but also the lives of the town s inhabitants . it s an example of environmental storytelling , something that s unique to games , where the world creates much of the narrative itself . we wanted to see where the next place to go with it was . but the game could ve ended up very different . the initial prototype for rapture had the same apocalyptic theme , but also gave players a time limit at the beginning of the game you would have minutes , after which point the world would end and so would the game . the idea was that you would replay that hour multiple times , exploring different characters and storylines each time . the concept was scrapped pretty early on pinchbeck likens it to a book that stops halfway through and tells you that you didn t read fast enough but not before the studio had become attached to the characters and location . and that location is a distinctly british one . the quiet town of yaughton , in the shropshire countryside , feels like a postcard that you can explore in three dimensions . the homes are full of cozy chairs and floral wallpaper , surrounded by peaceful gardens , and just about everywhere you go you ll see cups of tea waiting patiently on a table or counter . it s absolutely beautiful , but also haunting when you remove people , things take on a whole new look . the local playground is especially creepy , devoid of children . setting the game during the s , a time before the internet and cellphones became widespread , was also important for creating the sense of isolation that s so key to the game . the picturesque town is much larger than games like dear esther , and that was one of the goals from the outset . we wanted to push further than we had done with esther , says pinchbeck . we wanted to see where the next place to go with it was . and i was playing a lot of open world games skyrim , red dead redemption at the time , and was thinking , we tend to make these things work in corridors , but could we do this if we went into an open world and did something that was fully non linear . you can go pretty much wherever you want in yaughton , save for areas blocked by fences and locked doors , and the story unfolds differently depending on where you go and when . but that open nature also means that the world has to serve two purposes it not only conveys the story , it also helps guide you . rapture doesn t provide you any overt instructions , but instead uses various techniques to highlight places of interest . the most obvious are the ghostly wisps , tiny balls of shimmering light that will fly around , sometimes impatiently , showing you places to check out . you ll also hear things radio static , a beeping phone that will make you want to investigate a particular location . the world design is also often much more subtle , guiding you in ways you might not notice , according to pinchbeck . he says that the team labored over specific details the angle of a driveway , whether you could see an open door from the road as a way of suggesting to players where they might want to go next without actually telling them . even the power lines that run alongside the road serve as unconscious guides . these aspects are necessary so that players don t get lost or frustrated . we really didn t want the player to feel like they were being forced down a series of pipes in the world , he says . but also , you re trying to make sure they re not just completely lost . that balance between giving people enough clues and not lecturing on how to play the game is really hard . a sidestep from a long , proud history of first person shooters . according to pinchbeck , one of the main goals of the studio was to never pull you out of the experience , and that s part of the reason there s no mini map or typical on screen instructions . even the menus are styled and laid out as if they were part of the world , framed like a s disaster preparedness pamphlet . it s one of those things where , if you can , why wouldn t you ? he says of the menu design . it s just better . equally important to the experience is the music and audio . you never see the former inhabitants of yaughton they appear as human silhouettes made of light but you do hear them , and , much like in a book , you create your own vision in your mind for what they might look like . the wonderful music , meanwhile , imbues the otherwise quiet countryside with a real sense that something important is happening . the swelling score grows surprisingly loud during key moments , and often lingers afterwards to keep those events stuck in your head . jessica curry , ampnbsprapture s composer , is also the co studio head at the chinese room and served as director on the game perhaps explaining why the music feels so integral to the experience . rapture is part of a growing trend of narrative focused , first person games , which was largely spearheaded by the success of dear esther . curiously , many of these games tackle a similar theme of disappearance gone home is about exploring an empty home , trying to discover what happened to the family who lived there , while its successor tacoma is about investigating an abandoned space station . pinchbeck says that these thematic similarities are partially due to technical constraints of making a game with lots of people in it character animation and ai are a lot to take on for a small studio but also because these games are essentially an offshoot of the first person shooter , a genre that tends to explore themes of isolation . right back to doom , you re the last one left on the moonbase , he explains . to me it was always just a sidestep from a long , proud history of first person shooters . for a new , growing genre of games , the question is what other kinds of stories it can tell . the next interesting step is thinking , how do these games become social ? everybody s gone to the rapture is out now on playstation . read next everybody s gone to the rapture review 