 not long ago , after meeting yet another entrepreneur pushing a messaging application , i used his app to send a note to my colleague josh . josh responded immediately with a giant blinking gif sent over imessage . oh my god that s dumb , the gif declared , flashing its judgment one word at a time in a blur of neon colors . and not as cool as this one . the gif concluded with a selfie of josh making a beaver face . it s pretty much my favorite message of , and i asked josh how he made it . it turned out he d used an app called ultratext , which he found on a site called product hunt . a must read site in silicon valleyinspired by earlier sites reddit and hacker news , in months product hunt has gone from a small email discussion list to a fast growing community with a popular website and iphone app . the daily email is popular , too . each day , users submit new apps , software services , and other tech products . people vote up their favorites , and entrepreneurs often join in on discussions to explain their design decisions and answer users questions . only to percent of users have been invited to comment , and it s an elite group venture capitalists , entrepreneurs , and journalists are heavily represented . as a result it s the rare comments section that s worth reading , and it s one reason that product hunt has become a must read site in silicon valley . today the company has some money to go with the buzz founder ryan hoover announced that the company has raised . million from investors including andreessen horowitz and reddit co founder alexis ohanian . hoover says he ll use the money to grow his team , build an android app , and expand to let people recommend products beyond the world of tech . in the meantime , product hunt is also adding the ability for users to follow other users to receive more tailored recommendations . in a relatively short time , product hunt has become a kind of early warning system for apps that are about to break out . taptalk , a fast growing picture messaging app , got a seed investment from the venture capital firm sv angel after a partner discovered it there . traffic to product hunt has grown percent every month since january , and each month it drives million visits to the products featured on its leaderboard . prior to product hunt , ultratext had almost no downloads , andrew farmer , one of ultratext s founders , told me in an email . through product hunt we got noticed by you guys and also got a techcrunch article . product hunt directly or indirectly led to tens of thousands of downloads for us . still , product hunt s initial audience comprises people whose livelihood depends on getting in early on the next big thing . can a service for tech nerds go mainstream ? the app discovery problemthat we re even asking the question is a testament to hoover , who has an unlikely hit on his hands . at first blush , a service devoted to surfacing apps and other tech ephemera looks gratuitous . platform owners like apple and google offer leaderboards of their own , in the form of their top download charts , and they regularly feature new apps across their respective app stores . meanwhile , a host of mainstream and niche publications pay obsessive attention to the tech world , highlighting new products on an hourly basis . but as it turns out , each of those channels is flawed in its own way . most downloaded charts tend to reward only a handful of top performers , and are difficult to crack without an expensive marketing campaign . getting featured in an app store is often a matter of who a developer knows at apple or google . and product coverage in the press is often driven by public relations , which is available only to the already rich and well connected . a way of appealing to early adopterslittle wonder , then that developers have seized on product hunt as a way of appealing to a group of early adopting enthusiasts . the leaderboard resets itself every day at midnight pacific time , giving entrepreneurs a perpetual clean slate to try to get users attention . the leaderboard rankings take into account user votes and also when in the day something was posted if it s later , the product may get boosted above something that has more votes depending on how quickly it accumulated them . it s the perfect place to discover an app like ultratext , which was built as a side project by two friends with no interest in turning it into a venture backed startup . today more and more people are building products , hoover says . they may not be traditional startups , but they re still making interesting , useful products that people want to discover . the endless hamster wheelon the other hand product hunt can be exhausting . there are few things i enjoy more than finding a cool new thing to do with my phone , and yet i still open the morning email from product hunt with a sense of fatigue . every day , the email offers five more things to look at the site s leaderboard shows and the more things you look at , the more disposable they all seem . hoover sees the apps on product hunt less as lifelong companions than media you consume in the same way you might a television show for a few weeks , say , until you finish with it . the average person downloads zero apps per monthbut even that might be wishful thinking the average person , after all , downloads zero apps per month . hoover , whose iphone contains pages of apps , is an outlier , and so is the community he s built . his plan to expand the community is to create versions of product hunt for other categories , starting next year most likely with video games . hoover imagines a world where whatever you re interested in , there will be a product hunt for it , and it will help you find cool things that would otherwise stay hidden . and it will make money through ads , or affiliate links , or something more creative . of course , if the tech world s current boom times turn to bust , there may be less fodder for product hunt s endless hamster wheel of phone based distractions . it s one reason why the company would be smart to get those other verticals going in a hurry . but for now , at least , it s the best coolhunt on the internet relentlessly positive , easy to use , and adept at finding gems . i hate using the word democratizing , but i m just going to use it anyway , hoover says . product hunt is allowing anything from a vc backed company to a weekend hack project to get attention . bring on the upvotes . 