 last month i drove a lincoln mkx around detroit and i liked it . i was surprised for two reasons a lincoln has made a new vehicle feel like serious luxury and b it s a crossover , the most ambiguous segment of cars on the planet . yet for all its ambiguity , we are told the crossover utility vehicle cuv is the way of the road at virtually every major auto show . ampnbspdetroit s naias , which opens to the public this weekend , is no different . the long list of crossover debuts include the volkswagen tiguan gte active concept , gmc acadia , buick envision , and audi s ampnbsph tron quattro . a search of any car shopping site drums up over models that fall in the crossover category best described as the trucklets found in virtually every suburban driveway that fall somewhere between suv and minivan but the biggest differentiator is whether there s a third row of seating . i ve sat through two dozen marketing presentations in the past decade about the long term growth in this segment , which is no joke naysayers have had to keep quiet while the sales pour in and automakers profits climb . in the us , according to the atlantic , three times as many crossovers are sold as suvs and minivans combined . how do you make a crossover utility vehicle sound sexy ? in its essence , it s an uninspired blah of a silhouette , even at its most aerodynamic , sculpted extreme short in the front , big in the back . it does not take a skilled hand to draw the shape of two oblong lima beans . but for the auto industry , it s the shape that dominates our era . many buyers see it as a perfect compromise from the bloated suv . it does not take a skilled hand to draw the shape of two oblong lima beanstechnically , a crossover is based on a unibody car platform . meanwhile , a true suv is body on frame , a build common since the s in which a separate body is mounted onto a rigid frame . but this a very loose definition , and some crossovers skew toward the stretched proportions of an suv while others are more car like . it s the ambiguity that makes this segment interesting . if you want to sell a car as a suv or a suv as a car , just call it a crossover . before the term became an indelible part of our automotive vocabulary , the concept of crossing over first emerged and gained popularity in the s . while american manufacturers cashed in on the considerable profits of gas guzzling hummers , durangos , and navigators , smaller vehicles like the toyota rav , honda cr v , and subaru forester made headway . what manufacturers and buyers soon discovered was that while these crossovers took three steps back in the the evolution of automotive design , they benefitted from car like performance and do all utility . to this day , the cr v and rav jockey for the most sales in this segment . in fairness , the biggest detractors of cuvs tend to be those who write about them , who will always choose the station wagon that sits closer to the earth and makes you feel like you re at one with the autobahn , or the sports car with the wonderful exhaust note . but one of the responsibilities of an auto journalist is to put aside the fantasy of the impractical car every once in a while and think about the consumer . my time in the mkx reinforced that point . one day during my detroit adventure , it sleeted , iced , and snowed the all wheel drive mkx was an ideal ride . the handling was responsive and i felt cocooned away from the treacherous conditions , thanks in no small part to a heated steering wheel . meanwhile , i watched a rear wheel drive mustang slip and slide in front of me . the honda cr v . and for all their awkwardness , crossovers have still permeated popular culture it s perfectly chic to roll up to the valet in the porsche macan behind a ferrari . heck , ampnbspthere s a drop top crossover now . even true suvs are now taking cues from the cuv segment the ultra luxe , ultra spacious ampnbspbentley bentayga , based on audi s q platform , only has four seats . the popularity of crossovers impacts every buyer from the thrifty jeep patriot customer to those shopping for the new cadillac xt , which will hit the road this year . as many crossovers as gm already offers , cadillac is now doubling down on them the xt is the first of four cuvs that the automaker will introduce on a new platform designed to dominate this segment . the outgoing srx was already the brand s best seller . what s the appeal for buyers ? in this class of vehicle , it s what s on the inside that matters . cuvs are the cure for an automotive napoleon complex you sit a little bit higher , which might make you feel a bit safer , if only psychologically . if you re a commuter and you live in your car for several hours a day , that little bit of extra legroom and headspace makes all the difference . but unlike the s super sized suv craze that captured the hearts of soccer parents and begat odes to inch rims , cuvs are easy to park and engineered to be reasonably fuel efficient . they re even going electric now , including the wee kia soul ev , the tesla model x , and the mitsubishi outlander plug in hybrid . car like performance and do all utilityas a northeast dweller where utility and wintertime sure footedness are key , i am often asked subaru , bmw x , or ford escape ? yes , some of these people are carting around a gang of children , but others are single and more interested in room for a dog , a bike , or their next rideable . it s the vehicle that has no functional limits . in the luxury segment , where shoppers can take their pick of high end sedans , crossovers keep winning , too . bmw says that percent of its sales in will be in the crossover category . and s record breaking year for car sales was propelled by upticks in crossovers . in november alone , the sales spiked by over percent , and nearly every automaker reported record crossover sales figures for the year . and until the next great automotive evolution , only more cuvs are forecast for the immediate future . the competition is taking a smaller approach to big , because maximizing minimum space , it seems , is the path to maximum profit . 