 the thing about vine becoming the internet s premiere tool for making short form videos is that it happened almost completely by accident . its founders had envisioned their tool for making second clips as a way to help people capture casual moments in their lives and share them with friends . it was part of their pitch to twitter , which bought the company for a reported million in october , seeing it as a near perfect video analog to its flagship app s short form text posts . and yet even before the app launched , users had taken the second constraint as a creative challenge . something about that loop the way a vine endlessly rewound itself after completing , like a gif with audio encouraged people to put the app to strange uses . it was surprising , said dom hofmann , who founded vine with rus yusupov and colin kroll four months before twitter bought it . our original beta had something like or people on it , and even with that small group we started to see experimentation pretty early on . within weeks , it appeared that vine probably would never become the everyday video sharing tool its founders had envisioned . instead it became something wilder and much more culturally interesting . it became pretty clear as soon after we launched , hofmann said . watching the community and the tool push on each other was exciting and unreal , and almost immediately it became clear that vine s culture was going to shift towards creativity and experimentation . it immediately became clear that vine s culture was going to shift towards creativity . on thursday , the experimentation came to an end . with its own future increasingly uncertain , twitter said it would shut down vine s mobile app some time in the next few months . and while existing vines will remain on the web , a media format that had become beloved for its versatility now appears headed the way of betamax . interviews with seven former executives reveal a portrait of a company whose cultural impact far outstripped its strategic benefits to twitter . working a continent apart from their parent company , vine s small , new york based team struggled to grow its user base or find ways to make money . while vine once boasted a commanding lead over other social video apps , it failed to keep pace as competitors added features something that ultimately drove its biggest stars away . the app generated more beloved memes and cultural moments than most apps with twice as many users but twitter s mounting core business problems this year all but ensured it would eventually be sold off or shuttered . ian padgham saw the potential in vine both creative and monetary before almost anyone . as a member of twitter s marketing team in , he was responsible for making videos that explained how the service worked . his early film about working at twitter is likely one of the most watched recruiting videos ever made . after twitter bought vine , he sat in on meetings with the marketing team and began to explore its potential as a creative tool . padgham s first vine was a simple time lapse video of the view from his window at twitter . he loved the second limit , which forced him to think differently about storytelling . it s kind of like drawing in microsoft paint , he said . it used to be the worst app ever , but you couldn t get distracted by the bells and whistles . you couldn t get distracted by the bells and whistles . padgham began making vines every day before he left for work , and they soon grew both in popularity and in ambition . he cut out photo prints and spent three hours painstakingly turning them into a tribute to eadweard muybridge , a photographer who did pioneering work in motion pictures . he stood underneath big ben and recorded a time lapse of himself appearing to move the hands of the clock with his fingers , a loop that was viewed more than million times . soon brands like sony and airbnb were contacting padgham asking him to make vines on their behalf , and six months after vine launched he quit twitter to do it full time . in , vine began allowing users to record clips with their phones front facing cameras , and usage exploded . an ecosystem of young stars sprung up around the service , which evolved into a kind of live action cartoon network . there was zach king , whose eye popping magic tricks earned him million followers and more than . billion views . or amanda cerny , whose physical comedy earned more than . billion views . logan paul , whose vines looped more than billion times , parlayed his following into a series of acting roles while earning , to create a single vine for a brand , according to a recent minutes report . in a look at how video platforms were creating the next generation of celebrities , the new yorker put vine at the center . a vine s blink quick transience , combined with its endless looping , simultaneously squeezes time and stretches it , tad friend wrote . the app generated countless memes , and grew increasingly self referential over time , so that a single second clip might reference a dozen previous hit vines . and yet in retrospect it seems clear that was when vine peaked . research firm park data says . percent of all android users opened vine in august today that number has fallen to . percent . twitter never said how many people used vine , but once claimed it had an audience of million people on the web . former executives say that a major competitive challenged emerged in the form of instagram , which introduced second video clips in june . instagram video was the beginning of the end , one former executive told me . vine didn t move fast enough to differentiate . instagram courted celebrities with longer videos , eventually bumping the limit to a more flexible seconds . vines didn t break the second barrier until earlier this year , and its extended videos never caught on . instagram also began promoting celebrity accounts in its popular explore tab , bringing them attention that vine found difficult to match . marketers began shifting their money away from vine , and stars followed . vine didn t move fast enough to differentiate . meanwhile snapchat , which allowed users to send each other second video clips and later broadcast them publicly , ultimately became the casual mass market lifecasting app that vine s founders had once pitched their product to twitter as . when other platforms surged ahead , some vine stars began negotiating to be paid to post on the service . but the talks stalled , and by may the washington post found that vine users with large followings were sharing new videos much less frequently . at the management level , vine was rarely stable for long . hofmann quit in to pursue a new startup . kroll followed him out the door later that year . twitter laid off yusupov , who was vine s creative director , as part of last year s mass layoffs . don t sell your company ! , he tweeted on thursday . jason toff took over vine in and led it for two years before quitting this year to work on virtual reality projects at google . hannah donovan became general manager in march after working at a series of music startups . her lack of previous experience running a company led some employees i spoke with to question whether her hiring might be the beginning of the end . years of executive churn likely contributed to vine s failure to make money . for a while , brands were happy to pay vine stars directly to make ads and share them to their millions of followers . but after snapchat and instagram grew into hundreds of millions of daily users , marketers interest in vine dropped significantly . they had once longed for ways to grow their own followings on the app through paid placement offerings similar to twitter s promoted tweets and promoted accounts . but vine never came through with any options , in part because the founders resisted monetization from the start , sources said . it never took a cut of stars deals with brands , although twitter bought a social media talent agency last year in hopes it could begin to do so indirectly . by this year , twitter executives were discussing ways to bring twitter s various video offerings together somehow , sources said . in june , the company held discussions about absorbing vine into twitter s flagship app . to vine employees , those discussions served as evidence that twitter never valued vine as a standalone property the way its audience did . but no vine integration ever materialized , and this summer top vine executives began heading for the exits . twitter explored selling the app , according to the new york times , but it never found a buyer . vine didn t ship anything of consequence for a year . a couple of things plagued vine , and it all stems from the same thing , which is a lack of unity and leadership on a vision , said ankur thakkar , who was vine s head of editorial from until may of this year . he told me he was proud of the work the app did to highlight rising stars , including ruth b , who earned a record deal after his team gave her a coveted editor s pick award . but by the end the company was rudderless , he said . that trickled down into all of the project teams and the things they were working on , he said . vine didn t ship anything of consequence for a year . the stars who grew famous on vine continue posting their work on other platforms . but they re no longer pushing the surprisingly elastic boundaries of the second medium . the most important of part of vine has always been the people that are on it , dom hofmann told me . it s also the only part that can t be replicated . so i m going to miss them . even though i can and do follow some people from vine on instagram or snapchat or twitter or wherever they ve decided to go , it just doesn t feel the same . it s like the band is breaking up and everyone s going solo . 