 michael bromwich was in court with the most powerful company and the top government law agency in the country when he seemed to get antsy . apple and the united states department of justice had , after all , been exchanging jabs about him . i d like to be heard , your honor , if i can , he told the judge , who said they d need to exhaust the arguments of the main combatants first . wanting to interject would be understandable , considering how long bromwich and apple had been putting up their dukes inside and outside of court in a bloody fight over cash and corporate power . in july , apple was found guilty of conspiring to fix market prices for ebooks . the judge in the case , denise cote , said there was a clear portrait of a conscious commitment to cross a line and engage in illegal behavior . the prosecution s case was so clear cut , and apple showed such little contrition , according to cote , that it wasn t enough to take the company s word that it would change . to make sure apple fell in line , she called in help . that would turn out to be bromwich , a bearded , bespectacled attorney appointed by the court to be apple s corporate monitor for two years , a job made to ensure apple complied with court rulings . apple says bromwich stands to make millions almost two years later , no one in the arrangement is pleased . apple has accused the court of abusing its judicial power , and bromwich in particular of malfeasance , arguing that he stands to make millions in exorbitant fees for the monitorship , with apple footing the bill . that was the reason , after more banter between apple and the justice department , that bromwich addressed the judge , who was there to mediate the problems . thank you , your honor , he said . it s good to see you , but truthfully it s not good to be here . we shouldn t be here . we really shouldn t . according to bromwich , apple was pulling a shakedown . he d filed a report on the company with the court , as had been required , and said apple was furious with the results . the company , he argued , had been refusing to pay him as punishment . bromwich s first report said the monitoring remains preliminary . the monitoring team still lacks a significant amount of the information it needs to fulfill its monitoring obligations , bromwich wrote in the report . for these reasons , and others described in this report , the monitor s assessment of apple s antitrust compliance policies , procedures , and training remains preliminary . we re here in large part not because apple objects to the fact that we wrote the report , bromwich said . we re commanded specifically to write that report and subsequent reports by the final judgment . they re objecting to our discretionary decisions about what to put in the report . there can be nothing more chilling to someone in my position to have the contents of a report challenged and for payment to be declined because the monitored entity isn t happy with what s in the report . that court appearance happened last may , and the relationship between bromwich and apple has only intermittently improved since then . millions of dollars and a test of apple s power hinge on how the fight plays out , but the stakes could be much higher , setting a standard for how or how willing we are to deal with business titans who break the law . when i tried to set up a talk with bromwich , i was briefly intercepted by another employee at his firm , the bromwich group , who said bromwich couldn t answer any specific questions about apple while the case was still happening . it s ongoing and contentious to say the least , the employee told me . the key , there , is to say the least . at one point , when we later spoke , bromwich said , while answering a broader question , that he didn t want to even inadvertently say something about apple . it s ongoing and contentious to say the least . here s one example of how that plays out . both bromwich and apple submitted emails as evidence during the trial , and they re a rare look into how a secretive company treats interlopers and how an interloper , vested with power , might respond . kyle andeer , a former federal trade commission and department of justice litigator hired by apple two years before the trial to strengthen its antitrust team , wrote an introduction to bromwich and an assistant also appointed by the court , barry nigro . i don t believe i have met either of you before , but i am looking forward to it , andeer wrote . the circumstances at least from my perspective could be better , but i am committed to working with both of you and developing a best of class antitrust compliance program for itunes . apple s eddie cue , during the antitrust trial . bromwich responded with a draft letter outlining how he planned to carry out his job , with information on what he needed from apple interviews with top personnel , reviews of company records and how he planned to be reimbursed , per hour for himself and , per hour for nigro s assistance , plus a percent administrative fee . the judge on the case provided for bromwich to set the fees at the cost and expense of apple , as long they were of reasonable and customary terms and approved by the justice department . if apple objected , they could come back to the judge . andeer wrote back thank you for the draft it raises a number of issues , and we will respond as quickly as we can . i have attached a signed copy of the monitoring letter . the only change is the date . the next day , bromwich wrote again , saying he hoped to interview apple s board when it met the next week . andeer told him there had been a mistake there is no board meeting next week . when andeer responded to bromwich s letter , the tone was much less jovial , subtly mentioning how it would be highly unlikely that bromwich would have access to confidential information , and saying his fees do not reflect the competitive realities of the marketplace . he said , like all of apple s legal service providers , bromwich and company would be bound by apple s rules . apple would pay per hour to bromwich and per hour to nigro . there s palpable anger in the next email from bromwich . thanks very much for your response to my cover note and our draft letter , he wrote . unfortunately , i think you may have misconceived its purpose . if apple wanted to modify the confidentiality provision , they could suggest changes , but there was not to be a negotiation in the fees . i have attached a signed copy of the monitoring letter , he wrote . the only change is the date . that didn t seem to be the bromwich i spoke with last month . he was chatty about everything except apple and another one of the largest companies in the united states he monitors , which he declined to name . bromwich has held some of the most coveted jobs a professional monitor could ask forbromwich has held some of the most coveted jobs a professional monitor could ask for , overseeing internal investigations of the fbi , cia , and the offshore drilling industry work that occasionally made others less than pleased . he kept the lead forensic scientist at the fbi from testifying at the oklahoma city bombing trial after , he says , it became clear he didn t know what he was talking about . he tells a story about being courted to monitor the offshore drilling industry after the deepwater horizon disaster , when he got a call from a blocked number , who called again , and then again . when he finally picked up , it was the white house . that afternoon , he was speaking to a familiar voice michael , it s barack . bromwich took the job and , at a point in history when the drilling industry was cowed by public opinion , was able to make some reforms . later , he worked as a monitor at the washington , dc police department and , at least relative to his current situation , is effusive in his praise . i never had a dispute with them about anything , he told me . mostly , his responses were markedly measured compared to his emails . it doesn t need to be an adversarial relationship , and shouldn t be an adversarial relationship at any point , he says about the corporate monitor s role . the company and monitor should work together to improve the company s behavior . it doesn t need to be an adversarial relationship , and shouldn t be an adversarial relationship at any point . yet , whether borne of frustration or something else , neither bromwich nor apple have shown much interest in collaboration . in court , bromwich accused apple of withholding payment to grind the investigation to a halt . he had a recommendation to get things moving again so if apple wants the bills to go down and stay down , my advice is that they cooperate with us a little more , fight with us a little less , and challenge us a little less . not to take away their right to object , but i think things would go far more smoothly and things would be handled far more inexpensively if they were a little bit more careful about the challenges they made . it should be said , the arrangement between apple and bromwich isn t typical . corporate monitors are generally placed with a company under mutual agreement after an investigation , a government agency like the justice department will place the monitor , whom the company will welcome as part of the agreement . welcome really is the word it s better than losing a case and having changes foisted on you . bromwich addressing the house oversight and government reform committee in . chip somodevilla getty images if apple had entered into the monitorship voluntarily , these requirements likely would not have resulted in much contention , notre dame law professor veronica root writes in a paper on the subject . they are relatively similar to the types of requirements corporations routinely agree to enter into when settling claims of misconduct with the government and entering into corporate compliance monitorships . if apple had entered into the monitorship voluntarily , these requirements likely would not have resulted in much contention . those monitors , and the terms that they are appointed to , are usually kept hidden from the public eye . that s part of what s made monitors although nominally a crusading force for accountability controversial . former attorney general john ashcroft was appointed in to be the monitor of ampnbspan indiana medical supply company accused of handing over kickbacks to doctors . the person who recommended his firm was current new jersey governor chris christie , who was then the united states attorney in new jersey , and who had formerly worked for ashcroft . the appointment was worth as much as million . bromwich s fees are certainly not on the low end of the scale . for contrast , bromwich s appointment is lucrative , although maybe not out of the range of top firms . it doesn t seem that far out of bounds , says vikramaditya khanna , a professor of law at the university of michigan , although it s certainly not on the low end of the scale . conservative critics , though , will hardly be mollified by that thinking . the wall street journal editorial board has blasted bromwich more than once for what it sees as unreasonable fees . recently , they focused on a bill entry charging for time to review relevant media articles . if this article ends up as part of that charge , by the time you ve read to here , apple will have lost about , payable to the person it doesn t want there at all . the bromwich apple brawl cooled at least some since the opening salvos , only to heat up later . bromwich has filed three reports on his progress . the first nearly only talks about apple failing to comply with his requests for documents and interviews . the second says bromwich s relationship with apple during the period was more productive and constructive than it was during the first few months of the monitorship . but by the third report , from last month , the relationship took another turn . bromwich reported that , after some moves forward , apple had shut him out . bromwich reported that , after some moves forward , apple had shut him outapple has made the case a constitutional issue , and observers have suggested the company could take the fight as far as the supreme court . anything s possible , khanna says . that , not money , might be the truly important outcome of the dispute . how do you deal with the company found guilty , or just the one settling ? is a person on the inside a way to ensure accountability ? several bills have been introduced in recent years as a way to rein in , or at least guide , monitors . but as root notes , the apple case and other recent cases show varied ideas about what corporate monitors should be . how do you write a law when it s still being decided what you re writing it about ? whatever happens , despite some gains , the judges have seemed less than impressed so far with apple s case against bromwich . they sometimes sound downright exhausted . in front of a judge , apple made a winding argument against the corporate monitor , saying the court had violated its constitutional rights by the appointment and saying bromwich was engaged in a fact finding mission . obviously the monitorship involves fact finding . well , obviously , the judge replied . pardon ? obviously the monitorship involves fact finding . it couldn t be otherwise . when the lawyer interjected on another point , the judge said , the irrepressible impulse . go right ahead . this likely won t be apple s last tango with the feds the justice department has looked into apple s music streaming service next . meanwhile , apple versus bromwich seems likely to go on , with irrepressible impulses arguing on both sides . in front of a judge in , apple said , w e want to move forward with mr . bromwich . we want to resolve these disputes . but bromwich s third report wouldn t seem to agree that s still the case . apple s cooperation diminished substantially toward the end of the reporting period , he wrote , and some of our longstanding requests for information remain in dispute . 