 ever since leaked nsa documents first started popping up this summer , the battle against nsa surveillance has proceeded on multiple fronts legislators pushing for new laws , journalists pushing for new stories , and tech companies fighting to regain users amprsquo trust . yesterday , one of the major fronts closed down . since july , tech companies had been putting pressure on the department of justice , fighting for the right to say more about their interactions with law enforcement . yesterday they made peace , reaching a settlement and withdrawing a class action suit that had drawn in some of the most powerful companies in america . on this front at least , reformers have likely gotten all they amprsquore going to get . the deal was understood to resolve the question of transparency from the outside , it looked like a simple response to the president s recent nsa order , but according to the wall street journal s reporting , it was the result of intricate backroom negotiations between tech companies and the administration , the end of a conversation that s been going on for months . as soon as the order was announced , the companies quietly dropped their motion against the fisa court , declining to comment beyond a short prepared statement we filed our lawsuits because we believe that the public has a right to know about the volume and types of national security requests we receive . we re pleased the department of justice has agreed that we and other providers can disclose this information . while this is a very positive step , we ll continue to encourage congress to take additional steps to address all of the reforms we believe are needed . as one obama aide told politico more simply , the deal was understood to resolve the question of transparency around national security . as far as the courts were concerned , the tech companies had won . it s the kind of compromise president obama lovesso what did they win , exactly ? on the transparency side , companies get to add two new columns to their transparency reports , announcing the general number of national security letters and fisa warrants alongside traditional warrants and wiretaps . the numbers still aren amprsquot exact , lumped into bands of or , , but users can now have a general idea of the volume of requests companies are receiving through those channels . in exchange for that , the government gets a two year window in which new methods can amprsquot be disclosed . so if microsoft were to launch an all new chat platform tomorrow , the government will have at least two years between the first data request and the first transparency report , supposedly lulling gullible terrorists into a false sense of security . it also applies to entirely new kinds of warrant , so if terrorists start sending self destructing messages through snapchat , the same two year lag time will apply . it s the kind of compromise president obama loves , locking both sides into a limited version of what they want . there s some chilling effect , since users of smaller services will never know whether a given service is in the two year window or not ampmdash but in the long term , two years is just a snippet , hardly enough time for society to spiral into a surveillance dystopia . as long as all the programs are disclosed within two years , then the public will be generally informed about the government s surveillance programs , and the gears of democracy can take it from there . the disclosure rules only apply to customer selectors if that were the whole story , privacy advocates would be declaring victory right now ampmdash but they re not . that s because the order also leaves a number of loopholes that seem to be designed to let programs like prism slip by unnoticed . aclu chief technologist chris soghoian has already raised concerns that the disclosure rules only apply to customer selectors targeting individual users . that would mean a fisa warrant for a specific person or email address would be included in the numbers , but it might not include broader queries that brought up anyone who emailed the word terrorist or started accessing their account from yemen . the order only addresses bulk collection programs in a footnote , offering vague assurances at best . where does that leave prism , or the network tapping efforts that allowed the nsa to pull wholesale data from google and yahoo networks ? those programs are still closed off , effectively unreportable . tech companies have been looking for something simpler trustthat s a big concern for the aclu , but for google and others , it may be beside the point . while nsa reformers have been crusading for fundamental changes in us surveillance , tech companies have been looking for something simpler trust . all the web s most successful products are built on trust , from gmail and facebook on down . if web users stop trusting the service , they amprsquoll simply leave so that trust must be protected at all costs . disclosure isn t just a public service it s a business imperative . so when google wrote an open letter to the fbi director this summer , it opened with the simple statement , google has worked tremendously hard over the past years to earn our users amprsquo trust . in a joint letter to president obama , signed by eight of the largest companies in tech , apple , microsoft and others asked the president to consider users amprsquo reasonable privacy interests and the impact on trust in the internet . as the ceo of cloudflare told me back in october , we are fundamentally in the business of trust . google has worked tremendously hard over the past years to earn our users trust . yesterday s deal protects that trust , but it doesn t go further . it s a move back to the pre snowden state , with fights over targeted surveillance obscuring more secretive programs that suck up data in bulk and escape accountability entirely . those programs , with prism chief among them , are at the core of the nsa amprsquos surveillance efforts , but they amprsquove been increasingly ignored by the president amprsquos reform efforts . in last week amprsquos speech , he laid out plans to reform the phone records program and the fisa courts , but the programs targeting the open web went largely unmentioned . unless someone forces the issue , it amprsquos likely to stay that way . if you care about web freedom , that amprsquos a scary thought . programs like prism strike at the nature of the internet itself , establishing a breed of totalizing surveillance on a scale that would be unthinkable elsewhere . the free flow of data , once a tool of freedom , becomes something much darker . any true reform will have to grapple with that fact . the president has made progress , but those crucial reforms are still missing , and each new empty gesture makes it less likely they amprsquoll appear . after the transparency deal , we amprsquore left with an even scarier thought the companies with the biggest stake in the web may not be interested in defending it . 