 most efforts at combating climate change have focused on reducing carbon emissions or trying to eliminate them , but many climate scientists believe we may have already passed the point of no return . that s why noah deich wants to pull carbon out of the air . not only can we stop making a mess , we can clean it up . deich is the founder of a nonprofit called the center for carbon removal its goal is to bring together scientists , political figures and leaders in the energy industries to find the best way to remove co from the atmosphere . not only can we stop making a mess , but we can clean it up and hopefully prevent all of the damages scientists expect will happen if we don t clean it up , he says . carbon removal schemes aren t new , and they aren t entirely supported by the scientific community , either . some groups of scientists are working on the problem , and documents like the one published by the un s intergovernmental panel on climate change urge developing this kind of technology in the future . one major barrier is cost . technology already exists to remove co from smokestacks at a reasonable price , but taking it out of the air raises the price just how much , though , is disputed . it s not a question of if we can take carbon out of the atmosphere , but i think the question is if all of the technologies that can take carbon out of the atmosphere do it in a cost effective , sustainable and scalable way , deich says . he believes we can find a cost effective method . one thing is for sure the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is risingone thing is for sure the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is rising . currently , the level of co is just over parts per million so co molecules for every million gas molecules . it doesn t sounds like a lot , but scientists say that small changes in the balance can have major impacts . concentrations of carbon dioxide are projected to almost double to parts per million by , according to research from mit . ampnbspthose levels are alarmingly high , since carbon dioxide was at ppm before the industrial revolution picked up in the late s and early s . the un s goal for co emissions is currently unrealisticthe un s goal is to keep co from going over ppm in the next century , in the hopes of avoiding the likely catastrophic effects of climate change . that goal currently appears unrealistic , thanks to a lack of investment in the technology and the continued global reliance on fossil fuels , according to many climate scientists . deals among members of the united nations could help , but they will have to be swift and unyielding to prevent catastrophic consequences . the largest industrial nations will not just have to promise to try to cut emissions by large numbers , they will have to meet those goals and even try to exceed them . ben grey , flickr in terms of technological help , a machine made to pull carbon dioxide out of the air is crucial , says deich . recently , just such a machine made headlines it pulls co out of the air , processes it and combines it with hydrogen to make hydrocarbons so the co can be used as fuel . there are also ideas for storing carbon in soils that can absorb it . this is really an untapped area for technology innovation , deich said . lackner believes his methods could help stop climate changeone method for carbon removal , created by klaus lackner , who is the director at the center for negative carbon emissions , uses sodium carbonate and a resin material to suck up carbon from the air like a plant s or tree s leaves do . the resin soaks up the co like a sponge , and the carbon can be removed by adding water in a vacuum sealed container . then , the co can be pumped underground , in a process called sequestration . lackner believes his methods could help stop climate change . he says it s not likely the atmosphere can handle or , ppm of co , and we will likely get there this century if we don t do anything about it , lackner told the verge . we will need to balance the system out and find a way to get negative emissions . much of the scientific community doesn t especially care for carbon capture . many researchers who are working on promoting green energy or planning on capturing the co directly from smoke stacks don t want a technology that lets people pollute as much as they want so it can be captured later , lackner says . but plenty of fossil fuels are burned without carbon capture in planes , ships , and automobiles , for instance so we will eventually have to capture what s already in the atmosphere , he says . the real issue is affordability . the real issue is affordabilitypeople like lackner are hopeful that carbon capture can be made cheap quickly . but that may not be possible . for instance , there s sherwood s plot , a graph that shows how much it will cost to handle a certain volume of material based on how diluted it is . it s a straight line upward for cost as the material is more diluted . co is times more diluted in air than it is in a smoke stack , according to lackner . with the cost of taking it out of a smokestack running around to per ton of co , it would conceivably be incredibly expensive to take it out of the air . most estimates for the cost of open air carbon capture range between per ton and , per ton of co . lackner wants to find his way around the plot s skyward trajectory . he agrees with the basic idea behind sherwood s plot that a more dilute substance costs more to capture but he thinks he can disrupt the linear growth in cost . the way to do that , according to lackner , is by not forcing the machine to actively seek out carbon dioxide . his device lets co come to it , instead of grabbing everything around in an attempt to find co , as its first step of the process think of it as standing in the wind , rather than sucking in large volumes of air . designs that allow this type of airflow could get the cost down to or per ton of co captured , lackner says . but lackner s estimates sharply contrast what some studies of carbon capture devices , which usually estimate capture s minimum cost as around per ton . howard herzog , a senior research engineer at mit , was one of the researchers who helped conduct a study that looked at the cost of capturing carbon from outside air . his team based their research on the devices that would capture carbon from smoke stacks , and using sherwood s plot , they found an open air machine would likely cost , per ton of co captured at this point . however , lackner s device isn t the same as the device used to get co from smokestacks , so this estimate may not directly reflect that cost . sherwood s plot gutowski et . al there are ways that cost can be driven down , but the overall volume of the air that needs to be handled and how diluted the co is makes it an expensive process , herzog says . if you have basically free electricity for the device , then that changes things , but i just don t see that happening anytime soon , he says . one of the biggest issues is how much energy a machine needs to capture carbon , so very cheap electricity will be key . even technologies that are often called free energy , like solar panels , typically cost at least cents per kilowatt hour and that s still too expensive . it s important that the air capture device be running on energy not created by burning much fossil fuels , otherwise you re just chasing your tail , herzog says . cost is the biggest hindrance to carbon capturecost is the biggest hindrance to carbon capture everyone agrees on that , even if they disagree about how expensive it will actually be . once some groups have built their devices to scale and fully tested them in a large area , the reality of these devices will be a little clearer . right now , prototypes have only been tried out in test facilities , with little reported but estimated costs and basic efficacy . initial tests show many devices capture at least half the co they come in contact with , but they re still pricey to develop and use . but these devices haven t been tested much , so that s hardly the final word . proponents of carbon removal devices claim they are a necessity to help clean up our mess but necessity doesn t determine a technology s success . as more prototypes are tested , we may actually find out if we can clean up after ourselves and at what cost . 