 in , senator james inhofe r ok and then chair of the senate s environment and public works epw committee , took to the senate floor and asked , with all of the hysteria , all of the fear , all of the phony science , could it be that man made global warming is the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the american people ? more than years of science has been completed since inhofe first posed his question . nearly all of it shows climate change is definitely not a hoax . that hasn t stopped sen . inhofe and other conservative politicians from waging a crusade against climate policy and science . the senate changes hands global average temperature anomaly since , compared to the average temperature from to . noaa . republicans took back the senate in the november elections . that means inhofe is headed back to the epw chairmanship after a seven year absence . he s promised to use his position to stop environmental legislation in its tracks and rein in the environmental protection agency . his tenure comes as the epa gets ready to implement some of the most sweeping environmental regulations of the past several decades , and as world leaders are gearing up to meet in paris next year to come to a global agreement to respond to climate change . environmental safeguards are difficult to pass even with democrats controlling the senate and the executive branch . take the cromnibus the bill cut epa spending by million , down to . billion . it s the fourth year in a row congress has cut epa funding , from a high of . billion in . as if that weren t enough , the cromnibus will prevent restrictions on oil development , which threatens the endangered sage grouse , and contains another provision that could make it harder for the epa to enforce clean water act on farms . how bad could the next few years be ? sen . inhofe lays out exactly what he believes in his book the greatest hoax how the global warming conspiracy threatens your future . the book makes it clear that the next few years will be challenging ones for people who care about the environment . the gist of inhofe s argument is this anthropogenic climate change is either not real or greatly exaggerated , and those who insist it s real are doing so to control american lives . the gist of inhofe s argument is this human caused climate change isn t real why , when the united nations ipcc is totally refuted when al gore is totally discredited when man made global warming is totally debunked when passing a global warming cap and trade is totally futile why is this book necessary ? , inhofe writes ellipses his . very simple the environmental activist extremists are not going away . the global warming conspiracy continues today because , inhofe writes , the media is obsessed with resurrecting the gore mantra , and two , moveon . org , george soros , michael moore , and the hollywood elites have the resources to reverse the defeat . many of inhofe s assertions are not cited of the book s citations , only five directly reference scientific journals . rather , inhofe counters scientific research he doesn t like with his own opinions . in one instance , he attempts to paint climate scientists as bullies who want to silence any critics of global warming science by telling the story of david deming , an oft cited climate change denying geophysicist who believes a brief period of warmer temperatures around ad , called the medieval warm period mwp , disproves that the warm temperatures today are caused by humans . deming has said that bullying climate scientists have tried to force him to get rid of that medieval warm period . deming is wrong about the mwp . a preponderance of evidence suggests the earth was warmer in some places then , but is overall much warmer now . on top of that , proving the earth was slightly warmer doesn t disprove the climate change happening now . there s also no evidence to suggest a scientist ever told deming to get rid of the mwp . when you backtrack , trying to find the proof , you find all these fantasies , says john mashey , a computer scientist who studies climate change deniers and helps run the website skeptical science . august s global average surface temperature was the hottest since record keeping began in . here s a map of temperature abnormalities during that time . noaa the debate over a single chart the red curve shows the global mean temperature from onward . the dark blue is the original hockey stick graph the light blue is its uncertainty range . the green dots are from a separate study the year average of the pages k reconstruction of temperatures over the last years the work of researchers in countries klaus bittermann misunderstanding of scientists work is standard in inhofe s book . for instance , inhofe tries to debunk the hockey stick graph a favorite target of climate skeptics . the graph , which details global average temperature over time , shows relatively minor fluctuations in temperature from , and then a spike in temperature coinciding with the industrial revolution . in his book , inhofe called the hockey stick bad science . most scientists don t agree . the hockey stick graph first showed up in in a paper co authored by climate scientist michael mann , then a researcher at the university of massachusetts amherst . for the paper , mann and his colleagues had looked at tree rings , coral , ice cores , and other records that display past temperature variation . they found that while local temperatures fluctuated , the average global temperature was largely stable from the year until the s . the hockey stick graph has been reviewed several times for accuracy , and each time it s withstood the scrutinymann is now a professor at penn state university . he s has written a book about his experience of being pulled into the center of the climate change debates , largely thanks to inhofe . inhofe s skepticism actually made mann s case stronger , mann says . mann s graph has been reviewed several times for accuracy , including by the national academy of sciences , and each time , the basic tenant of the graph that the world is hotter now than at any time in the past thousand years has withstood the scrutiny . it s been combed over more times than any other piece of climate data , probably ever , says jeremy shakun , a climate researcher and professor at boston college . his research suggests the world is actually warmer now than it has been for much longer than years . we re still nerding out over some small points , but we re several years past there being any real doubt . there are several more erroneous claims in inhofe s book . but perhaps the biggest failure of inhofe s argument about climate change isn t about one specific study or point of contention . he just doesn t understand the scientific process . good science builds clarity through consensus an individual study matters , but a body of research can t be rebutted with one or two contradictory studies . the vast majority of scientists agree that the climate is changing rapidlythere are some well reviewed studies that question the specifics of the hockey stick and other pieces of the global warming puzzle . there are some scientists who question whether the dire predictions about the effects of global warming are accurate . but the vast majority of scientists agree the climate is changing rapidly . one review of , peer reviewed abstracts found that in percent of papers where the researchers took a position on the cause of global warming , researchers blamed humans for contributing to it . shakun says scientists are towards darwin and evolution certain that climate change is real and humans are causing it . the rest of inhofe s book isn t about science at all . after devoting a couple dozen pages to attempting to debunk the hockey stick and the mwp , inhofe moves on to attacking the people behind the push to act on global warming . inhofe has remained defiant about his views on climate change in interviews and senate hearings he s still using faulty information to back up his views . asked via email whether his views on climate change pose a conflict of interest for his upcoming role as chairman of the epw , inhofe replied there is no conflict in defending the american people from costly regulations brought on by advocates of man made climate change . over the past years , the earth has not warmed yet co emissions have continued to increase . that claim is accurate , but only because inhofe uses as a start date . the year s an outlier was unusually warm because of a particularly strong el ni o . but even without el ni o , a brief warming plateau wouldn t disprove that climate change is real a dataset that starts in is too small to be useful . follow the money inhofe is funded by industries that have vested interests in ignoring the push for a greener future . far from being a friend of big oil , as the accusation is often levied against me , i am a friend of little oil or of any oklahomans who strive to develop our vast resources , he wrote in the greatest hoax . in total , energy companies have donated almost million to inhofeone of inhofe s major contributors is koch industries , which is a family owned business that says its annual revenue is billion . koch , which owns oil , gas , and coal infrastructure across the world , has donated , to inhofe . in total , energy companies have donated almost million to inhofe , more than any other industry . even during uncompetitive years , inhofe s campaign raised hundreds of thousands from oil companies . energy money coats all of congress . each dollar oil , gas , and coal companies spend on a politician buys the companies in subsidies , according to one estimate the controversy over that pay for play system has led most members of the senate to try to downplay their connections to the industry . inhofe announces his influences with pride . i firmly believe in pursuing policy options to foster an environment of economic growth and opportunity as well as to become energy independent , inhofe writes in his emailed response . sage grouse pacific southwest region u . s . fish and wildlife service but there s hope . over the past few years , organizations not usually associated with liberal ideology or environmental activism the pentagon , the vatican , exxonmobil have acknowledged the existence of climate change and humans contribution to it . even the sage grouse may benefit from energy companies largesse , but even if every politician acknowledged that climate change existed , doing something about it in the near future seems less than likely . congress hasn t passed a major piece of environmental legislation since it strengthened the clean air act in . all other legislation since then has been incremental or pushed through by the executive branch . inhofe has been instrumental in that blockade . last month , inhofe demanded the epa stop looking into whether states have effectively prevented fracking from causing damage to water systems . in , he sponsored a bill that would have stripped the epa s ability to force coal power plants to reduce the amount of mercury and other toxic substances they emit . one of inhofe s only pushes for environmental legislation was s clear skies act , which inhofe touts in his book as the most aggressive environmental legislation in history . but according to environmental groups , the specifics of the bill would have actually let power plants emit more toxic substances , and would have gutted the epa s authority under the clean air act . the league of conservation voters calculates that inhofe has only voted in favor of environmental legislation percent of the time . inhofe has only voted in favor of environmental regulation percent of the timethere s a section at the end of inhofe s book in which he recounts becoming deathly ill after swimming in a lake polluted with blue green algae in oklahoma . the toxins blue green algae carries can kill you if you drink enough of it . a few months ago , toledo , ohio shut of its water supply because the algae had migrated down from lake erie . blue green algae is proliferating across the us because of climate change . it s not clear why inhofe includes the story he doesn t use it to refute a point about climate change or to prove something about his policies . maybe it s a parable nature can kill you , no matter what you believe . 