 technology has added plenty of new annoyances to life , but it s also done away with countless others . one more that could be on its way out ? a visit to the doctor s office . that s the vision of a company called cue , which wants to make at home medical diagnosis everything from the flu to vitamin d levels as common as pregnancy tests . the concept revolves around a small cubic kit , which the company says can use a swab of saliva , nasal fluid , or blood , to discern what s going on in your body . and the product won t just determine if you re sick it ll also check vitamin or testosterone levels , or help women figure out if it s a good time to try for a baby . in short , cue is designed to replace the trips you d take to a doctor or lab by doing some of those same tests at home . the basic hardware is cue , which hopes to ship its first device to a group of beta testers early next year , is the brainchild of ayub khattak who has a background in mathematics and biochemistry , and clint sever , a product designer and engineer . five years ago , khattak was working on a project about genetic barcoding in plants at ucla , and thought that the same idea could be applied to a miniaturized tester for viruses in humans . the pair decided to take apart a home glucose tester and figure out whether that same basic hardware could extend to other types of tests . that led to the small base unit reader , which can analyze disposable cartridges that test different bodily fluids . you put a fluid into a cartridge , plug it in , and the cue base unit delivers test results wirelessly over bluetooth to an app on your phone . the flu is one of five things cue plans to assess in its initial model , alongside fertility , testosterone , inflammation , and vitamin d levels . some of those tests differ from what you d find in your pharmacy , which typically offer blood glucose monitors , home drug testing kits , fertility tests , and kits that check for hiv which until two years ago required lab work . by comparison , several of the tests cue s going after have traditionally required a doctor s visit or a trip to a specialty lab . cue s starting lineup of tests are similar in performance to their lab counterparts , khattak says , and in some cases are faster than what s being used in doctor s offices . the flu test , for instance , is three times faster than a conventional one , and the vitamin d test takes minutes to spit out results . million us doctor visits are for cold and flu there are over million doctor visits for cold and flu symptoms every year in the us . in more than million of those visits , the patient has flu , khattak says . we want to enable people to get this health information in minutes and , if flu is detected , communicate their result to their doctor who can order a prescription to the local pharmacy . and because cue relies on a universal reader to analyze cartridges , it could conceivably be expanded to incorporate additional tests in the future . cartridges , which are non reusable , are mostly expected to sell for per five pack , with the flu test going for for a pack of three . khattak says the eventual goal is to have both the unit and cartridges subsidized by insurance companies and government health care programs like medicare . right now , cue is being sold to select buyers without fda approval , by participating in an agency program that allows exemptions for investigational devices meaning the product can t yet be sold in stores . of course , cue isn t the first company trying to transform how and where medical testing happens though it is among the first to focus on consumers instead of health care providers . quantumdx , which is backed by the bill amp melinda gates foundation and the clinton foundation , has developed a portable device that can detect malaria , hiv , tuberculosis , or other stds in less than minutes using similarly specialized cartridges . unlike cue , however , it s been developed for testing in places without westernized medicine , and plans to eventually test for things like cancer . apple and samsung want to track health data toocue s entry also comes as technology giants like apple and samsung are turning attention to health tracking and its integration with sensor hardware . for samsung , that s a two pronged effort to track metrics like heartbeat , blood pressure , and physical activity . the company is also working in sami , a cloud based platform for securely capturing and processing data from all various health tracking hardware . more recently , apple announced healthkit , a backend for tracking fitness data which will work hand in hand with a health tracking app on ios . healthkit is expected to be an integral part of the company s wearable device , which is reportedly being announced this october . but not everyone is convinced by the idea of home health testing devices like cue . especially the part about turning the data into something that s actionable . a small machine is not going to tell you what it means , says dr . paul abramson , a san francisco physician . say these numbers were accurate . would they be useful to figure out what to do ? probably not , because it s hard to be objective about yourself when you re sick . and because cue has yet to be used by many patients , it s unclear exactly how accurate the device actually is and the company isn t ready to discuss that , largely because it can t make any claims to accuracy until the product is cleared by the fda . all khattak would say is that cue was definitely not less effective than standard lab tests , and that the company s been comparing its own results to those done in a lab . there s a lot of gray area . even so , abramson suggests that some of the things cue plans to test for don t yield simple answers , and could require analysis . self testing at home implies there s a linear progression this means this . that if you just measure it , it will tell you what to do and very few things like that are true in medicine , he says . there s a lot of gray area . that includes testosterone testing , something abramson argues was created by pharmaceutical companies , and is difficult to analyze because it can differ among patients and vary wildly from day to day . looking ahead , cue s founders also hope they can offer some analysis to go along with test results . the company plans to offer suggestions , like exercise tweaks or dietary adjustments , based on a user s health profile . what s less clear about that plan is what happens when you actually have the flu , or something else that s picked up in future tests . will doctors be on board with offering prescriptions even if they don t see a patient in the exam room ? if the tests end up being good enough , khattak believes that s the clear next step . we re not inventing something new about how things are detected , he says , we ve just packaged it in a way that s very efficient . 