 airports trigger anxiety . subway systems cause paranoia . we all know the statistics it amprsquos riskier to get in your car than it is to board an aircraft or take a train . but our collective memories of bombings , hijackings , and poison gas attacks often turn public spaces of transport into psychic mine fields . stuck in limbo between the here and there , pushing through a crush of strangers , we are totally vulnerable and alone . except we amprsquore not . there amprsquos always the voice . you know , the one that tells us that ampldquosmoking inside the terminal is prohibited , amprdquo and that ampldquounattended baggage will be removed immediately , amprdquo and that ampldquothe next stop is times square . amprdquo it amprsquos sort of irritating , yet something to cling to , as familiar and pervasive as the smell of cinnabon or axle grease . it may surprise you to learn that these announcements are not only real people , but for the most part the same two people . they are carolyn hopkins and jack fox , two cheerful , church going retirees who also happen to be longtime buddies . the story of how they came to conquer the sound systems of the majority of major transportation centers across the country is groovier than you amprsquod expect . it has roots in the music industry , and features a homespun business that was able to grow beyond its southern roots and go global by capitalizing on a weird technological niche . the next stop is louisville , ky . . mobile layout . voice object display none . desktop layout . voice iframe display none a conspiracy of voicesconspiracy theorists will probably be delighted to learn that a smallish , person company out of louisville controls the announcement systems in just about every important public space in the united states . they do it for airports including jfk , lax , and chicago o amprsquohare , all buildings at the capitol , the mayo clinic , the kennedy space center , and the new york city subway system , just to name a handful . the nyc mta has a host of other voices for specific platform announcements for instance , charlie pellett says , stand clear of the closing doors . they also work worldwide , from china to iceland and everywhere in between . conspiracy theorists will be delighted to learn a small louisville company controls most us announcement systems . listen to carolyn hopkins speak about her transition from music to announcementsthe company responsible for the voices , ied , short for innovative electronic designs , is the preeminent supplier of what amprsquos known as an automated paging system networked , computer controlled equipment that controls audio notifications for big complexes . though competitors exist ampmdash biamp , and qsc , for instance ampmdash ied is the main us player in this specialized sector . the company was founded in , but its genesis really occurred in tandem with the birth of rock amplsquon amprsquo roll . though it never had the fame of memphis , detroit , or muscle shoals , louisville , ky , where ied is based , was an important early meeting point for soul , r ampb , and electric instruments . the city nurtured popular touring bands like the sultans and artists like wilson pickett . louisville was also home to harvey fuqua , the moonglows amprsquo bandleader , who would later go on to help found motown records and serve as marvin gaye amprsquos mentor . ied amprsquos co founder , hardy martin , was a fixture in the scene , playing guitar in a band called the carnations . but he also had a head for business martin formed part of a music booking agency , triangle talent , that worked with major bands in the area . it was there that he began to pick up engineering skills . ampldquoi started out building sound and lighting equipment for the carnations , then different bands that triangle talent handled , amprdquo says martin . martin and his partner ray allen also started allen martin productions , a recording studio that at one time employed bill porter , one of the creators of the nashville sound . the studio later branched out into commercial and video work . ampldquothe first job i had with allen martin was to write the lyrics and the music for a jingle for a hot rod supplier called big red , amprdquo remembers carolyn hopkins , the female voice of ied . she had already been working with triangle talent as the lead singer of a regional touring soul band called the chaparrals , and before that , in radio as a producer . the chaparrals had a full horn section , sounded a bit like earth , wind amp fire , and played in full evening attire gowns , tuxes . ampldquoabsolutely excruciating in hot , kentucky weather , amprdquo says hopkins . when martin and three other partners started ied , they chose hopkins as one of their first voices . it was for the typhoon lagoon attraction at disney world at florida in . hopkins amprsquo voice isn amprsquot what you amprsquod expect from a paging system . it amprsquos neither robotic , nor elegant and actressy , but rather , mirthful and folksy . ampldquothey said , amplsquocan you do a certain voice ? amprsquo amprdquo hopkins , now , remembers . ampldquothey wanted a very happy smiling voice ! and i tried it . amprdquo the gig continued , and hopkins was called back every time they created a new system . her voice is neither robotic , nor elegant and actressy , but rather , mirthful and folksyjack fox was a local radio personality who had spent his entire career traveling around the country working as a dj at various adult contemporary stations before landing in louisville in . he has a classic booming , old timey announcer sound , has done extensive voice over and commercial work , and has recorded over , talking books for the blind . in , after the gulf war broke out , he was tapped by ied . it was the beginning of tighter airport security , and fox sounded strong . ampldquothey needed a male voice that was friendly yet authoritative , amprdquo says fox . typically , when a client needs a system built and hires ied , the voice actors are given very specific scripts as word or excel files . the actors then record them , and the files are uploaded to the computerized notification system that amprsquos constructed for the building complex in question . ampldquoi usually record a plethora of items for transit authorities ampmdash lots of options and variations . they don amprsquot change too often , but usually they are needed yesterday when i do get them . it amprsquos either feast or famine with numbers of takes needed , amprdquo says hopkins . comfort of strangersfox and hopkins are old friends . and they amprsquore both somewhat matter of fact about their omnipresence in transport stations the world over . ampldquosometimes it can be strange , because i amprsquoll be traveling somewhere , and forget i amprsquod recorded something , and suddenly hear my voice , amprdquo says hopkins , who recently retired to maine with her husband , but still records for ied from her home . i amprsquoll be traveling somewhere , and forget i amprsquod recorded something , and suddenly hear my voice listen to how jack fox started his voice recording careeronce she was on a moving sidewalk late at night , and there was a guy taking up both sides with his baggage , the way you amprsquore not supposed to . she sidled up behind him and tried to duplicate her own voice , which was playing on the intercom . ampldquohe didn amprsquot move and didn amprsquot react . i amprsquom going , amplsquowow . he must be dead or something . amprsquo amprdquoif they get recognized , it usually only happens while they are at the airport themselves . fox says he was renting a car at the terminal once , and the agent said , ampldquoyou sound like that guy ! amprdquo then there was the time he was traveling with his granddaughter ampldquoshe got this puzzled look on her face and said amplsquowhy is grandpa talking so much ? amprsquo amprdquohopkins , fox , and martin all have an informality and warmth that seems at odds with the environments their respective technology and voices inhabit . in the case of hopkins and fox , they view their work , quite literally , as a public service . they talk about how they hope that they can provide some mellowness to an otherwise stressful experiences . ampldquoi picture someone standing on a moving sidewalk and i amprsquom talking to that person with a friendly quality to my voice , so it won amprsquot be so cold and sterile . amprdquo says fox . ampldquomy father was a minister , and i think of this as my airport ministry . amprdquoclearly , although their rock and radio days are behind them , they amprsquore now programming the travel amprsquos soundtrack to have a little soul . photos by michael shane , audio mix by john lagomarsino