 what a year you were , . edward snowden amprsquos nsa leaks turned up the heat on a cauldron of privacy concerns that amprsquos sure to boil over in the next year . drones expanded from killing machines to potential package delivery robots . the us government shut itself down and revealed a disheartening lack of technical competence with the healthcare . gov launch debacle . microsoft started down a path of completely reinventing itself by looking for a new ceo and trying to buy nokia . from outlandish promises to dissembling politicians , the hyperloop dreams were almost as big as the spying nightmares . it amprsquos all a lot to remember , so we amprsquove put together our take on the biggest stories of the year . what did mean and what will the next year bring ? read on for our take . sticky toc engaged ! do not remove this ! biggest stories of the yearbiggest stories of the yearthe nsa leaksthe leaks began in june . edward snowden , an nsa contractor , had collected a vast store of secret internal documents and began sharing them with journalist glenn greenwald , the washington post , and others . the revelations were shocking the scope and depth of the nsa amprsquos collection of private data stopped looking like a conspiracy theory and became a cold , hard reality we all had to face . the leaks showed that the nsa has collected troves of phone records , spied on us citizens , and tapped the phones of foreign leaders . over the last half of , the relentless cadence of releases overwhelmed the government amprsquos attempts to justify the nsa programs . snowden himself , who ultimately landed in russia , declared that he ampldquoalready won , amprdquo despite the likelihood that he will live his life in exile . unfortunately , his claim to victory rings hollow ampmdash only now are committees and leaders beginning to take steps to bring about reform . the boston bombingsthere s no going back . the boston marathon bombing will be a defining moment as we continue to wrangle with media , news , and tragedy unfolding live in the years to come . the shocking attacks killed three people in all , injured over others , and lead to a week long manhunt that shut down boston and paralyzed the country . in addition to the brutality of the attacks , a new uncertainty aided by the free flow of information dominated the minutes , hours , and days following the explosion . an unending stream of hastily checked rumors , false leads , misinformation , and a well meaning but misguided amateur forensic reddit manhunt spiraled out of control . the race to be first tripped up traditional media and the hive mind alike on twitter and across the internet clearly the end is not written . domestic dronesthough the debates surrounding military drone strikes are far from over , saw a new issue rise unmanned aerial vehicles uavs in us airspace . this year , the faa slowly moved ahead with plans to regulate domestic drone flight by , approving the first commercial uavs and accepting bids for a handful of test sites around the country . companies , meanwhile , began work on drone related services even before approval amazon made waves late in the year by announcing plans for half hour , door to door delivery service by octocopter . drones also became a common tool for public services , used by firefighters and police for surveillance , reconnaissance , and search and rescue operations . of course , these developments weren amprsquot without controversy critics pushed for strong privacy protections to accompany the faa amprsquos other uav rules , and several states passed laws regulating how police and private citizens could gather and use drone footage . elon musk , superherothe ceo and co founder of two of the most exciting technology companies today ampmdash spacex and tesla ampmdash elon musk sits atop the verge for a reason . rarely a week went by in when the south african billionaire wasn amprsquot in the news , having taken his white hot electric vehicle maker to its first ever quarterly profit , docked a spacecraft with the international space station , and ampmdash in his plentiful spare time ampmdash designed an audacious high speed transport system that could send commuters from la to san francisco in under half an hour . at just years of age , it seems likely that musk will be a newsmaker for many , many days to come or sols , once he inevitably finds his way to mars . jeff bezos , magnatefor most billionaires , buying a newspaper works as a kind of a victory lap ampmdash but when jeff bezos bought the washington post this august , he was just getting started . seven weeks later , while the ink was still dry on the post deal , he announced the next generation of kindle fires , complete with mayday amprsquos innovative customer support system . as hardware , it amprsquos impressive ampmdash but it amprsquos just a bow wrapped around the company amprsquos complete domination of the ebook market , and its strengthening hold on music , film , and tv distribution . but like any good keynote , there was one more thing . after the halo had dimmed from mayday , bezos called in minutes to announce something absolutely no one expected ampmdash a plan to use drones to ferry packages seamlessly through the sky . with a little help from the faa , you could be getting drone powered soap deliveries as soon as . healthcare . gov melts downthe obama administration earlier this year launched the largest consumer facing app ever built by the government healthcare . gov , the health insurance marketplace that was supposed to be a keystone of the administration amprsquos landmark affordable care act . unfortunately , that milestone foray into technology turned out to be a disaster . the website , as thousands of users now know , buckled under even modest traffic and produced absurd errors that often made getting insurance nearly impossible . while the debacle was a huge embarrassment for the administration , it also catalyzed a long overdue debate about the convoluted and inefficient way the government buys technology . as a result , everyone from silicon valley to washington , dc is now getting caught up on ampldquofederal it procurement reform , amprdquo a process that is key to the success of government led technology ventures in the future . bitcoin risesbitcoin , the virtual currency that mimics cash on the internet , has proven itself to be surprisingly resilient , as technology fads go . despite increased regulation , repeated price crashes , massive heists , and competition from other virtual currencies , bitcoin is now almost five years old ampmdash it amprsquos showing no sign of going away , and has even spawned a meme based me too cryptocurrency . the currency has faced a steady climb towards relevance , and was the year that people really started to take bitcoin seriously . a single bitcoin amprsquos price peaked at a high of more than , , and it was the main subject of a first of its kind senate hearing on virtual currencies . multiple international governments , including norway , germany , and singapore , issued official opinions on bitcoin use . and the illegal drug marketplace silk road , which had been a black mark on the currency amprsquos reputation , was shut down by the fbi . twitter matures saw the last big tech ipo that everybody had been waiting for twitter . unlike facebook , which faltered out of the gate , twitter amprsquos ipo was a home run by most measures . while a host of early employees and angel investors made a ton of new cash some of which will pour back into the startup scene , the ipo established twitter as a mainstream company . next up ? profit , if twitter plays its cards right . those cards include more pictures , more ways to bring in new users and potentially annoy current ones , and more rapid redesigns of its apps . now that it amprsquos a public company with real investors expecting real returns , the biggest changes for the service are yet to come . is yahoo back ? in her first full year as yahoo amprsquos ceo , marissa mayer kickstarted the company amprsquos once moribund mobile team and refreshed nearly the entire product line . yahoo amprsquos new weather app won an apple design award , and a similar look revived the company amprsquos finance and news apps . meanwhile , after years of pleas from loyal fans , flickr got the attention ampmdash and redesign ampmdash it deserved . yahoo amprsquos accelerated pace of innovation was driven in large part by nonstop acquisitions . since becoming ceo , mayer has bought more than two dozen companies in areas including imaging , machine learning , video conferencing , and photography . but her biggest buy was tumblr , the white hot blogging platform that yahoo scooped up for . billion earlier this year . it amprsquos unclear whether mayer amprsquos sharp maneuvers can make yahoo as profitable as it once was ampmdash but with million people now using the company amprsquos products on mobile devices each month , its prospects are looking better and better . microsoft in fluxalthough microsoft launched a tweaked windows . update and new surface models in , this year was less about products and more about massive internal change . ceo steve ballmer revealed his giant reorganization plan to transform microsoft into a devices and services company , before announcing , months later , that he won amprsquot be around to see ampldquoone microsoft amprdquo take shape . ballmer will retire from microsoft in , with his successor expected to be named early next year . the next ceo will take over the ambitious plans , alongside an acquisition of nokia amprsquos device business . the surprising acquisition came just weeks after ballmer amprsquos retirement note , and sets the company on a path to be a hardware player in the smartphone and tablet market . with the new xbox one console , microsoft is also hoping to capture the living room . it amprsquos another ambitious plan from a company in transition , but early figures show it amprsquos selling well so far . has been a year of change for microsoft , but is the year the company will need to prove its big bets can really start to pay off . permanent snapchatsnapchat amprsquos success wouldn amprsquot be long lived , pundits said . the app was too buggy , and its most important feature ampmdash its disappearing messages ampmdash could be cloned in a minute . but snapchat kept growing , beating out facebook amprsquos ephemeral messaging app poke , and eventually seeing over million photos shared per day ampmdash which put it within spitting distance of facebook . but as snapchat amprsquos engagement numbers grew , so did its aspirations and ego . as came to a close , the company reportedly turned down multibillion dollar acquisition offers from facebook and google . in , snapchat will need to justify staying independent by finding ways to make money and add features ampmdash and do so without losing the advantage it seems to have over facebook with younger users . music comes backremember when the music industry was doomed ? it wasn amprsquot so many years ago , but it feels like longer . it was before beyonc ampeacute ambushed the web with one of the best albums of the year , owning the moment in a way most culture critics thought was impossible in the modern age . she was snatching it from kanye , who amprsquod been tussling with daft punk for control of the world amprsquos headphones all summer . jay z did his strange , transfixing , app based two step with samsung and for months on end , it was all anyone wanted to talk about . and that amprsquos to say nothing of the billion dollar edm company that splashed onto the nasdaq in october . music ? dead ? what were we thinking ? the netflix studiooriginal shows have been produced for the web since the s , but they remained second class citizens compared to network and cable series no matter how polished they were . in that all changed . netflix lead the way as the kevin spacey vehicle house of cards debuted to a flurry of positive reviews and viewing binges . arrested development and orange is the new black proved it wasn amprsquot a fluke , and the emmys made it official when netflix shows earned nominations . cards went on to win three awards , including best director for david fincher . it echoes the legitimacy hbo gained when the sopranos became the first original cable series to score an emmy nomination , setting the stage for a revolution . with amazon studios recently releasing its first original shows and microsoft working on a halo series with steven spielberg , the question isn amprsquot whether a streaming service can produce a ampldquoreal amprdquo television show it amprsquos if the next breaking bad or lost will even be available through traditional channels in the first place . t mobile amprsquos wild ridein , t mobile was very nearly bought up by at ampt and had no clear path to a next generation lte network . but in , under new ceo john legere , t mobile transformed itself from a struggling fourth place carrier to an aggressive upstart aimed at turning the wireless industry in the us on its head . as part of its new ampldquouncarrier amprdquo branding , t mobile got rid of the onerous cellphone contract , launched options for people to upgrade their devices more often , offered free data to all tablet customers , and deployed radically cheaper international data roaming plans . oh , and it finally started selling the iphone . the plan seems to be working t mobile reported more new customer additions in than any other major carrier in the us . as a result , at ampt , sprint , and verizon have all followed suit with their own rapid upgrade options , and at ampt recently launched plans that are less expensive for customers who have fulfilled their contracts . google gets weirdduring a q ampa session at google i o this year , ceo larry page mused about an intriguing desire to ampldquoset aside a part of the world amprdquo where experimenters could perform tests and trials that don amprsquot conform to pesky laws and regulations . but really , given all the outlandish experiments the company is running here at home , who needs a google island ? this year brought calico , a google company tasked with curing illness , aging , and death . it brought project loon , a network of high altitude balloons designed to connect the remaining two thirds of the world amprsquos population to the internet . and it brought robots . google this year acquired eight robotics companies , including defense contractor boston dynamics , and put them under the leadership of former android chief and lifelong robot aficionado andy rubin . turns out there is a google island , after all . and we amprsquore living on it . google kills readerin march , google buried a bombshell in its regular ampldquospring cleaning amprdquo product shutdown blog post google reader . the rss client was still popular despite the fact that reader was an all but abandoned product . users decried the move and declared that rss was still important for the web , but nevertheless reader shut down as planned on july st . luckily , companies from aol to feedly to digg rushed to fill in the gap and by the end of the year there were several rss reading and syncing options to choose from . rss may have been supplanted by twitter for many users , but it amprsquos not quite dead yet . banksy takes new yorkbanksy amprsquos october residency in new york city was about so much more than his silhouette street art . dubbed better out than in , the month long series saw unannounced banksy installations all over the city , with a photo of each posted on instagram setting off a stateside frenzy where everyone was discussing street art in public . art hunters raced around the five boroughs to catch a glimpse , local gawkers huddled nearby , and mayor bloomberg got riled up . banksy strayed from his usual stencils with a tiny memorial and cinder block sphinx , but it was all about art as an event that ratcheted ever higher as the installations disappeared or were defaced , painted over , and covered up in hours . mars wins our heartexperts have been scrutinizing the red planet for decades , but offered up unprecedented and tantalizing details about what mars is and was made of . after landing on the planet in august of , nasa amprsquos curiosity rover spent this past year sending back reams of data for scientists to analyze , leading to new insights into the planet amprsquos watery , potentially habitable past . and curiosity will soon have more company , as this year also saw nasa launch the maven probe to characterize mars amprsquo atmosphere . while scientists looked into the red planet amprsquos past , others looked to its future ampmdash and kicked off bold ventures intended to get people to mars within the next decade . dennis tito amprsquos inspiration mars announced a plot to send two brave souls to the planet and back by , while the mars one project made headlines for its ambitious plan to create a self sustaining human colony . design goes flatwindows has its live tiles , google has its cards , and now , with ios and os x mavericks , apple has finally left the rich textures of its recent history behind . the company changed the direction of its mobile and desktop software in less than a year , moving from green felt and faux leather to flat panels , thin type , and soft gradients . the timing of the change is no coincidence scott forstall , apple s head of ios since forever , left the company in october , leaving room for jony ive and craig federighi to take the reins . what does that transition mean ? two experienced people are spearheading the look and feel of all the company amprsquos software . there amprsquos plenty of work to be done , but apple fans can rest assured that the company amprsquos mobile and desktop software appears , at least , to be in capable hands . genetic testing evolvesfrom the risk of developing an illness to the roots of ancestry , each year brings with it new information on what we can glean from our genetic makeup . but as the burgeoning field progresses , it amprsquos also running up against regulatory roadblocks ampmdash ones that , as showed , have the potential to vastly transform how our genetic data is used and what it might teach us . first came a landmark supreme court decision , wherein justices ruled that a company called myriad genetics couldn amprsquot hold a patent on two genes involved in breast cancer risk . the ruling was narrow in scope , but it amprsquos expected to somewhat stymie monopolies on genetic tests . unfortunately , just as the field started to feel more open , the fda slammed a door shut in november , the agency ruled that andme amprsquos genomics test violated federal regulations , striking a resounding blow to the dream of personally managed genetic data . the chelsea manning trialin february , a young army private named bradley manning provided nearly , classified us government documents to the online publisher wikileaks . arrested several months later , he faced charges the most serious , aiding the enemy , carried a potential death sentence . manning amprsquos court martial began in december , , and this year manning received a year sentence , handed down just as the nsa documents leaked by edward snowden had begun to make international headlines . from prison , manning declared herself female , asking to be addressed as ampldquochelsea . amprdquo since then , she has fought to receive hormone therapy and , around thanksgiving , issued a public statement thanking those ampldquowho dare to ask probing , even dangerous , questions . amprdquo manning amprsquos lawyer believes that she could be paroled in february . biggest disappointments of the yearbiggest disappointments of the yearcongressdim approval ratings for congress are nothing new , but in they dropped to the lowest since we started tracking such things in earnest ampmdash and for very good reason . congress spent the vast majority of the year deadlocked , a situation that ultimately led to a government shutdown . that meant everything from nasa to government email to president obama amprsquos surveillance review panel went on hiatus . and our legislators didn amprsquot do much to respond to the leaks that revealed the scope of the nsa amprsquos spying , either , despite a growing consensus that it must be scaled back . in all , congress made lots of noise , expressed way too much fury , and did precious little of significance . facebook wasn amprsquot the best year for facebook . the company amprsquos initial public offering in was a notorious underwriting disaster , and its newest products ampmdash facebook home , a revamped news feed , and graph search ampmdash didn amprsquot make much of a splash . the htc first , what many called ampldquothe facebook phone , amprdquo was a flop . the company also battled a gamut of publicity problems ranging from prism and rumors that teens were leaving the social network in droves to research that showed prolonged facebook use caused depression . facebook stock has since bounced back , but home was a flop , and the company amprsquos new news feed hasn amprsquot sent engagement rates soaring . meanwhile , photo sharing apps like snapchat and messaging apps like whatsapp have begun eating into facebook amprsquos dominance . the company finds itself in a tough position , betting its mobile chips on its mid acquisition of instagram and its life on finding ampldquothe next billion amprdquo users . facebook has grown large in every way . by trying to do too much , the company achieved too little . blackberry was a rough year for blackberry . the once reigning king of the smartphone world finally launched its much delayed next generation blackberry operating system , but it utterly failed to catch on with smartphone buyers , and blackberry fell into a tailspin of declining market share and even worse financial reports . blackberry also launched bbm for ios and android , but delays and a rocky start put it far behind market leaders such as whatsapp . eventually the company announced that it would exit the consumer market and focus on its enterprise business . shortly after a failed attempt to find someone to buy the company , blackberry ousted ceo thorsten heins and replaced him with outsider john chen , who promptly tried to ease worries that the company was going away . chen is now tasked with turning around a company that just reported it sells three times as many of its old , blackberry smartphones as it does of the new blackberry models . blackberry amprsquos turmoil this year highlight just how competitive the smartphone market is . it amprsquos dominated by two platforms , and while microsoft amprsquos deep pockets enable it to hang on to a small percentage of the market for third place , there amprsquos clearly no room for a successful fourth player . the tv industrydespite the great strides made in content , moving internet based television forward proved to be about as effective as dragging a sleeping cat . after months of rumors intel confirmed that it was working on an internet based television system that would provide live tv and on demand programming amphellip until it couldn amprsquot close licensing deals and had to scrap the whole initiative . microsoft touted the xbox one amprsquos ability to integrate live television as a glimpse into the future , but relying on an existing set top box and ir blaster is more clunky alliance than revolution . and , of course , another months passed without apple releasing a branded television of its own . the most remarkable innovation we saw come to market was from aereo , a company that relies on some careful legal language and a ton of tiny antennas to let users watch broadcast television streamed to them online . of course , the entrenched powers were none too happy , and aereo amprsquos found itself in a series of ever escalating copyright cases that appear headed to the supreme court . the desire for internet based tv is there . the technology for internet based tv is there . maybe will be the year the incumbents in the tv industry stop disrupting the disruptors . climate changeit amprsquos hardly a new phenomenon , but mark as the year that the impact of climate change gained serious momentum among scientists and governments alike . in september , a landmark un report put the crisis into stark perspective the reality of a warming planet is ampldquounequivocal , amprdquo the report stated , and human activities are nearly certainly at fault . that report was echoed by other high profile studies throughout the year a widely publicized nature paper found that unprecedented high temperatures will be commonplace by , while another concluded that upwards of . billion people could soon face water scarcity as a result of changing climatic conditions . and if the actions of international governments this year are any indication , the grim outlooks in those studies will become a reality . at fractious un climate talks in warsaw , poland , countries tussled over emissions goals and financial reparations before reaching disappointingly modest agreements on both . in the us , president obama made climate change one of his key stumping points ampmdash all while releasing a fatally flawed plan to combat the issue , and punting any decisions about the controversial keystone xl pipeline . biggest products of the yearbiggest products of the yearipad airthe ipad air doesn amprsquot have a great story ampmdash if anything , it amprsquos indicative of apple amprsquos dedication to evolving its products rather than compulsively rethinking them . but while it may not be the most interesting or surprising product to launch this year , there amprsquos no question it amprsquos one of the best . apple amprsquos larger tablet now comes with a desktop class processor , an incredibly high resolution screen , a pound body that amprsquos both immersive and portable , and apple amprsquos huge and growing app store . the ipad is one of the most popular gaming machines in the world , and it amprsquos as good a netflix machine as ever . but it amprsquos no accident that apple likes to show off the ipad air by demoing pages and imovie , or that it amprsquos made them all free to use ampmdash this tablet is built for creating , and it amprsquos coming after your computer . moto xmotorola was purchased by google in , but it wasn amprsquot until this year that the company released the moto x , a device that clearly bore the influence of its new overlords . the moto x defied the spec race by offering hardware that was just ampldquogood enough , amprdquo but when added together became greater than the sum of its parts . the company also demonstrated how minor , innovative additions to android offer a better experience than a complete revision of the platform , as many other manufacturers choose to do . other innovative features of the moto x include the moto maker service , which lets customers order a custom designed phone through motorola amprsquos website and have it shipped right to their door . finally , thanks to google amprsquos financial backing , motorola became the first company to sell a smartphone assembled in the us . motorola hasn amprsquot yet been able to attain the commercial sales success of its competitors with the moto x , but it has the deep pockets of google behind it to keep trying . pebble and wearableswearable technology has been on the fringe of the gadget world for years , but in , it jumped into the mainstream consciousness . kickstarter darling pebble finally launched its smartwatch , and although it is far from perfect , smartwatches have been a hot topic ever since . samsung released its ill received galaxy gear , which was considered far too big , expensive , and limited by many , while sony followed up with the smartwatch , its best effort in the category yet . smartwatches weren amprsquot the only wearables in the spotlight numerous fitness trackers from the likes of fitbit , nike , and others launched this year , some of which even tried to incorporate smartwatch like features , albeit without much success . we amprsquore still waiting for the long rumored wearable devices from apple and google to actually be a real thing , but showed that wearable technology is going to stay . chrome oseverybody likes cheap computers , but no one likes them when they amprsquore slow and underpowered . so google made chrome os , the web based operating system that doesn amprsquot need high end hardware or customized software to work well . after a few fits and starts , chrome os took off in ampmdash our work and lives are moving ever more into a web browser , and with native apps and offline support a web browser feels a lot less like a compromise on a chromebook . meanwhile , manufacturers began to buy in acer , samsung , hp , and others all made chromebooks that squeeze good performance and good battery life into small , inexpensive packages . chromebooks sit perpetually at the top of amazon amprsquos best seller lists ampmdash turns out people still love cheap computers . but in , cheap computers didn amprsquot have to be bad anymore . xbox one and ps for gamers , was a year of waiting . both sony s playstation and microsoft s xbox one were announced early on in the year , but it wasn t until november that we finally got our hands on the next generation game consoles . and the two devices took very different approaches . microsoft initially unveiled some ambitious features for its console only to scale them back when consumers balked at the idea of an always online console that couldn amprsquot play used games . it also continued its kinect push , while furthering the idea of an xbox as the center of your living room . sony , meanwhile , tried to label the ps as a return to the brand amprsquos early days , describing it as a device built for both gamers and game developers . it didn t have all of the features of the xbox and was priced at cheaper . once the two machines finally arrived , they turned out to be remarkably similar in at least one way they re both still works in progress . while we amprsquove rendered our early verdicts on the ps and xbox one , with a few software updates and a more robust lineup of games , these will be very different machines in a short period of time . a look aheada look aheadwill legalized marijuana change america ? america amprsquos war on drugs entered uncharted territory this year , after colorado and washington became the first states to decriminalize the recreational use of marijuana . legalization advocates touted the laws as a turning point for us drug policy , and raised hopes that other states may follow suit . still , major uncertainties loom on the horizon . authorities in both states spent much of crafting strict rules that amprsquoll govern how marijuana is distributed and regulated once it becomes legal , but many have raised doubts over their ability to both oversee the industry and guarantee public safety . casting a shadow over all of this is the fact that marijuana remains illegal under federal law , although colorado and washington will at least be able to see their experiments through . the justice department says it won amprsquot challenge the laws as long as strong regulations are in place , setting the stage for what amprsquos sure to be a fascinating . marijuana sales begin in colorado on january st , and in washington later this spring . will apple break into a new product category ? in , it was the imac . in , the ipod . brought the iphone , and the ipad came in . apple amprsquos remarkable year run has seen it both invent markets and utterly dominate them ampmdash and every few years , steve jobs would come on stage and announce apple amprsquos next target . amid deafening rumor and speculation in , however , apple stayed its course upgrade , not overhaul . the chorus will only grow louder in will apple finally release the tv set steve jobs famously said he amprsquod ampldquocracked ? amprdquo will it identify in the nascent smartwatch market the same thing it saw in mp players , solve problems in both design and software , and release the first truly mainstream wearable ? the iphone c introduced color to the otherwise mostly monochromatic world of apple hardware designs ampmdash will its other products follow suit ? maybe apple will stay the course again next year , updating macs , ipads , and iphones to an audience of upgraders . or maybe it amprsquoll swing for the fences again and find another industry in need of an overhaul . either way , everyone amprsquos watching . can oculus reinvent virtual reality ? in , virtual reality may finally have a chance to be more than a amplsquo s era pipe dream . oculus vr has now raised over million to commercialize its critically acclaimed virtual reality headset ampmdash the oculus rift ampmdash and attracted a raft of talent to ensure the device doesn amprsquot become just another failed pc peripheral . the firm now counts famed video game programmer john carmack as its chief technical officer , hard at work on an android version of the system , not to mention former ea partners and origin dealmaker david demartini , who will use some of the company amprsquos newfound cash to lure game developers to the platform . the company already has a new prototype headset that allegedly does away with motion sickness , but there are at least two major challenges ahead figuring out how to build compelling games for virtual reality , and finding a natural way to control those games with your hands . will a moonshot actually hit the moon ? tech people have always liked big promises , but in , they got bigger and more outlandish . the weirdest part is , we started to believe them . when amazon announced it would start replacing ups with autonomous miniature helicopters read that again , we doubted the regulation more than the technology . by that point , we amprsquod seen google promising immortality and inching closer to self driving cars , all while they used balloons to broadcast the internet over remote parts of the globe . and that amprsquos saying nothing of elon musk , mr . moonshot himself , who continued to develop his once outlandish electric car and spaceflight schemes , then dropped blueprints for a next generation maglev like it was an extra credit paper . it won amprsquot all happen , but a lot of it amprsquos happening already . haters fumed and bankers scratched their heads , but more than during any other year in memory , companies were willing to gamble on an interesting idea . the payoff , if it comes , will be when one of those moonshots actually makes it to the moon . can we actually reform our privacy laws ? despite early assertions from the white house , congress , and the intelligence community that the nsa amprsquos out of control programs were properly sanctioned by all three branches of government , the tide of public opinion may be turning against secret mass government surveillance . lawmakers , private technology companies , and advocacy groups have increased pressure in the months following snowden amprsquos initial leaks , calling for nsa reform . just this month the president amprsquos nsa review panel , widely expected by critics to produce few results , offered sweeping , unexpected recommendations to reform the nsa and end bulk collection of phone records . but even an end to nsa bulk surveillance won amprsquot resolve some of the most critical privacy issues facing americans . the electronic communications privacy act , a wildly out of date law , established that sensitive metadata isn amprsquot subject to fourth and fifth amendment protections . there is some hope , however , that the government s position on metadata protection may soon change in december , a federal judge ruled that the nsa amprsquos bulk collection of phone records is likely unconstitutional , noting that the government amprsquos spying programs are ampldquobased in large part on a year old supreme court precedent , the relevance of which has been eclipsed by technological advances and a cellphone centric lifestyle heretofore inconceivable . amprdquo detours detroit area firefighters battle a plague of burning buildings driving the tesla model s in the real worldtop shelf camp shelf finding paul miller inside the chaos and spectacle of the nfl on fox