 the history of android has always been about more . from its inception with the t mobile g in , google s mobile operating system has sought to compete by having more features , higher specs , and bigger devices than everyone else . improving relentlessly with each new release , android s rise has produced excellent new phones but also many disappointed users who were either left on an old version of the software or bought a device that was never good enough in the first place . late last year , google sought to correct that by putting the brakes on and introducing android . kitkat , an os update that was about less . the leaner kitkat opened the door to much nicer cheap android phoneskitkat simplified the interface , reduced the minimum specs for a good user experience , and made it easier for google s partners to update their devices more rapidly . as a result , android is now more inclusive and consistent than it s ever been . but to rectify the fragmenting effects of android s constant evolution , google had to pause that essential process . what happens when the l successor to kitkat debuts , most likely at google i o later this month ? the motivation behind kitkat was as ambitious as any goal the mountain view company had previously set for itself . having just recorded its billionth android device activation , google was eager to reach the next billion smartphone users . the company was already in charge of the globe s most popular mobile platform , but obsolete versions of android were cannibalizing the most price sensitive markets in developing countries with dirt cheap devices that didn t include access to the google play store . that created a dual problem for google complete android neophytes were getting a bad first experience of the os , and even those who liked it weren t spending their time and money inside google s service ecosystem . the trouble was that good android and cheap android were two different things . kitkat was the solution . motorola s software vp steve horowitz credits kitkat s lower spec demands for making the extraordinarily affordable moto e possible . the e is the first of what should be a cavalcade of new android phones that finally combine smooth user responsiveness with rock bottom pricing . yes , motorola was already on this track with the excellent moto g , but the moto e addresses a far wider market . the g was cheap by european and american standards , whereas the e is cheap globally . the moto e is the purest embodiment of the kitkat philosophythe moto e is one of the missionaries spreading the google kitkat gospel to the world . it proves that android s best and latest really is versatile enough to be used on every device , no matter the size or price . in india , one of the fastest growing smartphone markets , demand for the moto e has been high enough to twice take down the distributor s website and the handset is currently out of stock . even with the lingering high reputations of nokia and blackberry in the country , the new google phone is attracting buyers with a superior user experience and broader ecosystem . whereas previously the manifestation of android in developing markets might have been some gingerbread monstrosity defaulting to baidu as its main search engine , google can now offer its finest software across the widest price range ever . uniting all the phone making houses under the powered by android bannerat the other end of the scale , even vertu is now selling phones with the latest version of android on board , proudly offering the ruby infused signature touch with . as the default os . all the big android device makers have also finally gotten their ducks in a row and have this year shipped their devices with kitkat preloaded instead of as a promise for the near future . google s kitkat has been surprisingly successful at reducing the amount of fragmentation in the android ecosystem . it s still far from the unity of ios , but it s much better than it used to be . now , google is preparing to unveil its next big wave of android updates . recent reports have suggested the introduction of a new android silver initiative that would bring in a tier of certified premium devices with a high minimum standard of quality and consistency . it would formalize google s demand for limited customization of the user experience and ensure that more software updates are delivered more rapidly . as such , it portends a return to the familiar strategy of focusing on high end devices first . whatever google chooses to do with android s future development , there are signs to suggest that kitkat s democratizing legacy will endure even beyond the next big feature update . kitkat , as embodied by the exemplary moto e , crosses a threshold of usability that android hasn t previously been able to offer at the lowest end of the market . even if google widens its nexus program of paragon handsets into the proposed android silver group , the achievement of a usable entry level android smartphone may not be lost . there s reason to believe kitkat s democratizing legacy will endureadditionally , this year s android phones are consistent from a hardware perspective as well as in their software . qualcomm s latest chips are dominating every segment of the market and their efficient performance is part of what s made android viable on so many more devices . that won t change no matter what happens at google i o . it may be damning with faint praise , but android s never felt as cohesive and consistent as it does today . whether you buy a vertu , a moto , or a sony phone , the basic user experience , performance , and features are similar enough to make them all feel like part of the same software family . now google s about to resume its old habit of additive innovation and , if that innovation s any good , disruption to the status quo should be expected . current phones won t slow down and functionality won t be reduced , but the perception of a fragmented android landscape could arise again . the tricky task for google is to figure out how to keep moving forward without leaving anyone behind . 