 for those too young to remember , the great subway map war of pitted two schools of new york mapmaking nerds against each other in a heated debate in the great hall of manhattan s cooper union . in one corner were supporters of italian graphic designer massimo vignelli s modernist , diagrammatic map of new york city s transit system . in the other , those who preferred john tauranac and his subway map committee s more geographic version . insults were traded . colors were debated . was central park green enough ? was the east river blue enough ? since when was the east river blue ? massimo , whose map thrilled design enthusiasts but mostly confused the public , said tauranac s map made him want to puke , and later thanked the moderator for helping him suppress homicidal urges toward his cartographical foes . last night , some of those same participants their hair a little grayer , their backs slightly more bent gathered in the college s great hall again , but for a different kind of debate . rather than brood over color coding , station dots , or intertwining routes versus parallel lines , the question was now whether physical transit maps even mattered anymore . in an age of google and gps , when smartphone ownership conveys the power to distill the most complex directions into a simple list of step by step instructions , the concept of the paper subway map never seemed more quaint . chaos on the subway platform when the new color coded map and nomenclature came into use on monday , november th , . courtesy of cooper union none of the participants in last night s discussion including tauranac , whose highly readable , geographic map prevailed over massimo s cooler , aesthetic version to become the basis of the map still in use today raleigh d adamo , whose map was the first to color code the subway routes and eddie jabbour , a designer who helped create the popular kickmap app were ready to declare print maps dead . but they all agreed that with the advent of smartphones and the willingness of transit agencies to release more data to app developers , the future was clearly in the hands of the engineers rather than the cartographers . without us , the map is nothing . we re no longer just map readers , we re no longer just map users or designers or creators . we re actually blue dots , said sarah kaufman , assistant director for technology programming at the nyu rudin center for transportation , referring to the symbol showing your gps location on a google map . without us , the map is nothing . it means that we give the map context and purpose . much still depends on slothlike organizations like the mta to make their data available to the people who can turn it into cool products , she said . thankfully , transit agencies around the world are now doing this , which will make it easier to navigate public transit systems in the future especially ones that are coming apart at the seams like new york s . similar to the first debate in , two schools of thought emerged during the discussion those who saw the current subway map as flawed , needing improvement , but ultimately necessary and those who think its relevancy was on the decline . jabbour , whose ampnbspkickmap was considered and rejected by the metropolitan transportation authority in , advocated for a universal map with a consistent user interface that can be used in any city but still retain the unique features of each transit system . it doesn t mean that the cities are the same or that it s a homogenous experience , he said . we re a big fan of cities . it s more than just a diagram . it s more than just getting from point a to point b . eddie jabbour s kickmap has been described as a hybrid of vignelli and tauranac . kickmap the veteran subway mapmakers on the panel , d adamo and tauranac , were understandably skeptical about the death of their craft , especially as maps become more interactive and alive . i frankly hate little maps on the iphone , tauranac grumbled . the big picture is critical . d adamo , whose homespun tale of winning the contest to design a better subway map was the evening s highlight , said he was optimistic about the future . he said he envisioned real time updates about service changes , route activity , and station conditions being made available to subway riders . but also i would go one step further , and think there would be a passenger input button , he said , where the passenger can either on his iphone or on the kiosk input a date and time in the future , and the map will then react with what the system will be like when the person wants to travel . he admitted he wasn t sure whether such innovation was available yet or not . indeed , many map applications allow users to specify date and time of travel to account for service changes . the paper map never seemed more quaintjabbour , whose kickmap has been described as a modern hybrid of vignelli s sleek design with tauranac s devotion to geography , seemed determined to inject the event with some feistiness in the absence of vignelli , who died in . he dismissed google maps as a terrible transit map , and lobbed insults at the ampnbspmta s new touchscreen subway map kiosks that were rolled out last year , criticizing them for serving as a vehicle to inundate straphangers with animated advertisements rather than useful transit information . they re kind of like dinosaurs , he said . what are we doing with things that are bolted to the floor and are huge , when you have your iphone in your hand ? raleigh d adamo with a photograph of his map . reka komoli the kiosks , which are now found in stations , provide real time train information , as well as service disruptions , which are frequent on the notorious lexington avenue line a line so busy that it alone sees more passengers per day than the entire washington , dc metro . neysa pranger , director of strategy consulting at intersection , the company that created the wayfinding kiosks , defended them for helping improve the flow of communication between the mta and riders , but one that has yet to still reach its full potential . she also hinted at a future where riders are more comfortable sharing their location and other personal data to make getting from one place to another using multiple modes of transportation as seamless as possible . we are just trying to get around , pranger said . we are using the subway , we re using ferries , we re using citi bike , we re using uber . as soon as there is location information across systems , then this concept of mobility as a service which is a single point of routing , planning , and paying for your ride can start to come online . 