 before it even launched in early , more than million people signed up to try mailbox . a month later , at the height of the app s popularity , dropbox bought it for a reported million . at the time , dropbox ceo drew houston said it would help the company s then nascent efforts around collaboration . many have promised to help us with our overflowing inboxes , but the mailbox team actually delivered , he said . whether it s your dropbox or your mailbox , we want to find ways to simplify your life . on monday , dropbox simplified its own life by ending mailbox s . carousel , dropbox s aimless photo storage solution , also got the axe . the moves were a long time coming . despite houston s public pronouncements to the contrary , the apps were clearly abandoned earlier this year . it s easy to criticize dropbox for its stewardship of mailbox its pace of development slowed to a crawl soon after the acquisition , a mac desktop app never made it out of beta , and by this spring it was virtually abandonware . the market for productivity apps has proven to be a miragebut mailbox s steady decline reflects a larger , less comfortable truth about app development in . the market for consumer productivity apps , which spurred companies like dropbox and evernote to multi billion dollar valuations , has proven to be mostly a mirage . businesses are increasingly happy to buy software for their employees people are often loath to buy software for themselves . and for all it did right , mailbox never became anything more than an alternate user interface for other companies email servers . there was a lot of intelligence in it , but no money . the mailbox team can t say it wasn t warned . back when co founder gentry underwood was raising money to build the app that would become mailbox , investors tried to urge him away . this path , they told him , is paved with corpses . ask ampnbspsparrow , or molto , or boxer . everyone uses email , but most are content to stick with the default mail app on their phones . at worst , you re dead within months . at best , you re acquired , and then killed off a few years later . to make a real dent , any new email client would have to be much , much better . and mailbox was ! an app is lucky if it introduces one true innovation to the market mailbox brought at least three . there was the novel use of swipes to move messages around . there was the introduction of timed snoozes for your messages , so they would pop back up when you were prepared to address them . and there was the unique way it launched making you sign up for a waiting list to start using the app that , whether or not it was necessary from a technical perspective , proved invaluable for public relations purposes . mailbox s three big innovationsover the next two years , swiping to archive or delete messages became an email app standard . you can find it in yahoo mail , google s inbox , and microsoft outlook . a swipe to archive gesture showed up in other places , too pocket , the save for later app , was one todoist , a task management app , was another . snoozing comes standard now , too outlook , inbox . and the waiting list ? that was widely copied as well . for me , the genius of mailbox was twofold . first , using it simply felt faster than any email app i ever used . it pre fetched messages in the background whenever you opened it you could start dealing with the daily horror of your inbox right away . second , using it was satisfying in a way no other email client was every time i swiped my fat thumb on a message , banishing it to the archive , the email turned a lustrous green . mailbox was good for dashing off quick replies , but it was best in class for cleaning house . every time i found myself standing in a line , i d open up mailbox and positively murder my inbox . mailbox turned you into an email assassin . so why didn t mailbox thrive after its acquisition ? it soon fell out of the ios app store charts , and on android topped out around million downloads . underwood was promoted to head of product at dropbox , where he was soon put to work on other products , including the hapless carousel . by june of this year , he had stepped down from that role he has since left the company for good . co founder scott cannon remains at dropbox , where among other things he s managing mailbox s shutdown . underwood declined to comment for this article . dropbox s ampnbspown message to users was cryptic . as we ve increased our focus on collaboration , it wrote , we realized there s only so much an email app can do to fundamentally improve email . who the hell s job is it to fundamentally improve email ? dropbox s increased focus on collaboration has taken the form of paper , its multiplayer document editor . email requires collaboration around communication , a dropbox weakness documents require collaboration around content , a dropbox strength . mailbox had multiple causes of death . most people don t download email apps those who do don t want to pay for them . the only path forward for an email app is acquisition , and the fate of most acquired apps is death . other email apps copied mailbox s best features aside from a somewhat dubious automatic archiving feature , mailbox stopped building new ones . email doesn t fit into dropbox s strategyfor a time , dropbox believed email could be part of its suite of personal productivity apps . but the company belatedly realized that the only way it could live up to its billion valuation was to begin steering toward the enterprise . and if there was a way to fit an email client into that strategy , dropbox couldn t find it . there s a world in which dropbox accepted slower growth and a lower valuation and maintained its original focus on personal productivity . it s a world in which the company s suite of products would likely include messaging and creation tools and powerful ways to organize your music , photos , and documents . it s a world that feels much more interesting to me as a user of the company s products . and yet it s hard for me to argue that in this world dropbox would make more money than it s making today . for a moment , though , that world was coming into focus . on twitter , people spoke of the coming dropbox os a mythical suite of products , led by some of the world s best designers and engineers , coming to rescue us from the dull gray google and microsoft status quo . mailbox was the acquisition that made it all seem possible . it was nice while it lasted . 