 many former trackingpoint employees say you can spell death with three letters brs . trackingpoint had a stunning product . launched in , the startup was a gun manufacturer building rifles designed to nail targets at extreme distances , even when it was an amateur staring down the scope . in an industry dominated by american companies nearly as old as the country itself , trackingpoint seemed poised to be the one to change the game . the firearms brought the company media notoriety good and bad but some people at the gun maker wanted more . that desire manifested as the brs , or barrel reference system , a laser guided attachment built to ensure guns met lifetime zero , never straying from flawless , factory set aim . according to former employees , the system was a mess . the device could cause more trouble than it was worth , and engineers were spending as much time putting together the brs as all the other parts of a rifle combined . worse , if the brs wasn t working , you couldn t fire the gun at all . something spectacular would ve had to have happened for us to survive that . but john mchale , the mercurial entrepreneur behind trackingpoint , had already made his bet on the brs . after the company s ceo ditched the system , according to a former engineer , mchale replaced him with someone else , despite the fact he was widely admired by employees . something spectacular would ve had to have happened for us to survive that , the former employee says . employees say they dealt with long hours and hostile work conditions in public , trackingpoint always put a smiling face on its prospects , while internally , the company s situation looked increasingly dire . as the company made stratospheric predictions about its future , forecasting growth and earning fame with media tours and demos , former employees say they dealt with long hours , hostile work conditions , and broken promises , often before losing their jobs entirely . with virtually every employee gone , trackingpoint is now nearly finished , but for a moment , it looked , to anyone watching , like the company was devising a plan for a brave new world from a texas office . trackingpoint s origin story is nearly unverifiable , a disruption tale bordering on the mystical , but according to company lore , it goes something like this mchale was hunting gazelle when he missed a yard shot , an event that jolted him with an epiphany . he would create a new gun , put fighter jet technology in a firearm , and change the industry . already wealthy from early bets on the telecom and internet industries , mchale certainly had the means to fund a new venture . he assembled experts from across disciplines to create his new machine , and began developing the precision guided firearm the gun that couldn t miss . mchale , according to former employees , wanted to bring the first weapon to market as quickly as possible . to ensure that happened , he made a deal with trackingpoint staff in the summer of . the terms of the agreement were simple . if employees could produce rifle scopes in weeks , they d earn a , bonus . jason schauble trackingpoint the goal was ambitious , to put it lightly . engineers on the team scrambled to make the deadline , as some worked or hours a day , seven days a week . at one point we did a hour straight shift , and that wasn t entirely uncommon , a former employee says . but they still fell short of the goal and missed the bonus windfall . the mood in the office was so bitter . well intentioned or not , after the team missed the deadline , executives at the company put together a transportable summer vacation floaties and palm tree decorations in the office . some at the company felt that was tone deaf , as if management was saying , according to the employee , but look at all this fun stuff we did for you ! look how fun the conference room looks ! employees say they often weren t compensated for working extra hours . at one point we did a hour straight shift , and that wasn t entirely uncommon . still , by early , trackingpoint was a hit , at least in the media . the company s first gun was certainly quite a sight a coal black , wi fi enabled , video streaming , severely precise rifle . you simply tagged a target from wherever you were , and the gun would deliver the target a bullet from about , yards away , even if it was on the move . reports straddled the line between awestruck and abjectly terrified . an impressive technical feat , sure , but what would happen when the rifle got into the wrong hands ? was selling a gun like this to the public a wise move ? mchale would brush off the ethical implications , saying the price thousands of dollars would be a barrier to entry . by may , the company was shipping out its first precision guided firearms , with no less an attendee than texas governor rick perry present for the launch event . and at his mason , texas ranch , according to sources present , mchale announced that he would be stepping down as ceo to become chairman of the company , passing the executive torch to an ex marine at trackingpoint named jason schauble . ceo jason schauble was literally a war heroschauble was literally a war hero , awarded medals for , among other acts , suffering major wounds in fallujah while trying to save a comrade . he presided over the company as it garnered more media attention and expanded production of its weapons , launching a plan for a super gun that could hit a target from , yards away , a goal that would eventually be scaled back . plus , schauble had come from remington , which meant he had valuable connections to a major player in the firearms industry that might acquire the smaller trackingpoint . everybody liked him , one former employee says . there was one other good reason to like him schauble was the one guy who could tell mchale no to an extent , another employee says . that could lead to tension between the two personalities . more than a moneyed financier , mchale had run tech companies before , and seemed intent on working directly on the guns . he would make changes , often disrupting production , according to former employees . when he was displeased , the trackingpoint team knew it . the guy would kick a hole in the wall , one former employee says . when someone said they could fix it , mchale stopped them that ll remind people not to piss me off . eventually , a former employee says , schauble was caught in a yelling match with mchale over the brs , and in november of , he was fired . that month , despite millions from outside funding and mchale s deep pockets , trackingpoint laid off more employees . a company spokesperson gave a statement about schauble the trackingpoint board felt there needed to be a change in direction . basically , one former employee says , because he told john mchale the truth . the news wasn t all bad . employees were getting stock and were still looking forward to the day they could cash out . an acquisition by a larger company would be nice , but firing schauble may have put any deal with remington , which some presumed to be the candidate , in jeopardy . employees were looking forward to cashing outmeanwhile , another old hand at trackingpoint , john lupher , replaced schauble , and the company still seemed solid . lupher wasn t a bad guy , employees say , although he was more of a yes man than schauble . he declined to comment for this story . one amazing thing about the company is that it collected the best talent in the industry of any industry , according to one employee . another called the team bleeding edge intelligent . moreover , the company was producing options for customers . at the consumer electronics show , the company unveiled a new line of rifles , starting at , . we expect not only strong demand for the series ar products , but also a growing demand for our technology across the industry , lupher said in ampnbspa company press release . in january of , the military reportedly bought six rifles for testing . that year , the company , which now had both a retired admiral from the us special operations command and a retired us marine corps colonel on its board , announced that it received more than million in funding . total outside funding , according to the company , was million . mchale labs , which a source says is mchale s funding arm , was reportedly one of the leading investors . lupher ampnbsptold the wall street journal in june that the company was worth more than million . but some were concerned about trackingpoint s business plan . if hunting was a sport , surely precision guidance was cheating , akin to taking cues from computer chess and calling yourself a grandmaster . real hunters guys that love hunting and spend their time hunting they hated trackingpoint , a former employee says . they could sell to the military an option that might present less ethical baggage but would they bite ? the company did score a deal with remington , which was looking to partner with trackingpoint on a project called remington . trackingpoint produced the scopes for a new series of precision guided rifles , but according to sources close to the project , it turned into a fiasco . the scopes shipped while still plagued by problems . they were basically tagging a very high percentage of these things as having manufacturing defects , and a vice president said , ship it anyway , a source says , estimating that out of every scopes shipped , about were flagged by remington as problematic . the scopes , ampnbspit was rumored , did not connect with customers , either . and the hammer kept falling . lupher was fired in december , apparently following a row over the direction of the business . another ceo , frank bruno , soon took over . we were promised more communication , but it went dead silent for five more weeks , a source there at the time says . we were promised more communication , but it went dead silent for five more weeks . there are two stories about what happened next the public and the private . on february th , , the company ampnbspput out a press release trumpeting exponential growth for . trackingpoint , according to the release , was soaring . year on year unit growth was percent and year on year bookings dollars grew percent , the release said . the company made the astonishing claim that not only was the company growing , but that it was perhaps the fastest growing gun company in the world . the company said the department of defense was also interested in buying its weapons . a restructuring meant major layoffs at the company it was only buried in the release that the company announced an internal restructuring to ensure and accelerate future growth . bruno is quoted in the release with new markets opening up and growing interest in our products , our company needs to focus on operational excellence . on the inside , that restructuring meant major layoffs at the company . far from feeling like a streamlining move , it seemed to employees like trackingpoint was suddenly in disarray . the research and development team was slashed . that was a massive one , a former employee says . the staff up to a maybe a hundred or so at the company s peak had been winnowed down to less than . with trackingpoint s employees still shaken by layoffs , the company cut most of its remaining staff last month , down to a tiny crew . the company posted a note ampnbspon its website due to financial difficulty trackingpoint will no longer be accepting orders . thank you to our customers and loyal followers for sharing in our vision . what are the company s plans ? it s unclear . mchale , in a brief phone interview last week , said there were still employees at trackingpoint , but would not say how many or whether the company was broke . but trackingpoint , according to former employees , is essentially dead , operating with a skeleton crew , there to document the company s intellectual property before a sale . where that valuable and potentially dangerous information will go is also unclear . employees the verge spoke with were angered over the stock they were given . many took options , hoping it would pay off eventually , but the stock was restricted . as it became clear the company wouldn t be finding a buyer , and as the layoffs came , it dawned on many that the stock would never have any value . employees the verge spoke with were angered over the stock they were givenbut despite trackingpoint s failure , the allure of a perfect gun might be too powerful an idea for someone mchale , the military , or otherwise to shy away from . darpa , for example , has been developing self guiding bullets . and even as trackingpoint has sunk , it may not have left the earth without some kind of legacy . a talk scheduled for ampnbspthe black hat hacking conference in august will be about trackingpoint . it s called , when iot attacks hacking a linux powered rifle . 