 aza raskin can t remember the name of one of the artists he wanted to talk about , so he s scrolling through his twitter feed to find the name . i definitely tweeted about it , he says . he s been in the windowless conference room tucked in the back of the verge office for , at that point , about eight hours . the long table where raskin , a young and industrious interface designer , and kari altmann , a self described cloud based artist , have been working all day is dotted with coffee mugs and a few stray bunched up wires . both are locked up here in the office because they ve been invited to participate in the rhizome seven on seven conference , an event part hackathon , part ambassadorship . the project has a simple enough premise pair seven artists and seven technologists into teams of two , give them a space in new york the verge teamed up with rhizome to host raskin and altmann , and let them present whatever they come up with . it s an event well known in circles that track experimental work at the intersection of art and technology , and even if the conference itself doesn t reach a mass audience , many of its participants are celebrities in their fields this year they include the journalist nick bilton , blogger anil dash , and electronic musician holly herndon . raskin wants to be the person to make swearing at your laptop obsoleteif the conference strives to attract a line up of the young , the accomplished , and the early adopting , raskin fits right it the son of early apple engineer jef raskin , aza dropped out of middle school to work with his father and reportedly gave his first talk on interface design at the tender age of . raskin works to make technology feel more like an extension of the human brain as he s been telling interviewers for years , he wants to be the person who makes swearing at your laptop obsolete . by now he s been making computer interfaces more intuitive for almost two decades at places like mozilla labs and with his own music streaming site , songza . another of his companies , massive health , which aimed to make people healthier by collecting and presenting data about their physical habits , was acquired in by jawbone , where he is now head of innovation . today , though , he s been chewing through something a bit outside of his comfort zone . he s been assigned to complete rhizome s hour project with altmann , an artist who s interested in extracting a different kind of meaning from our data saturated world . altmann makes all kinds of things sculptures , videos , performances but much of her practice takes place not in a gallery but online , where she manages image blogs arranged around abstract themes . in hosting and refining these image exchanges , she hopes to glean insight into how such networks affect the internet s emergent language , particularly as it relates to memes , brands , and viral culture . for example , her project , soft brand abstracts , studied and created images of highly rebloggable information porn shiny , glossy , wet looking renderings that , she says , aim to look as enticing as possible . basically the ultimate fetish objects for the digital age . but , as raskin noted repeatedly during the conference , he s just not really into that kind of art . he hates conceptual art , altmann told me . and i hate generative art . we each think the other s is too easy . or , as raskin will put it later the next day for an audience at the new museum , i don t dislike it , it s just . . . like candy . he hates conceptual art . . . and i hate generative art . conference organizers insist they don t see an artist technologist binary , but it s hard to make the case such a split doesn t exist . as atlmann says , the divide between she and her partner is primarily an industry divide . art and tech are , as genres go , fairly insular ones silicon valley has come under increased scrutiny in the last year for being insular and an echo chamber , while the art world is regularly criticized for generating value within a small community of elite curators , collectors , and dealers . despite their different perspectives , there were two things altmann and raskin could agree on . one was a distain for autocomplete , and the other was the band beach house . in fact , until relatively late in the day , the duo s project had been based on an experimental way to visualize a stripped down version of one of the band s songs . but they rapidly changed course at pm , around the time , according to raskin , that they started climbing up that long worry wall . at pm , they had enough of a concept to explain , if not to demo completely bug free . a screenshot of raskin and almann s conceptual image search tool . they call it , alternately , soft search , expanded image search , and bootleg image search . it s a conceptual image search tool . to use it , you pick a couple of images for example , miley cyrus , the apple logo , and a nike swoosh , though any image file will do . once you upload the images into the program , a machine learning program will begin to morph each image , changing each picture a little bit according to the characteristics of the others in the set . after the program runs over each image for frames , it inputs the results into google s similar image search , generating another set of pictures for the machine brain to run over another times . the resulting grid of images updates in real time , growing more abstract and increasingly spooky before jumping away on another visual tangent , crawling the internet for similar material . the artists say over time the program would learn your taste based on previously uploaded images . as raskin would later note , you re basically teaching this tiny ai , this little kid brain , with a set of visual metaphors . but now , at pm , he s leaving the verge office and the project is far from done . they would be up until am , running through the program and testing it for any bugs , tweaking slides for their presentation . the next day , raskin and altmann , along with the other six teams , presented their creations at the new museum . the small theater was fully sold out , most seats occupied by smartly dressed startup kids from manhattan s optimistically named silicon alley and young art wonks , one of whom wore a white d printed helmet made of stitched together renders of her own face . we think google reflecting your habits back to you is actually google changing your habits . when the duo took the stage , they posited that the tool could be used in a number of scenarios altmann says she could see it being used by teams of designers in creative agencies or in research and development labs to shake up the creative process . the reason we came to the project , she says , is that we re both interested in the idea of similar content . . . we have different ideas about it , but we think google reflecting your habits back to you is actually google changing your habits . raskin explained that in many instances part of his job as a ui designer has been to predict user behavior , but that he has grown uncomfortable with some aspects of that role . he uses the example of the predictive browser if , at pm most afternoons you visit facebook , should a browser suggest facebook to you every afternoon around that time ? he s not so sure . we shouldn t inject anything into our train of thought , he said onstage . that s something that s uniquely ours . . . so the tragedy of autocomplete is that even if it gets you to a place faster , it s also making you think more predictably , and basically about what somebody else wants . once or twice , the conference s organizers pointed to the s era los angeles based art and technology lab , a program that similarly aimed to bring the two disciplines together . but years ago , merging art and tech was a different sort of practice , often a way to augment existing art forms using new tools . but this isn t john cage using a more interesting kind of sound transmission . seven on seven may be an art jam , but it s also bringing together influential people from some of the most powerful industries in the world employees of jawbone , wordpress , and snapchat , the latter of which just last week released an update so exciting students hid under their desks to download it . as raskin noted during the presentation , he sometimes feels as though the best minds of our generation , through no fault of their own , are working on things that steal our attention . after hours in a room , focusing intently on a single serving collaboration with an artist he d never met , it wasn t exactly like much of that changed . but for two industries often chained to the demands of a narrow world , seven on seven did provide some room to stretch out . 