 last week , inside a federal courthouse in pasadena , california , google tried to stop a ruling that could upend the entertainment industry . the case of garcia v . google inc . was considered in an appeals court , in front of a panel of judges . at issue innocence of muslims , the controversial video uploaded to youtube in . the plaintiff , an actress in the film , argues that she holds a copyright to her performance , and has demanded that google take the movie down . but google says that if her lawsuit is taken seriously , then frivolous copyright claims will be used to constrain free speech and debilitate the internet companies that host it . with the court s decision expected some time next year , both sides are girding for a ruling that could have significant consequences . cindy lee garcia s role in the film desert warrior was supposed to be minor . after answering a casting call the previous summer , garcia was paid for what turned out to be five seconds of screen time . but it was hardly a bargain she was cast for a movie that never materialized . a video that spurred violent protests in almost countriesinstead of acting in a historical arabian desert adventure film , as she had been promised , garcia and the desert warrior cast had their dialogue redubbed by a producer . the result was a minute , islamophobic film trailer that came to be known as innocence of muslims , which portrayed the prophet muhammad as a belligerent , pedophilic dupe . garcia was originally cast to play a role as a mother in the finished film , however , she appears to insinuate that prophet muhammad is a child molester . in september , the video was translated into arabic and shared on youtube . the clip s antagonistic message spurred violent protests in almost countries , including egypt , libya , and tunisia . the uproar over innocence of muslims was even initially linked to the killing of us ambassador j . christopher stevens , and has served as a crucial talking point for the republican party s irrational fixation on an obama led benghazi conspiracy . an egyptian cleric issued a fatwa against every person involved with the film . fearing for her life , garcia sought protection in , of all things , copyright law . garcia sued the film s producer , nakoula basseley nakoula , as well as youtube and its parent company , google , in an attempt to have innocence of muslims taken down . while service providers like youtube aren t held responsible for the kind of deception that nakoula engaged in , they are on the hook for misappropriating intellectual property . this helps explain garcia s curious legal strategy . a novel interpretation of copyright lawto compel youtube to get rid of the video , and to protect her from the death threats , garcia had to fashion her possible allegations of libel and fraud into a copyright claim . she argued that her performance amounted to an independent work of authorship , a copyright upon which google was infringing . the court denied her request . but the ninth circuit court of appeals sided with garcia , in a decision , and ordered google to take the video down . concerned with the court s interpretation of copyright law and the demands it might impose on internet companies , google asked the ninth circuit whose jurisdiction includes both hollywood and silicon valley to rehear the case with a full panel of judges . in oral arguments on monday , google s counsel stressed the ramifications of upholding this expansive understanding of copyright . under the dmca , copyright holders can urge internet companies to remove illegal content by submitting takedown requests . if , as garcia argues , one s performance merits its own copyright claim , a slew of newly legitimate takedown requests might inundate the web s media platforms . not only would this jeopardize the viability of smaller film studios and content hosts , it would also restrict free speech . it could invite other claims of copyright that exist solely to suppress information , rather than to protect creative work . several judges seemed skeptical of garcia s copyright claim . take the battle scenes , for example , in the lord of the rings . in your view does every single person who made a cameo in the battle scenes have a copyright interest in their performance as fixed in the film ? judge m . margaret mckeown asked the plaintiff . on the other side , google s lawyer was needled incessantly by judge alex kozinski , who ruled against google in the previous appeal . kozinski challenged google to show why actors like garcia shouldn t hold a copyright in their performances . i spoke to corynne mcsherry , intellectual property director at the electronic frontier foundation , who filed a brief joined by the aclu and others in support of google . mcsherry told me that garcia s copyright claim is ultimately unpersuasive . a five second performance responding to the direction of somebody else in a much larger video does not give you a copyright interest in that work , mcsherry explained . copyright law is vague enough , but not that vague . copy right law is vague , but not that vague . mcsherry said this issue goes back to the constitution , which grants congress power to secure exclusive rights to artists and inventors . copyright claims have always involved someone doing something creative tied to a tangible work , rather than a minor recital of a line , or something more inchoate . there can be circumstances where an actor might exercise sufficient creative control and that person might have a copyright interest , mcsherry said . so it s not to say that an actor can never have a copyright interest in the work , but this isn t one of them . michael page , a partner at the law firm durie tangri and counsel for netflix , told me that even if garcia did enough creative work to be considered a joint author , she would still share authorship with nakoula , who would be free to post her performance on youtube . using garcia s theory , page said , any actor , no matter the insignificance of their role , might be granted unprecedented power over producers , studios , and distributors in a way we d consider unfair . you have a heckler s veto from anybody in the world who can basically censor the internet by sending a dmca notice , page said . garcia might have had an easier way to get the video taken down public citizen filed a brief arguing that she could have sued the producer in state court , arguing fraud and unfair businesses practices . with a court order against nakoula , she d be able to petition google to honor the removal of the wrongful content . public citizen believes google would have complied . google temporarily blocked the video in egypt and libya out of concerns for violence , and restricted access in other countries including india and indonesia , where the video violated local laws . where garcia s opponents see censorship and a tedious meddling with their business model , her allies see a recognition of their work and worth . each actor adds something new to the character she performs the actor imbues the character with originality , the screen actors guild and other entertainment groups argued in a brief . and in this originality , however small , lies a copyright claim . the brief goes on to describe the different actorly interpretations of batman how christian bale s bruce wayne was different from george clooney s . the brief did not mention the nipples on the batsuit . is five seconds on screen enough to deserve a copyright ? while garcia appears only momentarily in innocence of muslims , the entertainment groups point out that her script was over five pages . by industry standards , this amounts to about five minutes of screen time , had her full performance been used . garcia worked for three and a half days , according to court documents . sag and others contend that the five seconds of screen time is enough to merit a copyright . some of the most memorable film performances are ones that were exceptionally short , states the brief . the legal document invites us to consider clint eastwood s dirty harry line so you gotta ask yourself this question do i feel lucky ? well , do ya , punk ? it asserts that while this scene was part of eastwood s larger performance , this particular line was made memorable by the actor . thus , even fleeting performances such as garcia s could be separately copyrightable . i would like to see a short performance where a lawyer from sag restates this analogy with a straight face . google s opponents believe the company could easily sort through any increase in copyright notices using its sophisticated , automated systems . but it s not clear that other video hosting platforms have the same capabilities , or whether independent filmmakers will be able to comply with the new rules . it s hard to imagine the dread that emerges from a flurry of death threats . or the anxiety of seeing your own image , clumsily edited , mouthing out words you have never spoken . but garcia wants to use the ownership rights of her performance as a shield . she wishes to harness the power granted to authors as a workaround to coerce google , to alter a record of history she disputes . the ninth circuit shouldn t use the unfortunate facts of her situation to create a new kind of intellectual property , where extras and bit parts carry the creative status of author . the court may soon cite a dubious copyright to silence protected speech . we should hope they don t . 