 in october , massachusetts institute of technology graduate students sydney do and andrew owens released an independent research report on mars one a not for profit organization that wants to create a long lasting human colony on mars . the findings were bleak , casting into doubt the credibility of the project . initially do and owens were dismissed by the organization as undergraduates . but mars one continued to be buffeted by criticism the group belatedly scheduled a debate with do and owens on august th at the catholic university of america in washington , dc . it has been nearly a year since do and owens released their report , and it was the first time mars one ceo bas lansdorp has responded to them directly . for space enthusiasts , the showdown promised to be as epic as ripley battling the queen xenomorph . mars one captured space geeks attention by promising to send them to mars in the mid s . the organization s stated goals are to send a lander with communications capabilities to mars in as a demonstration mission . then , in , to send an intelligent rover to the planet , which will drive around the martian surface to find the best location for the mars one settlement . a cargo mission will launch in , carrying a second rover and the bulk of the supplies needed for the habitat the rovers will then assemble the outpost before the first humans land in . that first settlement mission will be followed by additional crews of four landing every two years . it was the first time mars one ceo bas lansdorp has responded to them directlydo and owens used the mars one plans at least , the ones they could find to run feasibility tests on the mission . they presented their results last year at the th international astronautical congress in toronto , canada . the mit researchers analyzed the living conditions on mars , including food production , cabin pressure , and habitat construction . mars one s current plans would probably kill its astronauts within the first few months of the mission , they concluded . in response , mars one attacked the mit team s credibility . it s not an mit report , it s a report by a couple of mit students bachelor students who don t have their phd degree yet , lansdorp said in february during a radio interview . mars one spokesperson suzanne flinkenfl gel employed the same tactic during an interview with technewsworld in late march . the study was written by a couple of undergraduate students , she said . and the organization s chief medical officer , norbert kraft , repeated the same message to a verge reporter in early april . you re talking about the undergraduate study ? it s not phd , they are undergraduates , i m sorry . they re undergraduate students who wrote a paper to go to a conference , and that s what it is . first of all , it s really sad they re mocking the work of students , because that just hurts our community and industry , do told the verge earlier this year . but second of all , we re not undergrads . lying about the qualifications of your critics isn t a good look , and mars one eventually figured that out . which is why lansdorp decided to address do and owens personally in dc . the three of them came for the th annual international mars society convention to discuss the feasibility of mars one in public debate . from left to right , sydney do , barry finger , the mars society moderator , andrew owens , and bas lansdorp pose for a photo after the debate . do and owens stepped up to the podium and began their presentation clad in black , single breasted business suits . do was clean shaven , while owens sported a manicured beard . the two spent minutes clearly and carefully outlining their findings , using language a layperson can understand . first , they said , mars one will have to significantly improve on current space landing systems . that s contrary to the organization s claims that the mission will be built entirely upon existing technology . at the moment , engineers can drop something that weighs a metric ton more than , pounds on mars without destroying it , but anything heavier is much more difficult . that s because of mars atmosphere it s thinner than earth s , so engineers can t rely on wind resistance to slow things headed for the surface . mars one s plans require them to land at least . metric tons , pounds of food for their cargo mission this means the organization will need an entirely new method of landing . the main argument revolved around the sheer cost of sustaining a space colony indefinitelythis was just a warm up , though . do and owens main argument revolved around the sheer cost of sustaining a space colony indefinitely . mars one has said that sending its first crew to mars would cost about billion . each additional one way trip to mars trips that would send more settlers to the red planet would cost billion . those estimates include equipment costs and operational costs , the company says . planning a one way mission might seem drastic , but it s the only way we can get people on mars within the next years , according to the project s website . sending people back home after a few months , or years , would be too costly and technology that would allow someone to return from mars doesn t exist yet . but the cost advantage of a one way mission is questionable , as spare parts become a crucial issue , do and owens said . for instance , to keep the international space station operational , nasa must launch a steady stream of cargo missions to replenish the station s supplies . hardware breaks frequently on the iss astronauts spend a lot of time doing repairs . a settlement on mars surrounded by lots of fine dust that can clog complex air filtration systems will likely need a lot of spare parts , do and owens argued . but unlike the iss , which is resupplied every few months , the mars one settlement will receive supply shipments only once every months . the mit team argued the amount of spare parts needed for a growing colony will cost hundreds of billions of dollars and those costs will only increase . the mission gets more expensive over time , in an unsustainable manner , do said in a march interview . you have to resupply the colony indefinitely . which means mars one s billion estimate is probably low . even nasa estimates that its human mission to mars , which is planned for the s , will cost between to billion . mars esa mps for osiris team there is technology that could help alleviate the resupply problem d printing . but material for the printers will still need to be shipped from earth . and while it s possible that martian soil could be used as stock in the printers , the technology required to use dirt as a source of ink for d printing tools probably won t be ready by the time mars one plans to launch . essentially , the conclusion of do and owens work is that the cost of the mars one mission grows exponentially over time . even if the astronauts somehow make it to mars , the settlers will need a monumental amount of supplies or else they will die horribly . our belief based on the data is that , no they cannot do this , said owens , rounding out their presentation . bas lansdorp decided the best counterargument was nostalgialansdorp then stepped up to rebut their argument . tall and thin , with very little hair , the mars one ceo was dressed casually , wearing a blue button down , a beige blazer , and jeans . he spoke softly and slowly , with a thick dutch accent , beginning his minute presentation with an anecdote about the time he watched the apollo astronauts walk on the moon . he asked if anyone in the room remembered what it felt like to see those men take their first steps on another body in space . it was one of the few moments in history where the whole world came to a stand still for a positive reason , he said . the trip down memory lane lasted at least five minutes . eventually , lansdorp addressed the mit study , which was , in theory , the reason he was there . he admitted that mars one should have embraced the study s findings instead of attacking them , as they were essentially free feedback from engineers with expertise . he then proceeded to backtrack on the mission s timeline , without giving specifics on what was being delayed , or until when . our plan is not etched in stone , and we ve already announced delays , he said . reality catches up with your plan . if mars one does delay again , it won t be the first time . the organization had originally planned to land humans on mars in . they changed that date to , before settling recently on . lansdorp presented only one slide for the evening an infographic of all the vehicles used for the apollo missions . it seemed as though , faced with the logistical problems the mit duo has identified , he decided the best counterargument was nostalgia mars one is possible because of how nasa stepped up to president john f . kennedy s challenge of sending humans to the moon in the s . if they can do it , so can we , he implied . it s a sentiment he repeated at least four times throughout the evening . lt ! new pym . parent theverge mars one graphic , apps . voxmedia . com at preview theverge mars one , xdomain . . voxmedia . com gtthe martian surface and mars one s vision for a mars habitat . nasa mars one at no point did lansdorp directly address the claims made by mit . he provided no concrete details regarding the mission s rockets , landers , interplanetary vehicles , or habitats . he barely touched on any science . he left that to his partner barry finger , an engineer and director for paragon space development corporation . paragon , a company that builds life support systems for extreme environments , conducted its own feasibility study of mars one , released in july . paragon s report came to some similar conclusions as the mit study technology development and adaptation are still needed for the mission to work . but despite the evening s premise , finger didn t address do and owens claims . instead , his presentation was a complicated history lesson of how paragon has solved engineering problems in the past essentially a technology focused continuance of lansdorp s pep talk . it was not exactly a convincing rebuttal , filled with lots of technical jargon and presented so poorly that it was hard to follow along . and of course , past performance is not necessarily indicative of future results , as the finance world is so fond of reminding us . at no point did lansdorp directly address the claims made by the mit studentsthen it was time for the question and answer session . in response to one question , lansdorp admitted that the billion cost estimate may be unrealistic . he didn t offer up an alternative cost estimate or suggest that mars one would be seeking additional funding , though . he also repeated the claim that mars one would require less funding because there would be no return mission an argument the mit students reminded him wasn t correct . it turns out mars one is currently hurting for cash . lansdorp said the organization has only , , garnered from its candidates application fees and early investors . that isn t enough money to pay lockheed martin to do a concept study part of the organization s initial plans . mars one is currently asking for million from investors to make that happen . lansdorp , however , is confident that he might actually get a phone call from a billionaire who says , i want to make this happen , he said . that seems to be the crux of the mission s financial plan make a big splash in the media to attract big investors . then , private space companies will offer up their services and figure out all the technical details for them . so lansdorp has proposed a reality show . mars one plans to launch a tv show that will follow the final colonist candidates as they train and prepare for the mission ahead . lansdorp said the broadcast rights and sponsorships for that show will greatly exceed those of the olympic games , which he claimed averaged around billion for the and cycles . the source link for this number is broken on the mars one website . mars one ceo bas lansdorp addressed criticisms of the organization in a youtube video . the evening devolved from there . the rockets aren t the problem the transit is not the problem , said lansdorp about the biggest challenges they have to face , as do and owens just stared at him with their brows furrowed . landing on mars i ve talked with several engineers from nasa who say they can do that with the current method . maybe so . but the space agency has ampnbspstated publicly that nasa can t land more than one metric ton with current landing technology . bashing nasa does not prove the feasibility of mars one . at one point , owens confronted lansdorp about a claim that the ceo made on television , saying that the organization had conducted its own feasibility study and found that mars one is possible with current technology . there s science conferences and then there s tv , says lansdorp sheepishly . as the ceo of the company , i always have to balance between how i phrase things . that feasibility study never happened lansdorp went on tv and lied . lansdorp was repeatedly asked for concrete details about the mars one mission plan , but avoided answering with specifics . instead he parroted the same talking point over and over again nasa stepped up to kennedy s challenge , so mars one can step up to this challenge . after lansdorp said this for the fourth time , the mit team just sat there shaking their heads . then , lansdorp grasped at another argument , stating that nasa has been promising us a mission to mars for the past years and it has yet to happen . the argument was met by applause from the audience . owens grabbed the microphone from lansdorp bashing nasa does not prove the feasibility of mars one . the statement was met by even greater applause . in fact , nothing lansdorp said during the debate proved the feasibility of mars one . in the end , mars one was in about the same shape as the queen xenomorph , flailing uncontrollably after it got blown out of the air lock . sean o kane and arielle duhaime ross contributed to this report . 