 official police business is a weekly column and newsletter by reporter matt stroud about new developments in police technology , and the ways technology is changing law enforcement think body cameras , cell site simulators , surveillance systems , and electroshock weapons . sign up to receive opb in your email every wednesday at officialpolicebusiness . com , or check for it here at the verge . in january , judges on a federal circuit court instructed police departments to treat tasers similarly to the way they treat firearms as deadly weapons that can t be used when someone is merely resisting arrest . those instructions were a big deal , setting policing precedent for departments in five states , and potentially leading the way for much more stringent rules about how tasers are used by police nationwide . taser international , the company that exclusively produces and sells those electroshock weapons to police departments , filed a court document on june th asking the united states supreme court to give the circuit court s instructions a second look . taser s move made sense if the instructions go unchallenged , some police departments could change use of force policies to place tasers more in line with firearms than with less lethal devices . taser international would thus risk competing directly with gun manufacturers to provide police departments with weapons , threatening the company s business model . taser international would risk competing directly with gun manufacturers the case stretches back to april rd , . that day , ronald armstrong a man who suffered from bipolar disorder and paranoid schizophrenia had been off his medications for nearly a week , and began attempting to puncture the skin of his leg to let the air out . observing this , his sister convinced him to go with her to nearby moore regional hospital in pinehurst , north carolina , to commit himself and get treatment . at the hospital , armstrong began the intake process but reconsidered midway through and walked out of the building . local police were called , and three showed up . but they had no grounds to arrest armstrong , since he hadn t actually committed any crime . still , he was acting strangely he wandered along a busy road by the hospital s entrance , and after the officers convinced him to move to the roadside , he sat on the ground and began eating dandelions and grass , and putting lit cigarettes out on his tongue . doctors at the hospital had , by that time , decided armstrong was a danger to himself . north carolina law requires that involuntary commitment orders need to be written and notarized before taking effect . the officers had been making sure to keep him in one spot , but they didn t attempt to arrest him before those orders were final . when the orders went through , the three officers approached and surrounded armstrong , preparing to arrest him . armstrong resisted by sitting down and wrapping his arms and legs around the post holding up a stop sign . before long , armstrong s sister noticed that he d stopped movingthe officers weren t in the mood to mess around . within about seconds of the officers being notified that armstrong s commitment orders had gone through , an officer shocked him five times with a taser . this worked to get armstrong away from the stop sign . the officers then cuffed armstrong , and set him face down on the ground . before long , armstrong s sister noticed that he d stopped moving . one officer on scene attempted cpr on armstrong , and another called emergency medical services . an ambulance arrived shortly thereafter to take him to a local emergency room . he was pronounced dead when he arrived there . the armstrong family sued the village of pinehurst in the u . s . district court for the middle district of north carolina on may th , , accusing the officers of violating armstrong s fourth and fourteenth amendment rights by using excessive force . the family also sued taser international , but taser was dismissed from the case early on since the company s training literature has warned , since , that tasers exposure can result in death or serious injury . a judge in the u . s . district court granted summary judgement in favor of the pinehurst officers , asserting that they were protected by qualified immunity the legal doctrine that protects police officers from prosecution in most situations . the family appealed , and , in january , a panel of judges on the u . s . court of appeals for the fourth circuit issued an opinion agreeing with the lower court that the pinehurst officers were not subject to liability in this case . but the fourth circuit added a precedent setting caveat . the fourth circuit added a precedent setting caveat where , during the course of seizing an out numbered mentally ill individual who is a danger only to himself , police officers choose to deploy a taser in the face of stationary and non violent resistance to being handcuffed , those officers use unreasonably excessive force , the opinion read . law enforcement officers should now be on notice that such taser use violates the fourth amendment . clarifying this point , the opinion stated that taser use is unreasonable force in response to resistance that does not raise a risk of immediate danger , and that physical resistance is not synonymous with risk of immediate danger . in other words from that point forward , police under the fourth circuit s jurisdiction needed to start rethinking and redefining , in policies how tasers are used on the street . that decision sent shockwaves throughout departments in the region , which includes maryland , north carolina , south carolina , virginia , and west virginia . police departments all over the region were advised to write up new policies taking the fourth circuit s opinion into account . which isn t to say they were happy about it . taser use is severe and injurious regardless of the mode to which the taser is set . all future taser use is now subject to the fourth circuit s pronouncement that taser use is severe and injurious regardless of the mode to which the taser is set , read a directive from the north carolina justice academy , which trains police in the state . although that statement is not factually true , today the court said it , and thus it s now controlling law . taser use can indeed be severe and injurious the company s own training manuals clearly state as much . and while there is no official tally of deaths connected to taser use , amnesty international connected at least deaths to taser use by . more recent estimates put the number of people who died after being shocked with a taser close to , . the insistence that tasers are safe , despite evidence to the contrary , has inspired a very strange thing , however the village of pinehurst which technically won in its fourth circuit case is now appealing the armstrong decision to the u . s . supreme court . and among the friend of the court briefs filed in favor of that appeal is one from taser international which was dismissed from the case nearly three years ago . taser international argued that the fourth circuit s opinion wasn t consistent with standards throughout the county . the u . s . supreme court should resolve the significant conflict between the circuits regarding the propriety of taser conducted electrical weapon use in response to a subject s active yet non violent resistance to a lawful seizure , taser s filing read . a single , familiar standard is essential when a subject actively resists seizure , officers can use a taser cew to gain compliance but when a suspect does not resist , or has stopped resisting , they cannot . it goes on taser use should be evaluated like any other use of force , on a case by case basis . i knew that the chances of getting this overturned in my favor were very slim . that argument and pinehurst s appeal to the supreme court is especially surprising to karonnie r . truzy , who represented the armstrong family . he technically lost twice once in district court , then again in the circuit court and still had no intention of appealing the case . i knew that the chances of getting this overturned in my favor were very slim , he told me last week , so there was no way i was going to ask for a rehearing and overturn some very good law that had been established . truzy believes that the supreme court appeal is being pushed by the company itself . truzy said that a member of taser s legal team contacted him in january , days after the fourth circuit opinion was issued , to suggest that he ask the fourth circuit to hear arguments in the armstrong case again . according to truzy , the lawyer said taser would file a friend of the court brief supporting truzy s appeal for rehearing at the fourth circuit level . truzy declined to file for rehearing , but taser filed a brief supporting armstrong anyway . it was rejected by the fourth circuit , since truzy hadn t filed anything . truzy didn t hear anything further until june , when he was informed that pinehurst would be asking the supreme court to hear the case and that taser was now filing a friend of the court brief supporting pinehurst . why is taser so interested in having this case reheard ? truzy reasons that if police departments need to start thinking about tasers as something closer on the use of force spectrum to deadly weapons , why would they purchase tasers at all ? a glock g firearm , for example a gun often used by police officers retails for around a taser x p is more than double that price , at , . . if policies indicate both can only be used in deadly force situations , why would a police department pay double for the weapon that s less lethal by design ? which is why taser international is screaming very loud , truzy said . because now the fourth circuit is cutting into taser s business model . who would ve thought the the fourth circuit would have had the balls to write what they wrote in their opinion . who would ve thought the the fourth circuit would have had the balls to write what they wrote in their opinion , truzy continued . nobody . no one thought that . and when the fourth circuit did that , now taser international was reeling , along with these other police organizations , because they re like , wow , we never thought that they would do that . they re completely caught off script and , wow , what s going to happen if this catches on at other circuits ? what s going to happen if other circuits start quoting armstrong in their opinions ? there s no way we can let this language stand . taser s vice president of strategic communications , steve tuttle , disagreed , calling truzy s reading way off . taser s amicus brief in support of the village of pinehurst s cert petition is based on numerous independent studies clearly demonstrating that an officer s use of a taser cew instead of hands on physical force results in substantially fewer injuries to officers and subjects alike , he wrote in an emailed statement . plaintiffs counsel granted blanket consent for any interested party to file an amicus brief in the supreme court , which is standard practice . does truzy believe the supreme court is going to take up the appeal ? if you would ve asked me before the appeal was filed , i would ve said no because they re not in the habit of taking cases from the winning side just to clarify language within a case , truzy said . but in this case , not only has taser international filed a friend of the court brief in favor of a rehearing , so has the national fraternal order of police , and the southern states police benevolent association . you ask me right now ? he says . i would tell you that i have no idea . 