 the blood cells of cancer patients , reprogrammed by doctors to attack their leukemia and re infused back into the patients veins , led to complete remissions in of people . that s especially exciting because those patients had failed all conventional treatments . today s report , in the new england journal of medicine , is an extension of data presented last year at the american society of hematology s annual meeting . not all of the remissions lasted , the report showed . nineteen patients in the study remain in remission to months later , and of them didn t need any additional treatment . seven patients relapsed between months and months after their infusion those included three people whose cancers spread beyond the blood cells the new treatment targets . five patients left the study for alternative therapy . the numbers are remarkable because these patients had cancer return as many as four times before they joined the study , including some whose cancer had returned after stem cell transplants , said carl june , the leader of the research team and an immunotherapist at the university of pennsylvania . in other words , these people were the sickest of the sick . initially , we didn t know if we were just lucky with the first patients , june says . the group s first patient , a year old named emily whitehead was treated when she was . shehas remained cancer free without any further intervention for more than years and was at a fundraising bike ride with june last weekend , where . million was raised to continue the research . she s become sort of a legend , june says . living without b cells isn t perfect , but it s better than dying of cancerthe best comparison to the group s results are those for novartis s gleevec , which aided to percent of patients in early trials , june says . it is now approved for kinds of cancer . unlike this method , however , patients must take the gleevec pill every day . june s treatment regimen requires just one dose . for this method , the researchers harvest a patient s t cells using a process like blood transfusion . then the lab at the university of pennsylvania s clinical cell and vaccine production facility does a gene transfer , to teach the t cells to target a protein found on the surface of b cells , another type of blood cell that s affected in leukemia . the t cells are then transplanted back into the patient , where they hunt and kill anything with the protein attached to it . that means all b cells , not just the cancerous ones , are killed . tests of all treated patients showed that their normal b cells had been killed along with the tumors . because b cells are responsible for creating antibodies , which hunt any viruses or bacteria circulating in the blood stream , the solution isn t ideal patients usually receive immunoglobulin replacement to help boost their immune systems to healthy levels . it s striking how similar their response rate is to ours . living without b cells isn t perfect , but it s better than dying of cancer , says michel sadelain , an immunologist at memorial sloan kettering who wasn t involved in today s study . he s also doing research on the designer t cells , using a different technique for programming and growing the modified cells . his group s response rate was percent in a group of adults with a different type of leukemia , chronic lymphocytic leukemia . most of today s patients were between and years old , and they all had acute lymphoblastic leukemia . it s striking how similar their response rate is to ours , sadelain says . those numbers are almost the same , but coming from different hands , at different centers , in different patient populations . it probably speaks to the power of the approach . because the numbers are so similar between the two centers , it means that it s less important to focus on manufacturing differences , sadelain says . more important are the side effects , seen in all groups of patients who ve been treated by this method . twenty two of the patients experienced cytokine release syndrome , where their immune systems went into overdrive while hunting down the cancer . the cytokine release syndrome creates flu like symptoms , such as a fever , nausea and muscle pain patients also experienced breathing difficulties . those responses can be severe whitehead nearly died . the syndrome dies down on its own with time . figuring out how to manage the response is the next big challenge , sadelain says . designer t cells could become an outpatient treatmentunlike with most cancer therapies , the genetically modified cells need to be given only once , june says . he hopes to treat patients in less dire straits eventually . for those patients , designer t cells could become an outpatient treatment , since the cytokine release syndrome seems to be related to how many tumors the people being treated have . today s trial took into account all patients who were treated . the national cancer institute has done work with modified t cells also , using a so called intent to treat study , a kind of analysis that includes every patient who initially enrolled , even if that patient later drops out of the trial or doesn t take the right dose of drug . the nci research found that some patients weren t able to grow full doses of the t cells . taking into account patients who researchers wanted to treat but couldn t reach in time or couldn t grow cells for would probably drop the response rate by about a third , says crystal mackall , the chief of pediatric oncology at the national cancer institute . the field has undergone a boomthe nci data , published in the lancet on monday , showed that of the patients enrolled , received the prescribed dose the other two patients had blood cells that didn t grow to the assigned dose concentration . unlike in today s experiment , all surviving patients went on to bone marrow transplant as part of the study design . the most exciting part of the method , which uses what the scientists call chimeric antigen receptor t cells , is that it can be used to target any sugar or protein expressed on the surface of a cancer , june says . his group is looking to begin trials in glioblastoma , pancreatic and ovarian cancer . sadelain s group will open studies in breast and lung cancer patients next year . the field has undergone a boom as more researchers and drug companies have become interested . we re gratified to see industry stepping in . besides memorial sloan kettering cancer center , the university of pennsylvania and the national cancer institute , two other major academic facilities are doing similar work , baylor college of medicine and the seattle cancer care alliance . meanwhile , novartis is partnering with the upenn researchers pfizer signed a deal with cellectis to develop their own technology glaxosmithkline is working with juno therapeutics to work on treatments as well and so too are celgene and bluebird bio , which have rights to the baylor work . kite pharma , another company developing similar technology , had a million ipo in june . we re all gratified to see industry stepping in , mackall said . ten years ago , five years ago , if you d asked me if biotech and big pharma would jump in , i d say no way . but it s absolutely happening . that s explosive growth since the first case report from june s lab in , when two of three patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia experienced remission , according to reports in nejm and science translational medicine . those patients remain in remission , june says . we pinch ourselves . june s group received a breakthrough therapy designation from the us food and drug administration in july , for treating acute lymphoblastic leukemia in adults and children . the designation , created in , is meant to speed new drugs that treat life threatening illnesses . the designer t cells were the fifth therapy to receive the designation . this is unlike almost all cell and gene therapies in that it s actually ahead of the schedule we set for ourselves when we first started treating patients , june said . we pinch ourselves because , you know , until recently we didn t know if we got lucky or if it would last . our initial patients are still in remission , so we know it s durable and reproducible . that s something that makes us excited every day . 