 overwatch isn t just a brand new franchise for blizzard it s a new way of thinking about story . the company is known for building huge franchises , from diablo to warcraft , and overwatch represents its first new property in close to two decades . in the past , when blizzard created a new world , it started from a high level , figuring out the overarching themes and game ideas before it filled in the details , by adding characters , places , and more . instead of starting , feet up , overwatch is starting at the ground and moving upwards , says chris metzen , blizzard s svp of story and franchise development , and creative director on the game . overwatch is primarily defined by its characters . it s a shooter where players can choose from different heroes , each with their own personality and history . and it s those personalities and histories that have come to define its near future world . overwatch takes place at an unspecified point in the future , and stars former members of the titular group , a one time peacekeeping organization that has since disbanded following accusations of corruption . the game s version of earth is recognizable , but also fantastical . we definitely wanted to do a near future franchise that wasn t , years in the future on the far side of an alien galaxy , metzen says . the roster includes a talking , cybernetic gorilla named winston , a nature obsessed robot called bastion , and tracer , a former overwatch agent with the ability to travel through time . metzen describes the setting as a recognizable earth that was near enough that we could inject sci fi hooks , fantastical hooks , and just be able to conjure whatever heroes we wanted , but had more of a tether to the familiar world we share . it has a bit of an avengers vibe , with all of the world s most powerful heroes joining together for battle . the game itself is team based , similar to games like team fortress or the upcoming battleborn . but unlike many games , the genre had little influence on the story of overwatch blizzard has big plans for overwatch and this shooter is just the first introduction to this new universe . we decided to try to do it another way . overwatch is currently two different things , metzen explains . overwatch is not a group based shooter by itself . that is simply the first video game expression of what overwatch really is , which is a big , breathing , mighty , compelling franchise . i say all of that in hopes that we achieve that . but that s what we re aiming for . warcraft is not world of warcraft . it s a big , sprawling idea that s comprised of something like distinct video games . warcraft is not an rts , it s not a mmorpg . soon it ll be a movie . that s how blizzard thinks about its franchises . that s a big shift from previous franchises , where the initial game helped define the world around it . starcraft , for instance , features three distinct races because the game s designers wanted three different types of armies for players to control . they wanted one with weird aliens , and one with psychic powers , and so the narrative team built out the story based around those constraints , crafting the zerg and the protoss to give more depth and interest to the races and their abilities . with overwatch , we decided to try to do it another way , says metzen . which was , don t start with this huge backstory and all of this specificity we wanted overwatch to really be achieved through these characters . so as a new character idea comes up whether it came from a drawing or a design instinct senior story designer michael chu and i have tried to stay on our toes relative to letting the world be shaped by these characters . that s part of the reason why overwatch even has a story . multiplayer focused games , whether it s a shooter like tf or a strategy game like dota , aren t exactly heavy on narrative exposition . few people play league of legends for the story . but because blizzard views overwatch as one part of a bigger universe , it s adding in narrative elements to help tie it to all of the other versions of overwatch that do and could exist . there might not be another game in the works or at least announced just yet , but blizzard is still fleshing out the universe in other ways . last week it released the first in a series of pixar like animated shorts detailing individual characters , and later this year blizzard will launch a graphic novel called first strikesince the game will largely only hint at the bigger universe it takes place in , these supplemental materials are meant to appease those looking to learn more . the idea is to appeal to multiple kinds of players . for those that really don t care about a lot of narrative context in their game , they can jump into overwatch and not be burdened at all by needing to know who is who , or the intricacies of the relationships , or the history of the world , metzen says . at its most conservative , the game does not demand that you know much of anything in terms of lore . the key to making all of those elements , whether it s a game or an animated video , work together is consistency . for instance , in the first overwatch short , which tells winston s backstory , there s a battle during which some glass in his lab is smashed . when that moment was first created by the animators , the developers went back to the in game version of winston s lab and smashed the same bit of glass . we try to make sure that all the details sing together , says metzen . chu keeps a constantly updated spreadsheet full of dates and other key details , to make sure they keep everything straight . overwatch s near future setting gives the team a lot of leeway when it comes to adding in new features based on crazy technology or science , but it also provides an extra set of challenges , one that blizzard hasn t really had to face before . each of blizzard s three big franchises fits snugly into an existing category of genre fiction , whether it s fantasy or sci fi , which means that this is blizzard s first time tackling characters derived from the real world . overwatch features a diverse cast , with heroes based everywhere from russia to india to egypt , and designing those characters is very different from creating a new orc in azeroth . it s a little intimidating for us . with overwatch characters , we definitely wanted to have a cast of heroes that are from different nationalities and places around the world , so we strive to be very responsible with how we develop the ideas and how we are even fictionally portraying people around the world , metzen says . sometimes it definitely puts the pressure on us to be aware of cultural sensitivities and just people s feelings . sometimes we re educated enough , sometimes we aren t , but we certainly want to build this near earth experience with respect and love . chu adds that we do a lot of research , the team actually comes from a lot of backgrounds , so we draw inspiration from the different team members . given the success of blizzard s past games , it may be surprising to see the company trying to fix what isn t broken . warcraft , for instance , is still going strong , with an upcoming duncan jones directed film adaptation and the incredibly popular digital card game spin off hearthstone . but metzen believes that this is exactly the reason why the developer needs to do something different . it s a little intimidating for us to step out and do something that we ve never tried before , he says , but that s why , for a company that s years old , overwatch was so important for us , to test ourselves and climb another mountain and see what we could do . it keeps us sharp and it s an important challenge . whether the game succeeds or fails , says metzen , having attempted it is so important for blizzard . overwatch launches may th on pc , ps , and xbox one . 