 yesterday fcc chairman tom wheeler shared a proposal that would make the cable set top box world look a whole lot more like the mobile phone market . the idea is to give consumers more choice around the hardware they use when they sign up for tv service . the rules , he wrote in re code , would create a framework for providing device manufacturers , software developers and others the information they need to introduce innovative new technologies , while at the same time maintaining strong security , copyright and consumer protections . so is this good news or bad news ? it depends . silicon valley players and cable operators are lining up their talking points and the washington lobbies are getting together a game plan to convince you of either case . cable companies say rules would be unnecessaryfor the most part , we already know the points each side will make . cable companies say these rules would be completely unnecessary they already build out apps for third party products , including for rokus and xbox ones , so there s no need for them to directly open up a pipeline to their raw cable data . third party companies , however , say those apps aren t great and stifle them from really competing in the cable tv world . you can read more on those points here . we ve reached out to some of the biggest stakeholders in this fight to ask their thoughts on the proposal . predictably , the statements so far stick to established party lines . naturally , the cable companies have been the most vocal . they re continuing to condemn the fcc s proposal . at ampampt , time warner cable , and a coalition of multiple cable operators and media companies known as the future of tv coalition , spoke out . their statements don t exactly hide their industry s disdain for regulation . at ampampt , for example , called the proposal another disappointing example of an fcc that thinks it s smarter than a highly competitive market that will discourage the very investment it claims to want . meanwhile , time warner ceo robert marcus said during the company s earnings call today that this move represents an attempt to create regulation that is really unnecessary , given the advances that have been made driven by marketplace forces . those advances he s referring to are the industry s apps , which it believes are the answer the fcc is looking to find with possible rules . apps are the answer the fcc is looking to find consumers can already access pay tv programming right alongside streaming content on an ever expanding universe of consumer owned devices , from smart tvs , game consoles and streaming devices to laptops , tablets , and smartphones , the future of tv coalition said in a prepared statement . this app driven innovation is already happening and it doesn t require a government mandate that would increase consumer costs , strip viewers of privacy protections , and let third party device makers ignore the terms of carriage agreements between programmers and distributors . we all know where the cable companies stand , so perhaps most intriguing is silicon valley s lack of response . most companies the verge contacted in regards to the chairman s proposal said no comment on the matter , or have not yet formulated their responses . this included apple , roku , amazon , and microsoft all of whom have a vested interest in the tv world . apple , roku , amazon , and microsoft all have a vested interest in the tv worldit s possible this is because the proposal really just happened . there were rumblings of action eventually being taken , but not necessarily so soon and with so little warning . as such , tech companies are taking their time to sort out a direct response , and there s no real rush . as wheeler has said , congress mandated years ago that consumers should have this kind of choice , and yet , we re still dealing with outdated technology from cable service providers . in reality , this proposal , if passed , would greatly democratize cable television , and line up the access tech companies need in order to create the set top boxes they ve always wanted . apple , for instance , wants its apple tv to be the go to device for tv watching consumers . from it , they d ideally be able to watch live tv , access programs , channel surf , and also browse netflix and other apps . that dream has remained unattainable so far , and hindered by cable companies refusal to turn over direct cable access . these could end up creating unwanted competitionbut even if these rules could help solve that disagreement , they could also end up just creating more competition that might not be welcomed . imagine google deciding to , say , license android as a platform in order to help set top box makers design smart boxes . the field could quickly get crowded . while most companies have stayed mum , some did offer their thoughts . tivo , the one company that has played ball with comcast and actually uses the dated and forgotten cablecard standard , told the verge that it is looking to provide choice and lower cost options , and we think that will increase the desirability for cable service . general counsel matt zinn said consumers are obviously frustrated with the lack of choice , which led to cord cutting and cord shaving . this could persuade more people to stay with the cable bundles . consumers are obviously frustratedgoogle didn t directly comment on the recent news , but left behind some clues of its stance when it commented on an fcc report last year . at the time , it wrote that there s much more at stake than streamlined channel surfing when it come to reinventing top set boxes and cablecard . innovation and competition in navigation devices will promote numerous policies important to the commission , ampnbspthe company said . beyond those two companies , silicon valley produced nothing but silence . it s clear the cable companies have a vested interest in maintaining the status quo . it s working out well for them and churning out profit . meanwhile , tech companies have a vested interest in upending the norm to sell new , enhanced products . ultimately , it comes down to consumers . that s where the fcc s vested interests lie . 