 this morning , facebook is announcing a new standalone iphone app called ampnbsppaper . contrary to earlier rumors , it s much more than just a news reading app ampmdash it s a complete reimagining of facebook itself . once you ve used it , you may never want to open the standard facebook app again . it may not replicated every feature of facebook s main app , but it does fulfill the majority of people s needs . simply put , it s much , much better . paper takes the standard facebook news feed and recreates it as an immersive , horizontally scrolling set of screens . it also provides a new way to post to facebook and paper with an elegant wysiwyg editor that borrows the styling of medium s and svbltle s blogging systems . finally , yes , it s a news reading app that owes some of its looks to flipboard . it will be available for the iphone in the us and only the iphone in the us on february rd . it s also ad free , at least for now . that s all more than we were expecting when we sat down with product designer mike matas and product manager michael reckhow . neither would quite take the bait when asked whether this should serve as a replacement for the original facebook app or , as i put it during our interview , a virtual indictment . reckhow says that there are tools that were out there for sharing high quality stuff and also the tools where you could reach an audience , but that too often they aren t the same thing . we felt you shouldn t have to choose between one or the other , he says . goodbye buttons , hello swipespaper cuts away virtually all buttons and other ui elements to make every status update , photo , and news story appear full screen . to get around , you will need to learn a basic set of gestures , but the app will gently remind you what they are if it thinks you re stuck . wide photos pan as you tilt the phone the team cheekily calls it the ken turns effect , ui elements often just fade away , and news stories are presented in twitter esque cards . the lack of chrome to help place you in the app and tell you how to navigate can be a little disorienting . on the bright side , the ui is fast and fluid , thanks to the nine months the team has spent working on the app . loren brichter , the creator of letterpress and tweetie , also chipped in on the coding . the result is an app that shares a family resemblance to facebook home on android , but is much faster and more full featured . each section in paper has a main screen with a cover photo and a list of small cards at the bottom . you can scroll through or drill into the cards , at which point you ll be swiping through one card at a time . matas hopes that you ll flip through slowly . you really want people to spend a little bit of time with it and appreciate that content , matas says , almost like when you go to a museum and you spend a little bit of time with each thing . a lean back experience , but on a tiny screenif you aren t put off by the idea of considering a photo of your friend s dog an art piece , you might call it a lean back experience albeit on a tiny screen . as a ui philosophy , this stands in direct opposition to the high volume , high noise vertical feeds we re used to on twitter and facebook . it definitely means it will take longer to grind through content like you can on twitter ampmdash but for facebook , that s exactly the point . if , like me , you re a news addict and an information fiend , paper may be a little too relaxed for you . the interface for news reading is exactly the same , with the exception that links are automatically turned into small , twitter esque media cards with branding from the publication . swiping up to read the full story takes you to the source site ampmdash there s no offline mode like you might find in a more full featured news app . you also can t add any site you want , as with a traditional rss reader . instead , facebook has hired a team of content curators to pick stories for you in one of a dozen or so categories ranging from basic news to cute animals . you can post to paper and thus facebook in a new kind of compose screen . it shows you exactly what the final post will look like , and reckhow isn t shy about his hope that people will think of paper as a new kind of thing ampmdash even though the plumbing underneath is still facebook . think about when instagram came out and you now had this new way to share , he says . facebook amprsquos ambition with paper is to have it become its own thing , not just a different way of accessing facebook . matas goes so far as to say that it amprsquos a publishing tool , a way of publishing great content , and a way of viewing great content . paper is the first product to come out of facebook creative labs , a unit within the company tasked to innovate and build new things , as reckhow puts it . that s likely a sign that paper will be just one of what ceo mark zuckerberg called new and engaging types of mobile experiences on yesterday amprsquos earnings call . since its embarrassing snapchat clone called poke failed , facebook seems closer to figuring out the right formula for its single use apps . facebook knows that mobile users are gravitating towards such apps , and it intends to create more of them . facebook wants another spot on your home screen , and another one after thatthat amprsquos probably a good thing , and perhaps a necessary one . from a user s perspective , facebook amprsquos current app is beset by dozens of options , nooks , crannies , and features that most people don amprsquot really use . the recent tab centric redesign helped simplify things , but it wasn amprsquot radical change . facebook has a billion users , and so any alterations it wants to make to its core app need to be tested ampmdash extensively . that kind of testing can get in the way of creative design . you can amprsquot be innovative if you amprsquore encumbered by worrying if you amprsquore going to disrupt what hundreds of millions or a billion people are doing , reckhow says . the team wanted to have the creative freedom to go outside of what we amprsquove done and not worry about if it amprsquos going to impact metrics on day one . for reckhow , matas , and the rest of the team , paper is less a replacement for facebook amprsquos app than a chance for the company to try out something very different from what it amprsquos done before ampmdash and get another icon on your iphone amprsquos home screen in the process . if paper does score a slot on your main home screen , another app will probably have to be buried away somewhere else . for a lot of people , facebook itself will be a prime candidate . 