 this article was originally published on november th , . we have revived it today in light of blackberry s declaration that it s getting out of the business of designing and building its own phones . as the last holdout to favor physical keyboards on smart mobile devices , blackberry s outsourcing move today marks one of the final milestones in the demise of the physical keyboard . so here , once more , is a salute to this now historic input device . i bought a droid twenty one months ago . as a devout user of physical qwerty keyboards , i m pretty sure i m screwed . my two year contract expires in just three more months , but i don t know if my phone will make it . i touch type all my interviews into my droid , but it s simply not reliable anymore . there isn t a day that goes by without some app experiencing crippling slowdown . the phone just can t seem to hold a charge . and it s not like i can just go out and upgrade , even if i had the cash there isn t a single desirable smartphone with a physical qwerty keyboard on the horizon . over the last few months , motorola announced the moto x , the droid ultra , the droid maxx , and the droid mini , but there was no droid to be had . isn t it strange how all the high end smartphones with keyboards have up and disappeared ? recently , i met doug kaufman , manager of handset strategy for sprint . he had a story to share . the qwerty champion for years , i ve been the qwerty champion within sprint , kaufman began . sprint s had one of the largest bases of qwerty going back to the whole messaging phenomenon . . . at one point we were selling percent messaging phones , he explained right off the bat . when android came along and smartphones truly began to take off , handsets with qwerty keyboards did very well for sprint . the samsung moment , the ampnbspevo shift , the ampnbspepic g we sold multimillions of those , said kaufman . it was a big party and nobody came . all the research told sprint that it was on the right track , that physical keyboards were a differentiator that would help the carrier sell phones . when sprint conducted surveys , it found that to percent of respondents with side sliding physical qwerty keyboards reported that it was easy to type words and letters . by contrast , touchscreen only devices typically polled under percent . the best touch only device we ever had was the ampnbspgalaxy note ii , said kaufman , on which percent of respondents said typing was easy . the ampnbspiphone was around percent , just to give you a sense . and for a time , it seemed like that typing experience would actually drive future purchases . when sprint asked customers whether they d buy a physical keyboard the next time around not so long ago percent of existing qwerty users said they would . even one quarter of iphone users , and percent of galaxy note ii users , said they d prefer a physical qwerty keyboard on their next smartphone . so we had all that data , and we said look , there s still the demand for qwerty . and then we went out and built the ampnbsplg mach and the ampnbspphoton q . it was a big party and nobody came . so much for surveys . what happened ? people started buying phones they could recognize , according to kaufman . he believes the reason that qwerty phones stopped selling has little to do with large screens and everything to do with a trend towards iconic handsets flagship devices which boast fancy designs and giant advertising campaigns . at the end of the day , what happened is two things . half of your customers buy the iphone . all those people who said , oh , i m going to buy qwerty , boom , take them out of the equation . and then as you probably know , the market has moved to everyone buying iconic phones . . . people see the advertising , they walk in , they want to buy a ampnbspgalaxy s iii , says kaufman . or an ampnbsphtc one , he adds suddenly . one and doneit s ironic that kaufman would mention htc . the taiwanese company built a good part of its reputation on qwerty handsets before it decided to put all its eggs into one iconic basket . after years of manufacturing tiny windows mobile typing machines , htc built the very first android smartphone , the ampnbspt mobile g . if a cellular carrier needed a qwerty phone to offer their customers , htc was all too happy to provide , manufacturing devices like the evo shift g , the ampnbspg , and t mobile s entire mytouch line . but in , htc decided to focus on just one smartphone at a time . the htc one series was the company s attempt to make its products a little more iconic , a little more like samsung s successful galaxy line . the announcement came with bad news for keyboard fans , though htc designer claude zellweger explained that the firm was moving away from qwerty as a whole . we have texting , emoticons , voice to text and other such methods of communication that have abbreviated our exchanges . why did htc abandon the physical keyboard ? certainly , design played a role . htc design director jonah becker tells me that sliding qwerty devices like my droid are typically significantly thicker and harder to slip into a pocket , and that the moving parts result in a phone that doesn t feel as solid as a monolithic bar type phone . but surprisingly , becker tells me that the physical construction wasn t the primary justification the real reason is not design , but the changes in behavior . he explains how far virtual keyboards have come , how children are growing up with touchscreens , and how written communication has become less critical for the smartphone audience . if a picture tells a thousand words , how many can you convey with a vine or a youtube clip ? we have texting , emoticons , voice to text and other such methods of communication that have abbreviated our exchanges . this all makes a physical qwerty less important , says becker . motorola , the manufacturer of my droid , agrees . there became this interesting tension where people wanted to see information , but they didn t need input as much , motorola svp rick osterloh tells me . htc s qwertya forced choice ? i wasn t totally buying that the world abandoned the idea of physical keyboards overnight . it seemed more likely to me that the cellular industry never gave them a choice . for the past several years , buying a smartphone with a qwerty keyboard has meant settling for less than the latest and greatest technology on the market . when my droid launched in february , it had already been completely outspecced and outclassed by devices with better screens . arguably , there hasn t been a top tier smartphone with a physical keyboard since the samsung epic g set a new high bar for android devices in august , . the carriers had decided to treat qwerty sliders as messaging phones for teens rather than tools of the elite , and adjusted their asks and advertising respectively . who killed the qwerty keyboard ? the usual suspect is the hd screen . visual real estate has become a focal point for the industry . and yet , as screens got wider , they became harder to hold , so manufacturers made them thinner to compensate . thin and wide became the goal , and then the norm . we used to want a tv for these types of experiences , but now we expect a cinematic experience on a phone , says htc s becker . who killed the qwerty keyboard ? the usual suspect is the hd screenand that s where you run into trouble with physical keyboards , according to motorola s rick osterloh . keyboards make it so you have to cut the screen size down , or have a slider form factor which adds a considerable amount of cost , thickness , and weight to the product . there s really no getting around that because it s another mechanical part . . . it ends up being fundamentally thicker by just a few millimeters , he tells me . still , all of this assumes that smartphone buyers would actually rather have a top tier smartphone with a large hd screen instead of a top tier smartphone with a smaller screen and a keyboard . in the past couple of years , that s never even been an option . the niche marketbut what if it were ? would manufacturers and carriers consider building an iconic phone with top of the line specs , a nice hd screen , and a physical qwerty keyboard that slides out from underneath ? even sprint s qwerty champion doug kaufman doesn t think that s likely to happen . i think there would be a segment out there that would buy it , but it s getting smaller every day . . . the oems want a thin , sexy device to put on advertising , he explains . i think the ship has really sailed on qwerty . we saw what happened to the manufacturer who thought different . for their part , htc and motorola say the keyboard is simply not that important . i use the htc one now , and can t imagine going back to a physical keyboard , says becker , adding that htc has to stay focused to achieve its design aims . i don t think there are roadblocks preventing us from building a qwerty phone at any price point . it s that the behaviors and technologies have made them less of a priority , he explains . the combination of voice dictation and predictive software keyboards reduces the imperative to have a physical keyboard for a consumer , says motorola s rick osterloh . is the qwerty so incredibly niche that manufacturers are willing to let blackberry have that market unchallenged ? one anonymous industry insider hints that blackberry s misfortunes might actually be part of the problem . believe me , this is a game of volume . . . if they thought qwerty would be a meaningful niche , it would not go ignored . we saw what happened to the manufacturer who thought different . still , when i push sprint s kaufman just a little bit further , he relents . it d need to be an htc one q , a galaxy s q . . . a flagship phone with top of the line specs . if you could have a galaxy s with a qwerty , i think people would buy that . if any company were to try qwerty again , samsung would seem to be the most likely candidate . though some have accused the korean manufacturer of copying competitors , the company has also shown that it s willing to go to substantial lengths to make its smartphones appear bigger and bolder than the competition . it was samsung that pushed screen sizes to a crazy . inches , and samsung who successfully brought the stylus back from the dead . now that the company already has a screen size for every pocket and purse , perhaps the company could use its marketing prowess to push the physical keyboard once more . i selfishly hope so . 