 in , a man named vincent ferrari called aol and tried to cancel his internet service . it took him minutes as an increasingly desperate customer service rep named john tried to talk him out of it . you used this quite a lot , john says , in a recording ferrari made of part of the call . last month was hours of usage . i don t know how to make this any clearer , so i m just going to say it one last time , ferrari says . cancel . the . account . it goes on . last week , aol vice president of product ryan block had a similar experience with a comcast rep . block and his wife spent around minutes on the phone as an aggressive call center employee asks questions like , why is it that you re not wanting to have the no . rated internet , no . rated tv service in the country ? cancel . the . account . the rep , whose name is withheld , is certainly obnoxious . he s also desperate . as the awl s john herrman points out , the customer service rep is trapped in an impossible position , in which any cancellation , even one he can t control , will reflect poorly on his performance . bullying customers who try to cancel their service is a very old trick used by subscription services , from cable to satellite radio to gym memberships . new york times customer advocate david segal has written about this phenomenon repeatedly in his column the haggler , which includes a plea for help from alan alda , who couldn t figure out how to cancel his mcafee antivirus software . there are abundant horror stories about attempts to cancel siriusxm , which uses a popular euphemism for the art of frustrating customer attempts to leave churn management . the man who spoke to block is a retention specialist , a position comcast describes as equal parts detective , ally , troubleshooter , and negotiator in job listings . comcast s retention reps are paid a low hourly wage supplemented by a monthly commission that depends on how many customers they are able to drag back into the fold . for any number of reasons , customers may feel the need to make a change either to a lower level of xfinity service or even a different carrier . your job is to convince them that xfinity can meet their changing needs better and keep them in the family . job description for a retention specialist for comcast s streaming media servicethe practice is common at internet and phone service providers and at call centers across industries , but it must be uniquely challenging at comcast . the company has no competition in many of its markets , which makes customer satisfaction a low priority . as a result , comcast was recently named worst company in america in a consumerist poll , a title it snagged for the first time in . comcast declined to say how its employees are compensated , but one reddit commenter txmadison , who claims to have been a comcast employee for nearly years update the verge made contact with this user , who provided a pay stub , tax return , and internal memo as proof of employment , laid out these metrics first call resolution anytime a customer calls back within days , all the people in every department who ve talked to that customer within the days except the brand new person taking this call get hit for first call resolution , this is a metric everyone is judged on everyone on the phone regardless of what department they re in . average call length you re supposed to be off the phone within seconds , anything longer and your metric for average handled time is impacted which is bad . in the billing department their aht goal is even lower , at about seconds . incentive gates let s say that if you retain percent of your customers or more this means percent of the lines of businesses that customers have when they talk to you , they still have after they talk to you , you get percent of your payout which might be per line of business . at percent you might only get percent of your payout , and at percent you get nothing . the caes customer service reps watch these numbers daily , and will fight tooth and nail to stay above the i get nothing number . in other words , the incentive structure is really about punishment . reps start out the month with a full commission , but every canceled product deducts from that amount . once reps fall below a certain threshold , they get no commission at all . that means a rep could get all the way to the second to last day of the pay period only to have a customer cancel four products . suddenly the rep is below her goal , losing to , off her paycheck . metrics obsessed reps are therefore highly motivated to get every customer to not only continue service , but keep the same number of subscriptions phone , internet , xfinity or add more . essentially , these reps are trying to reach a predetermined outcome in the call , and they re trying to do it in under minutes . comcast has turned its customer service reps into sales reps . comcast likes to pretend to be customer first , txmadison writes . but then they turn around and provide an entire incentive structure that is decidedly not customer first . block s call was pretty typical , according to a former comcast employee who spoke to business insider . reviews of comcast s retention department on the anonymous job reviews site glassdoor said similar things . encouragement was through dollar amounts rather than actually helping customers fix their obvious account issues , one former employee writes . metrics were increasingly absurd in how it measured sales as the number one factor when the job was about retaining customers who were intent on canceling their subscription . comcast has turned its customer service reps into sales repscomcast denies that it has a systemic problem with its approach to customer retention . the way in which our representative communicated with them is unacceptable and not consistent with how we train our customer service representatives , the company said in a statement . i hope the quick action you take is a thorough evaluation of your culture and policies , and not the termination of the rep , block tweeted . it d be nice to think that comcast will change its policies so that reps are actually encouraged to do what s best for the customer . unfortunately , massive companies that don t face much competition tend to treat their customers poorly and their employees worse which is why block s call is the perfect argument against comcast s looming merger with time warner cable . 