 the company that turned live streaming into a sensation last year is ready to introduce its next act . meerkat , ampnbspwhich sparked new interest in mobile broadcasting before ampnbspsputtering amid competition from facebook and twitter , has returned with ampnbsphouseparty . it s an app for video chatting with friends that the company is calling a synchronous social network a place to be together even when you re apart . built under a pseudonym for months , the app for ampnbspandroid and ampnbspios has been gaining traction among young people around the country and it s closing in on million users . its creators say it encourages users to have frequent , candid conversations with their friends and family . the question houseparty will face now that the company is ready to talk about it is that same one that dogged meerkat can it last ? spontaneous togetherness last spring , when his company s live streaming app meerkat became an overnight sensation , ben rubin explained its popularity with two words spontaneous togetherness . starting a broadcast with a couple of taps from a mobile phone , reaching a huge audience of friends and interested strangers , proved irresistible when meerkat ampnbsphad its breakout moment at south by southwest . the company quickly raised million in new funding from investors who thought it could be the next major social platform . then the idea of spontaneous togetherness seemed to spontaneously combust . twitter ampnbspblocked meerkat s access to its social graph and released a significantly more polished live streaming app of its own , periscope , within weeks . facebook built live streaming into its flagship mobile app , which has more than billion monthly users , a few months later . suddenly meerkat was in a three way fight against two companies with significantly more resources at their disposal . meerkatbut from rubin s perspective , meerkat faced an even bigger problem most people simply don t want to broadcast themselves regularly . meerkat users might launch a broadcast a handful of times , but the distance between each broadcast grew larger every time a week between broadcast six and seven , a month between seven and eight . we don t see the category of live media breaking out as we envisioned it last summer , rubin told me last week at the company s offices in san francisco . everybody felt like this is going to be the next big thing . and we did scratch the surface . but what we ended up with is that live is a great feature on top of an existing network . it s not quite yet in a place where it can justify a whole new medium and a whole new set of behaviors where everyone is doing it on a daily basis . in august the company whose actual name is life on air went back to the drawing board . it wasn t the first time the company had previously built yevvo , an earlier take on broadcasting that focused on locations and air , an app for live streaming between friends . after yevvo became a ghost town , the team hacked together meerkat in eight weeks . its success gave them another chance but now the ground was falling out from underneath them again . group video chat for up to eight friendsat a retreat , rubin and his newly hired chief operating officer , sima sistani , asked their team which parts of meerkat they actually enjoyed using . the majority said broadcasts were the most fun when a close friend or family member joined the broadcast to talk with them . rubin wondered whether that might serve as the basis for meerkat s next act . as they had before , the company hacked together a working prototype . open the app and it would immediately begin to broadcast using the front facing camera , while notifying your friends that you were live or as the company now says , in the house . up to seven other friends could join you with a tap , appearing on your phone s screen in video windows of their own . they called the app houseparty a name designed to suggest good times while courting a hip , young demographic . housepartyeven among supporters , some worried whether they were giving up on what meerkat calls one to many broadcasting too soon . i was a little bit skeptical , said josh elman , a partner at greylock ventures and member of the meerkat board . he thought meerkat might still have room to grow , and worried a private broadcasting app might find it difficult to acquire users . but the team loved using their creation , and elman supported the effort . the only problem meerkat didn t want to associate its name with the new product . the company had just raised millions of dollars in support of public live streaming , after all , and a pivot to private sharing was likely to generate noisy criticism . it would also put enormous pressure on the company s next product to be an outsized success . and so the former meerkat staged a hoax . it launched houseparty on android and ios with no fanfare , listing the developer as alexander herzick which happens to be the name of sistani s husband . they chose him as their front man because of his almost nonexistent social media profile . later , after houseparty rose to no . in the app store s top downloads chart , the company built fake facebook and linkedin pages for herzick to support the illusion . when venture capitalists would email him asking to meet , the company responded by sending them daft punk gifs . soon the company dispatched employees to college campuses in alabama , ohio , and arkansas . they met with fraternities , sororities , and other student groups to show them how the app worked . students began using the app to make friday night plans , to reminisce the morning after , and to do homework together during the week . students use it to do make plans and do homeworkfor the company , the best news was that users weren t abandoning the app after five or six broadcasts . instead they returned several times a week and invited their friends . houseparty spread to all states and then other countries . then the company almost lost it all again . by may , houseparty was growing so fast that the team of about people couldn t keep up . users would open the app and find that it wouldn t connect , or the call would drop . everyone was like , it s a good problem to have , sistani said . in the moment it doesn t feel like a good problem to have . app store reviews went from effusively positive to strongly negative . the number of new users slowed to a crawl . the next month , the app s connection to meerkat was revealed by recode . it also laid off about five people , according to recode . but houseparty hired kyle maxwell , a former senior engineer at twitter , to help address its scaling problems . user growth started to pick up again once the school year started , and the team is beginning to dream big again . the idea , rubin says , is to create a live , always on place that you can dip in and out of whenever you want . in his mind , it s the best part of live streaming , minus the social anxieties that come from calling someone or initiating a facetime call . no one ends their day by calling five friends , says sistani , who was formerly the head of media partnerships at tumblr . but if you could talk to five friends simultaneously , even while you were apart , you just might . we have a ton of spaces , mobile networks , where we share and we engage and we interact in an asynchronous way , elman told me over the phone . but we don t have many spaces that we go together at the same time to chill , to hang out , to interact , to be live . look at us having this live phone call this is a very different interaction than you sharing a photo and me liking it . those are all really powerful , too . but i still think this idea of these actual spaces is really important . houseparty has some goofy touches that will endear it to a younger crowd . a friend of a friend can enter your chat , and when they do , a banner warning stranger danger ! flashes on your screen . you can wave at other users to send them a push notification inviting them to join you like a facetime call , sure , but a bit less thirsty . and you can lock your room for privacy . so far it s all free , and there are no ads to be found anywhere . we re making a bet that live video is as real as it gets . if you re older than , houseparty might not be for you . an app that requires me to shoot video of myself is not something i m going to do much of during the work week . if i were , though , i can easily imagine myself opening it up after class to talk about homework and the day s gossip with my friends . a social network for generation z might look something like this , sistani says . she linked the popularity of snapchat among young people with the informal , authentic forms of sharing that it encourages . you might even call it . . . spontaneous togetherness . everything in this new generation is trying to come back to what feels real , she says . so we re making a bet that live video is as real as it gets . 