 demand for secret messaging apps is rising as trump takes office two weeks after the us presidential election , reverend rebecca bryan stepped up to her pulpit in the boston suburb of brookline and looked out on her congregation . the liberal unitarian universalists at first parish were already gearing up for political action , a central tenet of the church s year old mission . the members regularly protest for immigration and prison reform . post election , they were debating turning the church into a sanctuary for undocumented immigrants . that sunday , bryan shared an idea about how to communicate whats app , she said , enunciating the two syllables as if trying the name out for the first time . a group that is entirely encrypted , where we know what we share is completely safe . nathan freitas , a software developer and privacy activist , was sitting in the pews . i m like , did my reverend just use the word encryption ? did my reverend just use the word encryption ? freitas had mentioned whatsapp to reverend bryan as a tool for the parish s social action because last year , the world s most popular messaging app updated to using end to end encryption by default . that means messages don t live on servers and aren t readable to eavesdroppers , or even whatsapp s parent company , facebook . overnight , the words typed by a billion people were whisked from the threat of surveillance , thanks to the code developed by a san francisco open source project called open whisper systems . founded in by idealistic cryptographer moxie marlinspike , open whisper developed the protocol adopted by not only whatsapp , but facebook messenger s secret conversations feature , and google allo s incognito mode . open whisper also has its own flagship messaging app called signal , and people have been flocking to it since the election . on november th signal vaulted up app annie s ranking of the most popular ios social networking apps , from th place to th . worldwide downloads grew percent in the last quarter of , with nearly half a million downloads coming from the us . as activists and wary citizens prepare for a president elect who seemingly disdains the first amendment , flirts with the idea of creating a muslim registry , and will soon sit atop a powerful surveillance apparatus , signal has become the gateway drug to the encrypted life . while trump s election helped propel signal toward the mainstream , the trump era heralds more uncertainty for encryption s already uncertain future . on one hand , law and order trump has made statements about protecting the country from hacks , announcing in early january that he d start a committee in his first days in office to combat cyberattacks we re like the hacking capital of the world , he told reporters . yet he s also spoken critically about encryption and privacy protections . on the campaign trail , trump blasted apple for refusing to break into the iphone of one of the san bernardino shooters and spoke enviously about russia s hacking of the democratic national committee i wish i had that power , he said at a press conference , man , that would be power . trump has already appointed encryption critic jeff sessions as head of the justice department , and robust surveillance advocate mike pompeo to head the cia . in the meantime , signal s post election popularity appears to be more than a temporary blip . marlinspike said the app is getting more sustained daily downloads than open whisper s encrypted products did after its second biggest boost edward snowden s revelations about the surveillance conducted by the nsa . it was five weeks since the election when i met moxie marlinspike at the humble office he shares in san francisco s mission district . open whisper s logo is printed on a sheet of paper and taped to the door , which marlinspike opened as he showed me into the kitchen . an aerobics class pounded through the ceiling . his blond dreads were gathered into a ponytail , and he wore a black hoodie zipped over another black hoodie the cliche hacker getup , squared . i don t have a lot of clothes , he explained . while he now lives in an oakland apartment , marlinspike used to have a more itinerant lifestyle he lived in a warehouse after moving to san francisco in the late s as a college shirking coding wunderkind . he took breaks from software jobs to indulge his wanderlust , sailing around the bahamas and jumping trains across the us . in , he posted a picture on his instagram standing next to signal s most famous endorser , edward snowden , in moscow . but all those biographical facts come from the internet marlinspike is cagey on all personal details , reticent to reveal anything beyond the fact that he s now housed . he s equally tight lipped on the election , not revealing whether he d even voted . marlinspike is a reluctant participant in silicon valley s startup culture . when i was a kid , entrepreneur was not a compliment , he said . that wasn t the kind of thing college kids sat around in their dorm rooms dreaming about . marlinspike worked for other software companies for years , and his first startup , whisper systems , was put on hold when he was acquihired by twitter in to head its security department . the gig didn t last long . fourteen months later , marlinspike walked away from million in stock options , quitting after a near death sailing incident in san francisco bay to get back to the work that most fascinated him . he returned to developing two encrypted apps for android textsecure for messaging , and redphone for calls . in , he folded both services into signal . signal s clean blue and white design makes it nearly indistinguishable from any other messenger . apart from a few missing features like sending voice messages on ios development is in progress , there s little it can t do . signal is widely regarded as the best in field for security , both for its encryption and for retaining less info on its users than other privacy focused apps . people also tout its ease , devoid of the clunky shenanigans of pgp encryption . the only hint of its underlying security is when using signal for phone calls . once both parties are connected , each is given a random pairing of words to confirm the identity of the person on the other end of the line . if encryption is difficult it self selects for people willing to jump through those hoops , and bad guys are always willing to jump through the hoopsthree years in , open whisper is still running with a skeleton crew just five employees , plus more than a dozen contributors in the open source community . marlinspike wants to grow that team , and he s hunting for talent willing to sacrifice the usual tech salaries and cush silicon valley perks . the website states that there s no gym membership , but any time you feel like doing push ups , we ll do them with you . open whisper doesn t patent its open source protocol , giving it away to the most highly valued companies on the planet for free . instead , open whispers work is completely funded by private donors and foundation grants . marlinspike declined to name individual donors , and tax forms don t disclose them . marlinspike s goal isn t unicorn riches , but unicorn ubiquity . for that , he wants to make encrypted messaging as easy as beautiful , as fun , as expressive , as emoji laden as your default messaging app . his reason if encryption is difficult , it self selects for people willing to jump through those hoops . and bad guys are always willing to jump through the hoops . isis or high risk criminal activity will be willing to click two extra times , he told me . you and i are not . what ? ! i ask . you are , aren t you ? at this point no , he said . i m unwilling . i don t use pgp . i don t do any wing nut stuff . i just want to be a normal person . unless you have facebook and gmail , you won t understand what people s expectations are . marlinspike thinks the reign of the crypto nerds has lasted long enough there are some people who ve built an identity around learning how to use this crazy stuff . and if the basis of your identity is you have master skills that are difficult to use , you re not incentivized to help other people to do it . marlinspike wants to make encryption uncoolly mainstream , in the way facebook became uncool when everyone s parents got an account . that s because marlinspike said people will find that the classic dismissal of encryption i have nothing to hide isn t actually true if the government or nefarious hackers target them . who doesn t have an email sitting in their inbox that would embarrass them to death should it be revealed ? and marlinspike wrote that with , pages of federal statutes and , administrative regulations , you probably do have something to hide , you just don t know it yet . with complete computer security now impossible , he said , the only way to ensure privacy is to make the hacked spoils useless like a thief getting into a lockbox to find only lumps of coal . if you have an unencrypted email sitting somewhere , it will become public , he states plainly with no hint of alarm . that is the inevitable outcome . there s no question washington learned the value of better encryption during the presidential election , with the hacks of the democratic national committee and hillary clinton s campaign chairman john podesta . after the dnc learned it had been compromised , clinton s campaign staffers were instructed to use signal for any communications regarding trump . it was , marlinspike said , a good decision . cam floyd though digital security buffs have long preached about tor and signal at professional conferences , for many surveillance can seem like a distant threat , one that is logistically annoying and just a little tinfoil hatty to deal with . certainly , some communities have been vigilant about the safety of their communications . snowden and laura poitras were early signal adopters and hearty endorsers . civil rights activists also used the app early on , having dealt with government spying since at least cointelpro , continuing on to the fbi s surveillance flights above black lives matter protests . first of all , black communities been knowing that we had to code our communications , said malkia cyril of the oakland based center for media justice , who has used signal to organize black lives matter actions with other activists since . we been coding our communications since slavery . the knowledge of the need is not what s missing for us . it s the skills and the information . but for the ranks of the lazy , oblivious , or those privileged enough to assume they wouldn t be targeted , there was always an excuse to put off switching to encrypted communication . i m not doing anything wrong so what do i care about the nsa , as one documentary filmmaker put it to me recently , or , as summed up in a recent google chat with a friend , i ve debated that . . . but it seems like so much work ! trump s election has prompted many to reconsider their relationship to surveillance . the week after the election , deanna zandt , a brooklyn based digital strategist with hot pink and purple hair , sent out an email to her clients advocating signal . hey y all , as the future looms so pale in front of us , a lot of us tech folks are gearing up for the long haul . i wanted to make sure that everyone feels like they have a handle on how to keep themselves secure online , she wrote . for the ranks of the lazy , oblivious , or those privileged enough to assume they wouldn t be targeted , there was always an excusezandt advises nonprofits like race forward , women action ampamp the media , and planned parenthood , organizations that are not just worried about government surveillance , but doxxing from political opponents . there s a reason people volunteer to be clinic escorts in the offline world , zandt said . we need the equivalent of that level of security in the online world as well . that doesn t mean everyone is psyched about the logistics of it when zandt stood before a race forward staff meeting in new york recently and instructed them to swap out their legions of saved passwords for more complicated ones , she was met with groans . when we talked about the revelations of snowden , it was hard to convince some folks on the progressive side to care , said josh levy , advocacy director of access now , a nonprofit that runs a digital security hotline to counsel activists around the world on how to avoid surveillance . i would talk to folks about the vulnerability of their data and reliance on large commercial platforms , but because of their trust in the president meaning obama they didn t pay attention to it . i d say , what if trump came to have access to that data ? americans had been a minority of callers to access now s digital security hotline . in the weeks post election , americans dominated it . the nascent trump opposition has also been organizing a slew of digital privacy crash courses . the human rights organization security first said they ve gotten post election requests from us media and community groups for digital security consulting , double the amount they normally get over an entire year . cyril s center for media justice co hosted a forum to discuss police surveillance in washington , dc , and the freedom of the press foundation the fiscal sponsor of open whisper systems spoke at a standing room only brooklyn cryptoparty in early december called communicating in trump s america . that event was a coming out of sorts for the newly crypto woke , people like phyllis , a year old gif artist in brooklyn , whose website portrait features her lying on candy in a gummy worm sweatshirt . phyllis considers herself an amateur activist . she had always been interested in online privacy given that her laptop is her primary work tool , but common story had never actually gotten around to doing much about it . jarred by trump s election , she s helping organize a group of graphic designers to do pro bono work for civil rights causes . she came away from the cryptoparty with an action item for the graphic designers first meeting everyone join a signal group chat . friends doing activism stuff are more proactive about it , phyllis said . my friends who are not as involved don t see the need to do it . i texted a friend like are you meeting me at a certain time ? and no response . so i gave up on logistical non activism stuff . some users say they re constantly arbitraging texts political info to signal , banalities to other messengers . if you re talking about the emmys , please get up off my signal , said cyril of the center for media justice . i don t need to encrypt a conversation with my wife about what groceries we need to buy . but jp , a bay area documentary filmmaker , got his family on the app , and they re already using it for not so sensitive intel to wit we are gonna study at brianna s house but going to trader joe s real quick for snacks . marlinspike said now is the perfect time for signal to teeter on default status in politically active circles . people don t generally interrupt a protest to ask , wait a second , what app should we be using ? he said . that s why making this stuff the new normal and a successful part of everyday life is important . so for marlinspike , an arguably bigger moment for encryption than the election came when whatsapp or the secret conversations feature of facebook messenger adopted his protocol , inching him closer to his goal that signal style encryption becomes so universal that he works himself out of his job , mary poppins style . if you re talking about the emmys , please get up off my signal . while the makers of encrypted services say they ve seen previous spikes in activity around current events , trump s rise seems different . nathan freitas , the unitarian universalist developer , directs an open source organization called the guardian project , which created the tor browser for android named orbot . when a brazilian judge outlawed whatsapp for a few days in may , downloads of orbot shot up percent in the first hours . another spike came after the turkish prime minister briefly blocked twitter during protests . freitas said daily orbot downloads in the united states are up percent after the election , and holding steady . he s also been fielding demands for more secure options on ios including an updated tor browser and a way to route apps through tor . and freitas has witnessed other post election changes his year collection of activists in his phone contacts have begun pinging him on signal . we ll see a time bound spike for a day or a week and then things go back to normal . what s different in this case , freitas said of trump s election , is things don t go back to normal . like signal , the guardian project is partially funded by the open technology fund , a federally funded program that , since , channels money to technologies that promote transparent societies , circumvent censorship , or skirt surveillance around the globe . we just never anticipated it was going to become a domestic issue , because we were thinking about tyrannies , a source close to the otf said . marlinspike said it would be a shame if the new administration interfered in future otf funding for encryption . the money for the fund is earmarked by congress , so it s subject to political tinkering and has fluctuated over its five year life . still , support for internet freedom appears in appropriations bills since , fanned out over several departments . why would we the us stop supporting something that upsets russia , iran , and north korea ? the source close to otf said . if those people hate this work , i would continue to do it . cam floyd it s unclear how the new administration s actions could affect the new crypto awakening . increasingly aggressive surveillance policies could solidify the interest , prompting more people to make signal their default messaging app . but there are several ways the administration could make things difficult for the project , and though trump hasn t yet said signal by name , all signs point to him not liking the concept one bit . trump badgered apple earlier this year for refusing to decrypt one of the san bernardino shooter s iphones at the request of the fbi who do they think they are ? he sneered in an interview on fox ampamp friends . meanwhile , marlinspike literally led a round of applause to praise apple s position onstage at a san francisco cryptography conference , stating , i actually think that law enforcement should be difficult . and , in fact , i think it actually should be possible to break the law . i don t like isis . fuck those people , right ? it s not like i m happy that they re using signal . back at his mission district headquarters , marlinspike clarified his statement . he said he s not agnostic about how people are using signal . i have opinions . i don t like isis . fuck those people , right ? it s not like i m happy that they re using signal or something like that . but , he said , bad actors will always find a way to encrypt their communications , while the average person will only do so if it s easy . yet that criminal activity or at least the suspicion thereof will always provide the major argument against encryption . signal was legally challenged for the first time last year , when a federal grand jury in alexandria , virginia , subpoenaed all signal data , messages , and subscriber details associated with two phone numbers for an unspecified criminal investigation . one turned out not to be a signal user . for the other , signal disclosed the only info it logs when the phone number first downloaded the app , and the last time they used the service . signal also lawyered up with aclu attorneys and challenged the grand jury s gag order forbidding them from publicizing the subpoena . signal won , and wrote a blog post about the ordeal . the new administration will have a range of policy carrots and sticks at its disposal . ultimately , it s not going to be possible to stop encryption from being used by people , said electronic frontier foundation executive director cindy cohn , because encryption is applied math , and it turns out you can t ban math . but the government can do a lot to discourage use of the tools . for instance , cohn said , lawmakers could require a backdoor to messages for law enforcement , or the fbi could pressure companies into weakening security . companies are susceptible because maybe they want to be a government contractor , or cooperate with investors or business partners that insinuate that they cooperate with law enforcement , cohn said . i don t have a clear map of all the pressure points , but it s not hard to think about the various ways this could happen . in december , a house working group released a report advocating a middle ground approach to any future regulations , arguing encryption was necessary for national defense and to safeguard critical infrastructure , yet creates trouble for law enforcement that cannot be ignored . as our interview wrapped up , marlinspike hopped into the elevator to head out into the dark too early december afternoon at the corner of th and mission . the street has hosted its share of both world series victory riots and political marches . i d read that marlinspike used to attend political protests , and when i asked if he attended an anti trump one , he just answered , i don t really want to talk about that , and smiled . he questions why reporters label him an anarchist . well , is that a misnomer ? he paused for awhile , then replied , it s complicated . that falls into his personal beliefs , a topic he doesn t want to talk much about . i m not at all used to being a public figure , you know what i mean ? i m a private person . i m less interested in asking people to stop surveilling us , than doing things so that they can t surveil us . marlinspike prefers to let his tech speak for itself a tool with clear political implications and anti authoritarian uses . that s where he s more useful anyways , he said pushing code , not policy . i m happy to support people fighting that fight for encryption , but simply people like apple computer or facebook are probably better positioned to have those conversations than i am . marlinspike instead will force the issue by continuing to roll out his protocol . he likens signal to the demonstrators at standing rock , who stopped the oil pipeline by physically blocking its construction . i m less interested in asking people to stop surveilling us , than doing things so that they can t surveil us , marlinspike said . that direct action is what i want to continue to focus on . lately he s gotten some experience sparring with governments trying to ban his work . when signal was blocked in egypt and the united arab emirates in december , open whisper fought back successfully with a workaround for its android app . reading the news , i texted him on signal about whether he d do the same if ever blocked in the united states . his reply pings yeah we d work to make it available . 