 a family is gathered around the dinner table dad and the kids have spaghetti on their plates , mom is standing , serving spoon in hand . she cocks her head to the side and with a broad smile declares , don t thank me , thank the savings . the family freezes and a geico logo appears hovering over the table as a voice intones , you can t skip this geico ad , because it s already over . but the scene isn t actually frozen the family dog ambles up , slurping spaghetti off dad s fork . human eyes dart nervously , but bodies and smiles stay plastered in place . realizing his impunity , the shaggy beast climbs onto the table , gobbling up noodles , knocking over the salad , and generally causing mayhem . red dawnan inside look at youtube s new ad free subscription serviceby ben popper photography by cara robbins a family is gathered around the dinner table dad and the kids have spaghetti on their plates , mom is standing , serving spoon in hand . she cocks her head to the side and with a broad smile declares , don t thank me , thank the savings . the family freezes and a geico logo appears hovering over the table as a voice intones , you can t skip this geico ad , because it s already over . but the scene isn t actually frozen the family dog ambles up , slurping spaghetti off dad s fork . human eyes dart nervously , but bodies and smiles stay plastered in place . realizing his impunity , the shaggy beast climbs onto the table , gobbling up noodles , knocking over the salad , and generally causing mayhem . the ad , which won a grand prix at cannes this year , cleverly manipulates the conventions of youtube advertising a short , often skippable marketing message that runs before the video you actually want to watch . advertising has always paid the bills at youtube , which , over the last decade , has grown from an oddball collection of clips into the world s largest and most influential video portal . the service is on pace to earn around billion in revenue this year . but starting today , advertising will no longer be the only way youtube and its creators make money . the service is rolling out its biggest change yet a monthly subscription offering that completely removes ads from the equation . the new option is called youtube red . it costs . per month and will be available for purchase on october th , starting in the us , then rolling out worldwide . along with removing ads , subscribers will be able to save videos for offline viewing , and keep videos running in the background on mobile . that means you can listen to a music video or a ted talk while checking email or surfing instagram . that monthly fee also gives you access to google play music , meaning you get two streaming services for the same price spotify or apple music charge for one without video . as a final enticement , youtube will also begin putting new , exclusive content behind a paywall . red has the potential to dominate the industryat a star studded event in los angeles today , youtube introduced a slate of new originals available only to subscribers . the service plans to match its native stars with traditional hollywood and television production talent , all backed by a generous helping of google s money . the company is hoping that for a rising generation of consumers , a horror series from pewdiepie or a documentary about lilly singh will be equivalent to hbo s game of thrones , unique , must see programming that draws paying subscribers . with red , youtube is signaling a definitive shift from an ad funded video hosting service to a media company that will eventually go head to head with hulu and netflix . youtube has the potential to dominate the industry if just percent of its us viewers were to sign up for the service , it would add more than a billion dollars in annual revenue to the company s bottom line . robert kyncl , youtube s chief business officera week before today s announcement , i visited youtube s los angeles headquarters to meet with robert kyncl , the company s chief business officer . kyncl is the man tasked with growing youtube s content offerings , revenue and hopefully , someday , turning a profit . he was feeling under the weather and showed up with a box of tissues in one hand and a bottle of kombucha in the other . kyncl grew up behind the iron curtain in czechoslovakia and was recruited onto a government sponsored skiing team at a young age . he retains the athletic build and calm , confident demeanor of a highly trained athlete . over the last decade , kyncl has made a name for himself as a deal maker at the intersection of traditional media and technology . after working as an assistant to a talent agent , in he took a job at hbo . there , he helped consolidate hbo s eastern european channels and launch hbo india . later on as vp of content at netflix , he helped lead the transition from dvds to streaming video . from there , it was a natural jump to youtube , which he joined in . kyncl describes his role as making sure that this flywheel of value between creators , users , and advertisers is spinning at an increasing speed . we believe in the advertising business . on the face of it , youtube s new ad free subscription service seems like an existential threat to the advertisers the service has spent a decade courting . kyncl , ever the salesman , argues that red could boost creator earnings without cannibalizing the ad business . we believe in the advertising business . ninety nine point nine percent of the content on youtube will be free , as it always has been , he explained . so the world that all of our advertising partners are used to remains alive and well and watch time continues to grow at an astonishing percent year over year . there is nothing we are taking away from there , merely adding onto it . if everything plays out as kyncl hopes , there will be more money , more content , and more viewership overall . still , if the most passionate fans stopped looking at ads , wouldn t that make the service less appealing to marketers who want their brands associated with youtube stars ? let s take it to the extreme , said kyncl . say every paid television customers in the united states million individuals sign up for youtube red . that would still be less than a tenth of youtube s total audience , barely making a dent in the number of eyeballs that would be available to advertisers . kyncl laughed and we have a very long way to go to that kind of number . lt ! new pym . parent theverge copy of a brief history of youtube graphic , apps . voxmedia . com at theverge copy of a brief history of youtube , xdomain . . voxmedia . com gtyoutube red is not the first time the service has tried to get users to pay for videos . back in the spring of , youtube rolled out paid channels . a year later , the service introduced fan funding a tip jar where fans could donate as they please . those products didn t catch on , either because creators and users never fully understood them or were unaware they existed . on a platform as large as youtube , narrow a la carte solutions have a big challenge in terms of discovery and comprehension . that lesson was relearned when the company launched music key beta last year , a monthly subscription service that became the seed of youtube red . music key beta was focused exclusively on music videos , and for . a month , users could remove ads and use the app in background mode . even among users who enjoyed the service , the biggest pain point was that it wasn t all encompassing . the most common and most frequent point of confusion was why this set of features didn t work across youtube , says kyncl . his daughter , for example , loves music from the disney film frozen , but couldn t find it on music key . to her it s music , but it won t be in the service , and that seems odd to her . the response to music key led to a massive shift in strategy . initially the plan was to create and license content only across verticals where youtube was strongest music , gaming , and kids . each vertical would get a dedicated app and be available to subscribers ad free and with power features . but after the response from beta testers of music key , kyncl and his team decided it was all or nothing youtube red will work across every video on youtube as well as inside the dedicated music and gaming apps . getting permission to include every single video on youtube ad free was no easy task . kyncl and his team had to convince millions of independent creators , large and small , many of whom worried that their fans would be forced to pay in order to see all their videos , of the benefits of a subscription model . independent musicians and labels whipped up righteous anger across the web . fans and media glommed to the story . but for users who choose to opt out , the vast majority of videos will still be available on either side of the paywall , with ads for ordinary users and ad free for subscribers . youtube also had to convince its big music label , television network , and movie studio partners . many of these big media companies requested a more favorable cut of the subscription revenue than the service was offering to the average youtuber , on the grounds that their premium content would be the main driver of subscriptions . but youtube held out , and in the end almost all the big players came along . the only one that hasn t is disney , but youtube plans to forge ahead regardless , saying it has percent of its content covered by agreements with rights holders . the ability to land these deals and largely dictate their terms shows the position of strength from which youtube is negotiating . it makes a lot of sense . network and cable television have been experiencing massive ratings declines , while the hours spent watching youtube is up percent year over year , with an average session on mobile lasting over minutes . on mobile alone , the service reaches more to year olds than any cable network in the us . if a subscription model works , and that s a big if , youtube will begin earning far more per user than it could through advertising . i would have to watch thousands of videos each month to reach a payout of . in ads . but how will this new business model work for creators ? dehlia ford feliz never expected to make money posting videos on youtube . she was simply a diehard philadelphia eagles fan who wanted a way to share her reactions to the latest games . but when the team s rabid fan base found her clips and began sharing them , ford feliz found her videos racking up tens of thousands of views . over the last few years , she has made youtube into a full time career , posting several videos a week and doing live broadcasts around game days . youtube s pay per channel and donation systems were a flop i make a little bit of money from ads , not much , but something , she recently explained . the real money these days is in product placement ford feliz recently signed onto a major fantasy sports league as a sponsor . she also hosts live tailgate parties and sells merchandise . a lot of fans actually reach out to me because they want to donate , she said . fans mail ford feliz cash and checks one man asked if he could send her a monthly payment of a few hundred dollars . but he wanted ford feliz to sign a formal contract . i didn t feel comfortable sharing my personal information . it s a struggle because you want to make fans happy and of course you want to grow your business , but there isn t an easy way to do that directly on youtube . youtube red won t address ford feliz s direct payment problem the pay per channel and donation system that the service previously implemented was a flop , and kyncl is adamant about not trying that again . but he believes that in the long run , red could meaningfully increase what creators earn . with the advertising model , youtube takes percent of the revenue , and the remaining percent goes to creators . with red , creators will be paid a percentage of the total subscription revenue , minus youtube s s cut , based on the watchtime of their videos each month . the more devoted their fan base , the bigger that check could become . youtube won t share the exact percentage it plans to take from red , but says creators will still get the majority of subscription revenue . jack conte , the founder of the crowdfunding service patreon and a musician who makes a large part of his living through videos , doesn t think red will bring about significant improvements for creators . subscription services are great for consumers . pay bucks and have any song or any video in your pocket , whenever you want , he says . but for the creators , there is still way too much of a middleman . youtube risks replicating the dynamics of today s streaming music worldconte says a subscription service like youtube s risks replicating the dynamics of today s streaming music world , where even millions of listens bring in paltry revenue . my art might be worth to a superfan , but if she is listening on spotify , even with a subscription , i am still only getting pennies every time she interacts with what i have made . kyncl thinks highly of services like patreon , but says he doesn t want to try and bring that model to youtube . the narrow a la carte focused solutions or funding mechanisms only get to the superfans . what we can deliver is not only the superfans , but also the casual fans , and where you generate the most amount of revenue , is the casual fan area . youtube is the place where anyone can start , and where the biggest stars are well rewarded . in the middle , where full time creators might struggle , they can turn to merchandising , crowdfunding , and offline events to fill the gap . we have to look at what we are strong at , says kyncl . and that s scale . when it comes to scale , to the sheer size of its video library , youtube has no peers . and with more than hours of new video uploaded every minute , it is unlikely that anyone will catch up soon . but in terms of its audience , youtube no longer stands alone . video , specifically mobile video , is the hottest segment of the advertising business , and hundreds of billions of dollars , slowly shifting away from television , print , and other traditional media , are up for grabs . red could go a long way to keeping talent on youtubeyoutube s toughest and most rapidly rising rival is facebook . in september of , facebook said that it was serving up billion video views a day . less than a year later , that number had climbed to billion daily views . the videos were also no longer coming from youtube . today more than percent of facebook videos are uploaded natively , and the social network is aggressively courting advertisers and talent . in addition to youtube , we see our clients getting big traction on platforms like facebook , instagram , snapchat , and vine , said dan porter , head of digital for one of hollywood s top talent agencies , wme img . it s clear that right now , talent is up for grabs . porter says that red could play a key role in that battle for stars . subscription , if it succeeds , could go a long way to keeping talent on youtube , because it could help fund bigger scripted series . brian weiser , an industry analyst with pivotal research , agrees . but he thinks in order to really compete as a subscription service against the likes of netflix , hulu , and hbo , youtube will need to start licensing premium content . kyncl also believes red needs premium content , but he is committed to creating it on youtube s terms . the service has no plans to pay big bucks to license the nfl or seinfeld , kyncl told me . he sees hulu , amazon , netflix , hbo , and others all bidding for the right to show the same films and tv series , all trying to grab the hottest actors , producers , and directors to make originals . he wants to move against that tide . to us what is important is we are not doing what everyone else is doing , competing for the same sources of material , the same creative elements . we are looking for people who are proven to work really well on our platform . pewdiepie will be matched with the producer of the walking deadyoutube originals pair stars who were born on the platform with top talent from film and television . what we realized is that in many cases , content creators on youtube have worked on a shoestring budget for many years , and have built super fan bases basically on zero budgets , says kyncl . in order to scale up , it takes a different kind of enterprise , a different kind of skill set there is a story telling skill set , there is showrunning , etc . in the near future , pewdiepie will be matched with the producer of the walking dead to make a scripted horror series very different from his one man vlogs . youtube originals is also helping to produce and promote a documentary about the world tour of comedian lilly singh . left to its own devices , youtube will continue to grow rapidly , to produce its own specific brand of stars , and to attract millions of passionate fans and billions of casual viewers . but can it find a way to take that talent and supercharge it into something that appeals to a wider audience ? is it possible for youtube to grow into something more serious , or is it just throwing away money by crafting polished , professional shows that simply won t thrive on its platform ? money from subscription revenue , kyncl hopes , will help figure that out . youtube is already shelling out millions to keep its top stars from straying . it hopes that the subscription revenue will provide another enticement for them to stay , and provide ammunition to battle a growing crowd of competitors from the worlds of web and television . what s happening is that the internet is doing to cable what cable did to broadcast . it s just broadening the set of choices , says kyncl . you have to really learn how to function in a fragmented world . i think that youtube is incredibly well positioned for that world . edited by michael zelenko