 even in an era when social networks are constantly pushing us to share more of ourselves , paul davison s projects stand out for their pushiness . davison s first foray into social apps was highlight , which broadcast your profile to everyone in your immediate surroundings . davison s idea was that if enough people passively shared their basic personal details , it would allow for all sorts of serendipitous real world connections . in late , when so called people discovery apps like highlight were on the wane , i met with davison to see a redesigned version of highlight . it took the oversharing premise of the original app and doubled down on it , broadcasting your motion state sitting , running , biking , or driving and even what song you were listening to . as with the first version , highlight . landed with a thud the company never disclosed user numbers , but it recorded fewer than , downloads on android . but one feature of highlight did resonate , davison says today photos . the most popular behavior on highlight was to open the profile of someone on the network and flip through the profile photos they had uploaded . but people didn t upload new photos every often , so the app s most popular behavior came to feel like a dead end . and so davison being davison , he took a flying leap to to a new question what if your friends could see every photo you took ? what if your friends could see every photo you took ? if you ve ever taken an unflattering photo , or a naked one , few ideas sound more terrifying . but plenty of successful social networks once sounded like terrible ideas , davison points out . if you look at the most interesting and loved and useful social products over the last years , you ll find that lots of them have pushed us to share a little more openly than perhaps we felt comfortable doing , he says . before linkedin you would never put your resume online that was a taboo . your employer wouldn t like it . but now of course that s the norm , and it s so useful to be able to see people s backgrounds . before facebook came out it was strange to put photos of your kids online who knows who s out there on the internet ? but now of course you can do that . this line of thinking led to today s release of shorts , a social camera roll for ios . you do control which photos on your camera roll your friends see , but davison says his goal is to get people to share as close to percent of the photos they take as possible . when we build products , we enjoy thinking about places where we could push people a little bit , and give them a really good experience , he says . and what we ve found is that when people first hear about the concept , it might sound a little bit more than what they re used to doing . . . . but once they feel comfortable with that , they realize what a benefit it is to be able to be see what your friends are doing throughout the day , to be able to see so much more about their lives . most photos are buried on our camera rollsdavison argues that most of the photos we take on our phones are effectively useless , because they get buried on our camera rolls and are never shared with anyone . and it s a shame , he says , because those photos contain the moments that show us as we truly are lounging around the house , playing with our kids , shopping for groceries . share those moments with friends , he says , and we ll all feel more connected . open up shorts and you can add friends via their usernames or phone numbers . when you open the app , it presents you with the latest photos from your camera roll . swipe up to share the pictures or down to keep them private . an activity feed shows you your friends tap them and you ll see their last pictures and videos . all of your own photos and videos remain visible to yourself on your profile . swipe up to like friends photos , or down to skip them . you can also tap the photos to add comments . in keeping with highlight s oversharing roots , there s also a discover feed friends of friends and other people shorts thinks you might know . by default , their last photos are visible to everyone . you can make your feed private if you like via the app s settings . within minutes of joining shorts , i received several requests to view my camera roll from strangers and even though i had carefully selected which photos i wanted to share , i still found the requests unnerving and ignored them . if the idea of sharing life s more intimate moments with a small group of friends sounds familiar , it s likely because you ve already used snapchat and its stories feature . a set of rolling photos and videos that are visible for only hours after they re posted , stories is snapchat s best feature and , by all accounts , its most popular . people feel more comfortable sharing knowing that it s all going to disappear , and the result is a network that often feels more lively and authentic than its peers . shorts can feel like a choresnapchat requires you to post photos and videos using the in app camera . with shorts , there s a clumsy extra step after you take the photos , you have to open the app , then go through every photo to decide what you want to share . if you take a lot of photos every day or just use burst mode once or twice this process can feel like a chore . and the delay between taking photos and posting them means that not everything you share is going to be in real time , robbing shorts of snapchat s live action appeal . the first version of shorts , which was never publicly released , omitted the swipe to share mechanic and simply broadcast your camera roll to friends . the problem , as you might imagine , was it was scary , davison says . you don t want to be edgy in the wrong way . you want people to use the product . the public version of shorts may be less scary , but it still strikes me as totalitarian a bid to turn one of our last private digital spaces into yet another forum for likes and comments . snapchat gets us to share more of ourselves because we fundamentally feel safe there . shorts , by contrast , feels like a high wire act . couples or families might find it to be a cute app for keeping in touch . but i d rather keep my camera roll to myself . 