 facebook faced withering criticism in the us for allowing fake news to spread during the presidential election . now , the social network has come under similar scrutiny in germany , amid concerns that widespread disinformation campaigns could impact upcoming elections . false and misleading news articles have spread rapidly across europe in recent months , prompting calls for new legislation and tougher regulations on social media companies . the reaction has been particularly aggressive in germany , where authorities recently opened an investigation into the matter . the german government , which has traditionally taken a firmer hand than the us in regulating tech companies , is also considering measures that would impose fines on facebook for publishing fake news . yet some fear that government intervention could backfire in germany , where memories of totalitarian rule and propaganda are still fresh , while others have downplayed the effect that fake news could have on the political landscape . under mounting pressure from lawmakers , facebook announced this week that it will begin filtering fake news for users in germany , marking the first expansion of an initiative that launched in the us in december . in a german language post announcing the expansion , facebook said it will wok with correctiv , a berlin based nonprofit media organization , to fact check articles reported as dubious , and that it aims to bring other media groups onboard . fighting fake news is essential for our society . we think fighting fake news is essential for our society , david schraven , correctiv s publisher , said in an email . people should make their decision on the basis of true information . but details on the partnership remain unclear . schraven said that the facebook project is still in a planning phase , and that correctiv is unsure of how many people will be needed to work on it . he added that facebook is not paying correctiv during this phase , and that the organization will determine how to pay for it after we know what needs to be done . facebook will not be paying fact checkers , according to a person familiar with the matter . it was previously reported that the company would not pay fact checking organizations in the us , either . the scope of germany s fake news problem was detailed in a report from buzzfeed news this week , which found that many fabricated and misleading news articles have targeted chancellor angela merkel and her open door policy toward refugees . sites such as anonymousnews . ru , rapefugees . net , and noch . info regularly publish incendiary stories about refugees and islam , as well as pro russia propaganda . photo by johannes simon getty images many fake news articles in germany aim to stir anti muslim sentiment . there is some evidence that such articles are gaining traction . an article falsely claiming that merkel took a selfie with one of the terrorists involved in an attack on brussels garnered more than , engagements on facebook , according to buzzfeed s analysis . a factual account of the photograph , which was taken with a refugee , generated less than , engagements , the website reported . the syrian refugee who took the photo has also filed a lawsuit against facebook for allowing the rumor to spread . merkel has warned of the effect that fake news could have on upcoming elections , suggesting that russia may be seeking to interfere with elections in germany as it is believed to have done in the us . merkel is seeking re election later this year . justice minister heiko maas has also suggested that facebook should be treated as a media company , which would make it liable for fake news or hate speech published to its site , while german lawmakers are considering a law that would fine social networks that publish fake news . reuters reported this week that facebook executives have been working to dissuade german politicians from adopting stricter regulations . the issue of fake news is , to most of us , very troublesome and worrisome , says christian schemer , professor of communications at the university of mainz . it has reached a quality that keeps officials busy . false and exaggerated news stories in germany have so far not led to violence , in the way the pizzagate conspiracy did in the us . but there have been real world consequences . police in the city of dortmund were recently forced to debunk a false report , published by breitbart , which claimed that a , man mob chanting allahu akbar set fire to a church on new year s eve . last year , reports of a russian german girl being kidnapped and raped by migrants led to far right protests in germany , prompting russia s foreign minister to criticize german authorities . the girl later admitted to making up the story , but not before it had been widely circulated in russian media and right leaning websites . i fear that this will only increase the distrust in media . german far right leaders haven t appropriated the term fake news in the way that donald trump uses it to belittle mainstream media in the us something that has fueled calls to retire the term . but the far right party alternative for germany afd regularly describes mainstream newspapers as the pinocchio press , while the anti immigrant pegida movement has revived the term lying press , which was used by the nazis . some activists in germany have taken it upon themselves to debunk false reports . a site called hoaxmap , which launched in february of last year , maps instances of false reporting on alleged crimes committed by refugees across germany , and includes police statements or other news reports that disprove them . to date , the site has documented false reports on asylum seekers , many of which contained allegations of rape and violence . another watchdog organization , called schmalbart , was created to keep tabs on breitbart , which plans to launch in both germany and france this year . karolin schwarz , one of hoaxmap s co founders , says she s seen a steady stream of online hoaxes since the summer of , when germany saw an influx of asylum seekers . from march through december , hoaxmap actually saw a decrease in refugee related hoaxes , but schwarz says they ve increased since the attack on a christmas market in berlin late last year . she also casts doubt on facebook s filtering initiative , saying that it may prompt allegations of censorship and further undermine confidence in the mainstream media . trust in media is weak in germany , so i fear that this will only increase the distrust in media , since people are framing this as an attempt of censorship , schwarz said in an email , adding that facebook has not been in touch with hoaxmap about a partnership . maybe this could work , but we sure need other ways to deal with this . i take this as a sign of a healthy system that can correct itself . some doubt that fake news will have much of an impact on upcoming elections in germany , where propaganda and disinformation campaigns were widespread throughout the th century . according to wolfgang m hl benninghaus , professor of media studies at humboldt university , recent history has made germans more wary of misleading news reports . we had a lot of fake news during the weimar republic , we had fake news in the third reich , m hl benninghaus says . we have an understanding of our history . there are also concerns over government interference in the media in the run up to german elections , which will be held in september . the government has reportedly considered setting up a press bureau to track and combat fake news , but there is reluctance among those who fear the institution being seen as a ministry of truth . leaders in the czech republic created their own anti fake news unit this year to counteract propaganda campaigns allegedly carried out by russia . schemer acknowledges that germany s recent history may make media consumers more alert to propaganda and disinformation , though he says there is still a small subculture that continues to spread radical ideas . social media has also made it easier for them to reach large audiences , he says , while making it more difficult for fact checkers and law enforcement to identify them . still , schemer says he s reassured by the speed with which many hoaxes have been debunked by the media and law enforcement . i take this as a sign of a healthy system that can correct itself , he says , adding so to this extent i m optimistic . but maybe we can talk after september this year . maybe this impression will have changed . 