 five years ago , craig d . adams was riding a toronto streetcar home after a long day at work , when he looked up from his phone and was confused about where he was . that evening , adams an artist and game designer better known under the pseudonym superbrothers had just released his first game , a collaboration with local studio capy games and musician jim guthrie . it was called superbrothers sword ampamp sworcery ep , and it had a unique feature all of its dialog was chopped into snippets of characters or less , and a little button let you tweet any of those snippets along with the hashtag sworcery . as adams was commuting home , the game was just rolling out in the ipad s app store in new zealand , and the tweets were flowing in . i was so engrossed that i didn t just miss my stop , he says . i missed the next nine stops . sworcery went on to become a rare thing in mobile gaming . it was both a critical and commercial success , selling more than . million copies as of . it featured a distinctive pixel art style coupled with a dark , foreboding soundtrack and simple yet engrossing gameplay that brought together elements of point and click games and classic fantasy adventures like the legend of zelda . unlike most popular mobile games , it hasn t been cloned , because its appeal lies more in a mood than a specific game mechanic , and that s not easy to copy . even today it remains distinct . but its influence can still be seen in many games that followed , notably the hit monument valley , whose creators have cited sworcery as an inspiration . today marks the game s fifth anniversary , and since launch capy has gone on to create several games , including the upcoming below , while guthrie has scored a handful of movie and game soundtracks and even released a new solo indie rock album . adams , meanwhile , has largely receded out of public view . aside from a few projects , he has remained out of the public eye , quietly toiling away on a mysterious project that he s not quite ready to announce yet . i think i ll just be lucky if anybody remembers the superbrothers name when i have something new to show , adams says . how sworcery came to be involved a lot of happenstance . sometime around , guthrie received a postcard in the mail . it had some pixel art on it and a short note from adams , saying that he was a big fan of guthrie s music . as a response , the musician mailed back a burned cd featuring some unreleased tracks made using an original playstation . the two kept in touch over the years , and made a few short animated videos together . some of those songs eventually made it onto the sworcery soundtrack . an early guthrie superbrothers collaborationat the time , guthrie was trying to make it as a more traditional singer songwriter . he also had dreams of doing soundtracks , but didn t know how to get his foot into that world . i was a mostly uninformed , low tech indie rocker guy who always wanted to do soundtracks for film and tv , he says . games were never something he d really thought of so it was a bit of a surprise when adams asked him to score sworcery . it was never on my radar , because it seemed so far away and unattainable on a practical level , guthrie says . i didn t know anybody who could make games . i knew people who play drums and play guitar and stuff . around that time , adams was working as an artist at the now closed toronto branch of japanese game developer koei . in the evenings he had created the superbrothers moniker it had a nice ring to it he says of the name and did some pixel art projects , including low fi illustrations for magazines . in he hatched a plan , one that seems far fetched in retrospect . he republished some of his old work online in an attempt to reignite interest , and then he headed down to san francisco for the game developers conference , in hopes of meeting someone who would want to make a game that looked like his distinct pixelated paintings . the plan worked . while at a gdc party , adams met nathan vella , president of a then relatively unknown toronto studio called capy games . it turns out that one of adams former koei co workers had gone on to work at capy , and introduced vella to his work . it didn t take long for the collaboration to start . fifteen seconds after meeting nathan he said let s make a game together , says adams . that was in march , and adams eventually started working in the capy studio full time on the game the following october . the time in between was filled with tying up some loose ends , including the process of receiving a grant from the ontario government . by this point , indie games were becoming a phenomenon . in jonathan blow released the seminal braid on the xbox , a game that showed it was possible for a small team to create a big hit . it made blow a millionaire he then funneled the money into making his next game , the witness , which launched earlier this year and showed the potential for new digital platforms like xbox live arcade and the app store . this is the thing i had been imagining would exist for kind of my whole life , adams says of the indie gaming movement , and when it actually happened i was busy . sworcery bluesto celebrate the five year anniversary of the game , guthrie is going to be releasing a limited edition repressing of the game s soundtrack on vinyl . when it first released in , the soundtrack was dubbed the ballad of the space babies , and the new version is being released on space baby blue vinyl . you ll be able to buy the record sometime in early april on guthrie s bandcamp page . but the timing turned out to be fortuitous . by the time work on sworcery started , the app store , and mobile gaming in general , were still in an early stage of maturation , and twitter despite being five years old was a bit of a wild west where a small game could still make a considerable impact . it was kind of a perfect storm , says guthrie . the ipad which was ultimately the launch platform for the game came out in the midst of sworcery s creation . there were already some hit mobile games , but adams felt that there was room for something more engaging than a time killing puzzle game . it felt like a bit of a blank canvas , he says . it seemed like there was a thirst there . like the game s origin story , the development of sworcery was very organic . while adams handled the art , writing , and some of the design , capy creative director kris piotrowski served as designer , while co workers jon maur and frankie leung handled the technical side , and guthrie provided the music . there was no real structure to how we did it , recalls guthrie . it was kind of a mess , to be honest , at times . sometimes adams would share a new piece of art , and guthrie would compose a song to fit the vibe other times it was the exact opposite , with the team building new sections of the game inspired by a new track . i remember thinking that there should be some kind of explosion at some point . guthrie wasn t always sure what to think . given his relatively limited history with games , the slow pace of sworcery which often involves just walking around an area , listening to music , and tapping the screen was surprising . i remember thinking that there should be some kind of explosion at some point , guthrie says . i remember being uncomfortable with the pace , though i wasn t uncomfortable with a pace like that in a song or in a film . vella similarly had doubts at certain points . sworcery was originally expected to take around a year to make , but ended up taking nearly twice that long , increasing the budget . as it became clear the project was going to run longer than our estimates , i definitely started doubting it , vella says . i think craig did , too . we talked about options for the project , and honestly my brain was telling me to scope it way down and figure out how to just ship something . that very easily could have been the end of sworcery . but as i remember it , kris really fought for the game he wouldn t let me sell it short and he wouldn t let craig lose faith . the slow pace that worried guthrie wasn t the only unique thing about sworcery . it also featured incredibly cryptic dialog which was part of why it was so fun to tweet and a structure that used the iphone s built in clock to encourage players to play at specific times certain events would only trigger during the appropriate lunar phase . because of its distinct and often strange nature , it s hard to pinpoint what exactly made sworcery so successful even for the creators . i think we created a design that had a pace and a space where interesting thoughts could percolate and jim s music could work its magic , says adams . i don t know what to make of it exactly , but it s just really heartening to see . it gave us a lot of confidence to keep pushing and making games we believe in . when i look back after five years , i am most surprised by how such a huge audience was willing to embrace something like sworcery , adds vella . it s such a slow , meandering game built to be a music box for jim s beautiful soundtrack . you fight shapes , lose health over time , read a book that collects thoughts . you are meant to just stand and look at moody pixel art . all of it seems really damn strange . but millions of people did it . they meandered and fought shapes and stood and looked . they listened to jim s music . thinking about it like that kind of floors me . that success has had a profound impact on its developers . combined with its other games like the adorable puzzler critter crunch and strategy game might and magic clash of heroes , sworcery helped to turn capy into one of the most respected independent studios in the industry , and the focal point of the vibrant indie game scene in toronto . the studio has since released acclaimed games like the time travelling shoot em up super time force and is working on the much anticipated below , due to launch this summer . it gave us a lot of confidence to keep pushing and making games we believe in , says vella . the slog through development takes a toll , but having so many people understand what we were trying to do is invigorating . guthrie , meanwhile , credits most of his subsequent success to sworcery . it really changed everything , he says . i had been making music my whole life up until that point , and had a little bit of success . honestly , i was still super broke and didn t have any money . and i didn t have anybody who wanted to hire me to do music for film or tv or games or anything . it really changed everything . adams took the opportunity to largely go quiet and focus on what was coming next . he has pulled back from the industry in a lot of ways . the last time he attended gdc was in , a year after the release of sworcery . once he realized the game was likely to be a success , he proposed to jori baldwin , his longtime girlfriend and the inspiration for sworcery s lead character , the scythian . a few months later the two were married in her hometown in quebec , surrounded by friends , family , and wilderness . eventually they left the hectic life of the big city and bought a small house in the woods in quebec , just along the border with vermont . in they had a little girl . adams calls her a little sylvan sprite . during that time he s been working on a follow up to sworcery , though he s not ready to show it just yet . like his first project , it ll be a collaboration adams is working alongside an as of yet unnamed partner and much of the focus will be on creating a specific mood and vibe . the pair don t have a release date in mind , but the game is being designed for traditional game consoles , not mobile , and will feature d graphics in place of adams distinctive pixels . while many game developers struggle with the idea of following a big hit , especially when it s their first release , adams doesn t appear phased by sworcery s success . my challenge the last few years has been can i create this thing that i want to create ? and that keeps me busy enough , and until that s finished i don t have too many worries outside of that , he says . as for sworcery , he says there isn t really anything he would change about the game in retrospect . that includes the tweet button , a feature which was actually made more prominent after playtesting showed people would often miss it . we were worried that the button would never get used , he says . 