 portrait of a bloodsucker as a young bed bug the bed bug is hardy , nasty , and well adapted to our homes , new analysis of its genome confirms . the work also corroborates previous findings on how the bed bug has developed resistance to modern insecticides and may lead to new ways to control the pest . the bed bug s genome , published in two nature communications papers by two groups of researchers , includes relatively few genes associated with smell and sight . that s likely because it isn t hard for the bed bug to find us across our bedrooms . the insect is very highly adapted to being a small ectoparasitic pest that lives by its host , says josh benoit , an insect molecular biologist at the university of cincinnati and first author on one of the papers . gilles san martin flickr the research shows that the bed bug has genes that help it feed . examples include genes that make salivary proteins , which prevent blood from clotting , and digestive proteins , which may allow the bloodsucker to take multiple bites during a feeding . the bed bug also has an unusually high number of genes that make an elastic protein called reslin . reslin in the female bug s exoskeleton may provide protection during an intense mating ritual where the male stabs a needle like penis into the female s abdomen and ejaculates into her body cavity . the work is part of a trend toward an ambitious goal to sequence the dna of all known living thingsthe new papers represent a larger trend in genomic research . in the field s early days , scientists focused on model organisms species common across labs , such as the fruit fly , mouse , or zebrafish as well as those that are medically or economically important . now , the technology is cheap and fast enough to allow for non standard organisms . the work is part of a trend toward an even more ambitious goal to sequence the dna of all known living things , or at least as many as scientists can access . i think maybe it s time to start thinking about describing life on earth at the molecular level the same way that google maps will give you maps of everywhere on earth , says stephen richards , a genomicist at baylor university and head of a pilot study from the i k project , which eventually plans to sequence the genomes of , insect species the manhattan project of entomology , as it s sometimes called . whole genome sequences essentially all of an organism s dna provide blueprints for scientists and help to decipher the genetic origins of the organism s appearance , function , and how it responds to its environment . having this genetic map fundamentally changes the research questions you can ask , says jeffrey rosenfeld , a bioinformatics expert at rutgers university and the american museum of natural history and a first co author on the other paper . as for the bed bug , he adds it s a complicated genome . they re just weird creatures . the two teams decided to work on the bed bug genome for different reasons . the i k team decided to use bed bugs in a pilot project that started in , along with other recognizable urban pests such as the german cockroach , agricultural pests including the colorado potato beetle , and generally interesting insects such as the dragonfly and the dung beetle . the same year , the second group , led by scientists at amnh and weill cornell medicine , chose the bed bug as a pilot for sequencing full genomes at the museum . this group chose the bed bug because they consider it a living fossil , as it hasn t changed much over its long history , which may stretch back hundreds of thousands of years . it didn t hurt that bed bugs are also iconic new york city pests . at first , the two teams didn t know they were competing . at first , the two teams didn t know they were competing they usually hang in different scientific circles . once the rivalry was confirmed , the groups kept their projects separate , partly because they were both far along in the work and partly for the competition . we had this classic conflict . do we reach out and try to all publish a paper together ? or do we race ? says chris mason , a geneticist at weill cornell medicine . but last july , both teams realized their papers were finished and under consideration at the same journal , and so they decided to ask nature communications to publish the work simultaneously . while both teams sequenced the genome , they took slightly different tacks . the i k team had a more traditional approach , focusing on the genome and covering it as thoroughly as possible . to put a genome together , scientists take the dna from an organism s cells and use machines to analyze its chemical makeup . in some cases , the scientists may rely on a computer to put the genome together , automatically analyzing it . in other cases , experts may go into certain regions to manually analyze specific sections and double check the computer s work , which isn t always accurate . the i k group did quite a bit of manual annotation , focusing are regions such as those associated with sight and smell . they also annotated genes already known to be related to insecticide resistance which has particularly developed in response to a popular insecticide class called pyrethroids . some sets of genes protect the bug s nervous system against pyrethroids make proteins that help bed bugs metabolize and detoxify the chemicals and thicken the bed bug s exoskeleton so it s harder for the pesticides to penetrate . that group also found evidence that bacteria that live in the bed bug s body inserted dna into the bed bug s genome . most of these genes came from wolbachia , bacteria that live in the bed bug s gut . previous research shows wolbachia help the bug synthesize vitamins . only one of these genes may actually do anything in the bed bug . the protein this gene makes is similar to patatin , which is common to potatoes and helps store fats . if scientists confirm that this patatin like gene is active in the bug which is a big if it could eventually be a good candidate for insecticides that target specific genes . the team looked for evidence of bed bug dna from new york s subway systemswhile the amnh team also sequenced the bed bug s genome , they did fewer manual annotations , instead expanding their work to also look at how the genes function in the bug and how the bug interacts with its environment unusual for a genome paper . for example , they compared changes across six stages of the bed bug s life cycle and noted a flurry of genetic activity after the bug has its very first taste of blood . this activity is likely because the bed bug s body is reacting to the new and foreign materials the meal introduces . the team also tried to see how the bugs are distributed across the city . to do this , they looked for evidence of bed bug dna in data from a previous project , which collected a range of dna from stations in new york s subway system . don t panic this doesn t mean bed bugs have permanently infested the subway . instead , the authors say traces of bed bug dna may have come into the subway stations on straphangers shoes or other belongings . these dna fragments may show how different bed bug strains bed bugs with slightly different genetic makeup relate across a geographical region . the paper suggests that bed bugs in closer proximity to one another are more related , while populations are distinct between the city s boroughs . these results come with some caveats . for instance , the researchers aren t sure the dna fragments are actually from bed bugs they may may be detecting an entirely different , but related , species . it s also possible that the dna found in the subway stations isn t from an insect at all , cautions jonathan eisen , an evolutionary biologist at the university of california davis , who wasn t part of either research team . i think it s interesting if they really found bed bug sequences in their subway data . but i m not even remotely convinced from what they report here that is the case . as genomics researchers aim for increasingly obscure research subjects , it gets more difficult to put together the genomes , says george amato , the director of the amnh s sackler institute for comparative genomics . for model organisms , you get the sequences and you kind of back them onto your structure . mapping a whole genome of a non model organism , amato adds , is more like driving in the dark blind , and there are no guard rails and you ve got no headlights . mapping a whole genome of a non model organism is more like driving in the dark blind , and there are no guard rails and you ve got no headlights . the amnh group envisions something similar to richards google map like level of genomic sequencing . the museum s longtime mission is to collect and catalog and characterize every species on the planet , says mark siddall , a curator in amnh s division of invertebrate zoology and sackler institute for comparative genomics . eventually , one supposes that sequencing whole genomes will be not unlike taking photographs of the animals when they come in . i don t think we re there yet , but wouldn t that be awesome ? with limited money and resources , covering the same genome twice won t exactly help reach this goal , but the fact that the bed bug teams took different approaches is helpful . frankly , genomes are getting to be fairly routine . it takes an interesting hook to present a genome in a way that s really exciting and broadly appealing , and these guys just totally nailed it , says may berenbaum , an entomologist at the university of illinois at urbana champaign , who wasn t involved in the research . the papers are complementary , she adds , which is why they are both being published . next , the amnh and i k teams will collaborate on a new paper on the bed bug s mitochondrial genome , which , because it s passed only on the maternal side , can help trace population relationships through time . we used both groups data and we will publish it jointly , says amato . what could be nicer than another paper all ready to be submitted , but that s a combination of the two groups working together ? 