 if a nuclear tipped missile were hurtling toward the united states , would we be able to stop it ? maybe , if we were very lucky . but some experts warn that the united states missile defense system isn t as reliable as people might think . right now , a constellation of sensors and interceptor missiles make up the ground based midcourse defense system , or gmd . it s intended to act as insurance against a small scale nuclear attack from north korea , or possibly iran , according to the department of defense . neither country has missiles capable of reaching the us , although us officials say north korea is getting closer . it s not meant to ward off an unlikely attack from the much larger and more sophisticated arsenals of russia or china nor would it be able to . still , it s the only defense we have against an intercontinental ballistic missile or icbm once it s in the air . on may th , , the us tested these defenses against an icbm like target for the first time . to stop it , a ground based interceptor missile fired from vandenberg air force base collided with the incoming warhead and smashed it to smithereens . the test appears to have been a success but that doesn t necessarily mean the gmd could stop an enemy weapon under real world conditions . in fact , the government accountability office a nonpartisan government agency also known as the congressional watchdog reported in that the gmd has not demonstrated through flight testing that it can defend the u . s . homeland against the current missile defense threat . here s what you need to know how is our missile defense system supposed to work ? for a second , let s imagine a frightening future where north korea actually does have working icbms and decides to launch one . satellites with infrared sensors and radar systems deployed in japan and on us navy ships would spot the missile launch , and alert control centers in the us . sensors , including a sea based , high resolution radar , would track the hostile missile as it flies . when the missile leaves the atmosphere , it enters longest phase of its flight called the midcourse . at this point , the missile breaks up into the warhead , debris , decoys intended to confuse our sensors , and the last stage of the burned out rocket booster . on the other side of the pacific , people in control centers in alaska and colorado would work quickly to find the warhead and figure out where to intercept it . then , they give the order to fire interceptor missiles from vandenberg air force base in california , or fort greely , alaska . there are interceptors stashed in silos at these two sites , each carrying a kill vehicle on a three stage rocket booster . tom karako , a missile defense expert with the center for strategic and international studies , describes the kill vehicle as a funny looking telescope with a jetpack attached to it . as the interceptor leaves the atmosphere and enters space , the pound kill vehicle and the rocket separate . using infrared sensors to find the incoming warhead , the kill vehicle moves into the warhead s path by firing its own little thrusters . when the two objects collide , the kill vehicle should , theoretically , obliterate the warhead without causing a nuclear detonation . image missile defense agency infrared image of a successful intercept in , where a ground based interceptor collided with a target launched from alaska . okay , but can it actually do that ? we don t really know . since , the gmd has been tested times . but the union of concerned scientists argues that these were conducted under artificial conditions where the timing of the incoming missile , for example , was known in advance . of course , for safety reasons , you can t exactly launch a surprise icbm at an air force base . and even so , the system has failed either eight or nine of those tests , depending on whom you ask . the department of defense s missile defense agency says eight failures , counting a glancing blow delivered to a target in as a success . but the pentagon s director of operational test and evaluation testified in a congressional hearing that it was a hit , but not a kill actually destroying the target apparently wasn t one of the test s objectives . that s why karako says that there is a need for more testing like the one on may th , which tested an upgraded component of the kill vehicle . the target took off from the marshall islands in the pacific , and flew toward the us with the speed and trajectory of an icbm . an interceptor missile launched from vandenberg air force base in california collided with the target and destroyed it . laura grego , a global security expert for the union of concerned scientists with a background in physics , says the gmd system has been described as like hitting a bullet with a bullet . she adds it s amazing that we ever actually do it . the difficulty is compounded by the fact that the interceptor missiles are essentially advanced prototypes , karako says . i think fundamentally what has challenged the program is the lost opportunities to go back and improve upon the basic design that was fielded back in , he says . everybody knows that that s what needs to be done , and now finally we re on a path to getting there but we have to keep at it . photo missile defense agency the missile defense complex at fort greely , alaska . how d we get to this point ? for decades the us went back and forth about whether , and how , to defend itself against incoming missiles . ever since the us developed the atomic bomb in , our best defense has been the prospect of devastating nuclear retaliation . but to supplement this game of nuclear chicken , the army asked bell labs in to start looking into possibilities for an antiballistic missile system . since then , the us very briefly deployed nuclear tipped interceptors designed to stop incoming missiles in their tracks with a nuclear explosion . in the s , ronald reagan announced his famous star wars plan which included a proposal for an x ray space laser powered by a nuclear detonation it never got off the ground . an anti ballistic missile treaty signed by the us and the soviet union in plus scientific and technological challenges stopped us from getting serious about defending against an icbm attack . there was also the concern that a sophisticated defense system could fuel a race for weapons that could overpower it . the clinton administration started making moves toward a national missile defense in the s . but the real push came after , when george bush pulled out of the anti ballistic missile treaty and fast tracked what became the gmd . this , grego and her colleagues at the union of concerned scientists argue , is what set the system up for failure by rushing missiles that were essentially still prototypes into silos . karako counters that the speed of the rollout was necessary we are unwilling , as a nation , to accept vulnerability , complete vulnerability , to be blackmailed by north korea . so we re going to do what we can to have some defenses , and we re going to improve it over time . photo missile defense agency launch of a target for a test from the u . s . army s reagan test site at kwajalein atoll because interceptors were rushed out before rigorous testing , the missile defense agency had to go back and fix them as flight tests uncovered issues . and those fixes have been both expensive , and incremental so not all the missiles have the same hardware , according to a report by the pentagon s director of operational testing . it went on to say the reliability and availability of the operational ground based interceptors is low , and the mda continues discovering new failure modes during testing . chris johnson , a spokesperson with the mda , says that the agency upgrades systems once new improvements are designed . one of those upgrades was to address a pretty serious design flaw discovered a few years ago that caused the vibrations from the thrusters to throw off the kill vehicles navigation . that made the kill vehicle more likely to miss the warhead it was designed to intercept . a fix for the thrusters was flight tested in and it was described as a success until an la times investigation revealed that , in fact , one of the thrusters had failed and thrown the interceptor way off target . we disagree with that characterization of the test , johnson says . the test met its objective , and the thruster performed as designed . the next challenge was to see whether the upgraded kill vehicle could actually hit an icbm like target as intended and it did , the missile defense agency reports . but again , it was under pretty ideal conditions the test took place during the day , there was only one icbm like missile , we knew where it was coming from , and where it was going . and , since it ll likely take several interceptors to destroy an incoming warhead , the next hurdle to clear will be for the pentagon to fire several missiles that will need to work together to stop one target . photo missile defense agency launch of an interceptor for a test . what does this mean ? that depends on who you ask . if you ask grego and her colleagues at the union of concerned scientists , it means that the missile defense agency needs more oversight . it should be required to test its acquisitions before it buys them , like many other defense programs . they re meant to be tested first and put through their paces before they re bought and put into the field , she says . in the meantime , the government should avoid statements about the gmd that give a false sense of security , grego says . the dod s ballistic missile defense review said that the united states is currently protected against limited icbm attacks . a senate report in said the gmd protects the entire us against an attack from north korea or iran . that s not true . at least , not yet , according to the gao , that says , gmd flight testing , to date , was insufficient to demonstrate that an operationally useful defense capability exists . but karako at the center for strategic and international studies disagrees i don t think anybody takes this lightly . this is a form of insurance policy . you don t have fire insurance and then go lighting matches around your house recklessly . instead , he argues that the missile defense agency needs to go back and methodically fix the interceptors based on what we ve learned from testing the gmd , as well as from regional missile technologies . there s been a number of decision points along the way , when the opportunity to fix these very fixable things could have been taken , but wasn t , he says . i don t think anybody really disputes that . making the system more reliable will take more frequent testing , a culture that allows those tests to fail , and enough breathing room to actually implement the fixes . still , it s pretty clear that regardless of how the gmd performed on may th , the best option we have against an icbm attack is never getting to that point in the first place . update june , am et this post , originally published may th , , has been updated to include a video and the results of the may th gmd intercept test . 