 moths are impressive insects . they can hover over swaying flowers and gather nectar in the dark conditions that would make most diurnal animals , like us , essentially blind . that s why researchers have taken a special interest in figuring out how these insects see at night . the finding , published today in ampnbspscience , suggests that scientists have figured it out and the new knowledge could one day help researchers build tiny robots that can fly in varying light conditions , without crash landing in a tree . the moths slowed their visual system to make the discovery , researchers put hawkmoths in front of robotic flowers in low light . the moths slowed their visual system down to collect more light over long periods of time , the researchers discovered . the change in moths brains resembles what a photographer does when she slows a camera s shutter speed . it s a crazy adaptation that comes with some drawbacks , but it helps the moths see far more clearly than you and i ever could . credit rob felt , georgia techhawkmoths are equipped with superposition compound eyes that allow them to see a thousand times more sensitively than insects with regular compound eyes in low light . it s a powerful adaptation , but to see at night , they need to see a million times more sensitively than insects with more conventional eyes . clearly , moths have another trick up their sleeves . so , biologists came up with an experiment designed to test the hawkmoth s vision under various lighting conditions . moths need to see a million times more sensitively than insects with conventional eyesthe researchers built a flower shaped robot filled with an aromatic mixture known to initiate foraging behaviors in moths . the robotic flower was programmed to sway and jitter at different speeds . then , the scientists released female hawkmoths in a lab under light conditions that matched those seen in the late afternoon and mid dusk . the researchers also filmed the moths as they tried to keep up with their scented targets . thanks to the moving flowers , the researchers were able to determine that hawkmoths lose some of their precision and begin to lag behind swaying flowers when they move above a certain speed , in very low light . the moth sees more poorly following motions that are above hertz , says simon sponberg , at biologist at georgia tech and a co author of the study a frequency that s equivalent to the robot flower swaying back and forth twice in a single second . but slowing their visual systems would affect their flightsponberg and his team created a computer model of the moths behavior it suggested that if the insects slowed their visual systems to catch more light , it would affect their flight . the model predicted that at certain frequencies of flower movement , the moths would overshoot the flower , moving past where the plant ended up and that s exactly what happened when they replicated the conditions in the lab with live moths . sponberg lab , georgia tech we found that at exactly those frequencies , the moth overshot the flower by exactly the amount we predicted it would , sponberg explains . their researchers concluded that the moth s visual system acts kind of like a camera does at lower shutter speeds . when the moth slows its visual processing , it sees better in dim light but if an object moves too quickly , the moth sees a blur . so what happens when a flower sways too quickly in nature ? as it turns out , that doesn t happen too often . flowers move at all kinds of frequencies , but percent of their motions are below hertz , sponberg says . by observing five species of flowers commonly targeted by hawkmoths in their natural setting , the researchers were able to conclude that the moths had figured out a way to slow down their visual system just enough to let light in for longer periods , without compromising their ability to see swaying flowers in dim light . flowers rarely sway above hertzeither that , or the flowers figured out a way to avoid swaying so fast that moths can t keep up with them . moths are pollinators after all , so letting them gather nectar benefits the flowers , too . in truth , the answer might be a combination of both but it s too early to tell . a moth s visual system is matched to its task , says jessica fox , a neurobiologist at case western university who didn t participate in the study . the moth can slow it down to forage in the dim light . but if it slowed any further , it wouldn t be able to keep up with the flowers it needs to be able to see . credit rob felt , georgia tech nocturnal insects have exquisite visual abilities at night . nocturnal insects have exquisite visual abilities at night , says eric warrant , a zoologist at lund university in sweden who didn t participate in the study . over the last years , warrant s lab has helped show that nocturnal insects can see color , learn visual landmarks and use them for homing and navigation , and navigate using the celestial polarization pattern formed around the moon or by the milky way . for him , the results of the sponberg study adds yet another piece to the growing body of evidence indicating that nocturnal insects see extremely well . the finding is intriguing , both from a neuroscience and an evolutionary perspective . but studying how hawkmoths see at night isn t just about advancing our understanding of evolutionary theory . researchers who wish to build flying robots for rescue missions may want to take a page from the hawkmoths book . insects are capable of doing many of the things that we desire autonomous vehicles and robots to achieve , and also in a miniature package , warrant says . understanding the principles by which a flying nocturnal insect negotiates the world , or tracks wind tossed flowers , could therefore provide clues to achieving the same precision in a flying robot . by understanding how animals see in low light , we can get some better senses of how we might be able to do that as well , sponberg says . 