 a sugarcane worker receives treatment for chronic kidney disease at his home in nicaragua . ed kashi arrived in nicaragua last january to shoot some photos for a local nonprofit organization . at the time , it seemed like just another two week commission ampmdash no different from the countless others he s completed during his career as a far flung photojournalist ampmdash but what he saw there stuck with him for much longer . literally every single day i was there , there was a funeral , says kashi , who is based in new jersey and works for vii photo . it was astounding , actually . the funerals he saw were not for slain soldiers or elderly villagers , but for young sugarcane field workers ampmdash mostly men ampmdashwho had died from chronic kidney disease , or ckd . this debilitating renal disease has , over the past few years , killed thousands of agrarian workers across central america and parts of south asia . the disease itself is hardly a new phenomenon , though the strain affecting nicaragua and neighboring countries is unique many of those affected are far younger and healthier than typical ckd patients , and a staggering number work in sugarcane fields . and while theories and hypotheses abound , scientists have yet to figure out what s actually causing it . a former sugarcane worker walks near his home in chichigalpa , nicaragua . he suffers from end stage kidney disease . it s not clear when ckd began killing field workers in central america , though reports suggest that it dates back at least years . there are no reliable data on mortality rates , either , but experts estimate that the disease has killed thousands ampmdash perhaps tens of thousands ampmdash within the past decade . cases among sugarcane workers have been reported along the pacific coast of central america , while similar cases involving rice farmers have been reported in sri lanka and india . the disease has been especially devastating in the low income countries of el salvador and nicaragua , where many workers rely on subsistence wages from sugar plantations to provide for their families . the situation has dramatically worsened over time , as well . over the past years , the number of men who died from ckd in el salvador and nicaragua increased by a factor of five . in the town of chichigalpa , where kashi photographed ckd patients last year , a community called la isla has been renamed la isla de las viudas , or the island of widows ampmdash a chilling testament to the huge number of men who have succumbed to the disease . ckd affects more than million people in the us , according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc . the disease comes on slowly , with only subtle symptoms at the beginning , and it can be months or years before loss of kidney function occurs . even then , symptoms like nausea and sudden weight loss may not occur until a patient s kidney function is below percent . if detected early , it can be treated with medication and lifestyle changes , though late stage ckd often requires dialysis or kidney transplants to avoid kidney failure . the disease is usually associated with diabetes and high blood pressure , and is most common among adults over the age of . but that s not the case in nicaragua and other parts of central america . it seems to be disproportionately affecting young , healthy males , says dr . peter hotez , dean of the national school of tropical medicine at the baylor college of medicine . and that s one of the tip offs that something odd is going on . why are we seeing this now ? many have posited that working conditions may be to blame , suggesting that the disease could be caused or exacerbated by the dehydration that workers suffer while laboring for long hours under the blistering equatorial sun . others have speculated that the workers may be inadvertently harming themselves by chewing on sugarcane stalks as they work . sugarcane bark produces a refreshing sweet juice , leading researchers to question whether years of sugar intake and dehydration could play a role . but hotez says that other factors are likely at work . people have been sweating and getting dehydrated in sugarcane fields for hundreds of years , at least since the start of the atlantic slave trade , he says . so why are we seeing this now ? that makes us think that there s something new causing it . there s a growing suspicion that agricultural chemicals may be the x factor behind the ckd epidemic . a study on ckd in sri lanka found that two toxic metals ampmdash cadmium and arsenic ampmdash may be responsible for the spike in cases there over the past years . both of the metals are used in farming chemicals cadmium in fertilizer , arsenic in pesticides , and rice farmers in the region had relatively high levels of each in their blood . although their levels were within the safe range , experts from the world health organization who suggested that continuous exposure to the metals could explain the country s elevated ckd rates . despite these findings , researchers have yet to identify what s causing the disease in central america , leaving many families with an unenviable conundrum they re well aware that harvesting sugarcane could kill them , but they don t have many other options . more than percent of the population lives below the poverty line , and sugar remains one of nicaragua s major exports . in , the country s sugar exports were valued at nearly million , marking a percent increase over the previous year . a coffin maker poses at his workshop in chichigalpa , nicaragua , where chronic kidney disease has made funerals a regular occurrence . sugar plantations have come under increased criticism as awareness of ckd has spread , with many accusing them of effectively working their employees to death without sufficient hydration . in nicaragua , the highest rates of ckd have been seen near ingenio san antonio , a sugar plantation owned by the pellas group conglomerate that accounts for half of the country s processed sugar . representatives from the pellas group have insisted they ve taken measures to ensure that their workers are properly hydrated and cared for , but kashi says the company has actively sought to silence workers and widows through intimidation . when he visited last year , many locals asked not to be identified by name or chose to conceal their faces from the camera , for fear of being reprimanded by the company . as a result , kashi says , a haunting sense of resignation has fallen upon the entire region . many are too poor to afford dialysis or other treatment , and those who do pursue dialysis often do so with cheap at home machines , operating them in unsanitary conditions that jeopardize effectiveness . there was a sort of stoicism , kashi says of the people he met last year . every day they would show up for the funeral , it was sort of this fatalistic ritual . i couldn t help but wonder , amplsquowhy aren t you guys more pissed off ? forgotten people with forgotten diseases there are signs of growing discontent . last month , a group of sugarcane workers staged a protest in chichigalpa , demanding that their employers pay for medical treatment and provide suitable compensation for the families of deceased laborers . after one farmer died during clashes with police , the government vowed to work with both groups toward finding a solution . health authorities are treating the issue with a greater sense of urgency , as well . the who last year described central america s ckd crisis as a serious public health concern , calling for greater surveillance and deeper investigation into its root causes . the announcement was welcomed by public health advocates , though many say it s long overdue . if this were occurring among wealthy people in the suburbs of the us . . . it would ve gotten attention a lot sooner , hotez says . but because it s occurring among people who have nothing ampmdash i call them forgotten people with forgotten diseases ampmdash this has gone on far longer than it should have . kashi , meanwhile , is still working to introduce the issue to wider audiences . a self described advocacy journalist , he returned to nicaragua not long after his first visit , and last month launched a crowdfunding campaign to launch another project in the region . the idea is to combine still photography with interviews and video footage to create a database of media materials that could be used and distributed in schools , non governmental organizations , and research groups . i believe that part of doing business is to treat people well and nurture a healthy environment , the photographer says . not to just rape and pillage and get the most you can and leave the place for dead . 