 air travel has left an indelible mark upon the th century . before the advent of the internet , the worldwide web that brought disparate people and cultures together was composed of flight paths . the face of international conflict was changed by the bombing raids of the second world war , and some have even argued that the devastation wrought from the skies then is what kept the cold war cold . but the th century also continues to exercise an influence on flying today , with the recent disappearance of malaysian airlines flight mh highlighting the archaic nature of safety equipment aboard most planes . the black box is neither black nor singularthe black box is an iconic part of any airliner amprsquos standard electronic kit , but it amprsquos notoriously misunderstood . for starters , it is neither black nor singular . flight regulations require every commercial airliner to carry two pieces of recording equipment , both bright orange in color so as to be more easily identifiable when searching a wreckage . one is the cockpit voice recorder cvr , which records the last two hours of conversation between the pilots and air controllers , and the other is the flight data recorder fdr , which keeps track of detailed flight parameters for hours . both are designed to withstand enormous environmental pressures ampmdash including impacts generating up to , gs and fires reaching temperatures of , degrees celsius ampmdash and together usually provide an accurate picture of what went wrong during a flight disaster . but they could be so much better . the first black box prototype was built in the s and could store four hours of speech and instrument panel data . it took some time for its utility to be widely appreciated and for data recorders to be universally adopted , but the legal framework continues to lag behind that original device amprsquos most basic capabilities . until recently , us regulators only required the last minutes of cockpit audio before a crash to be recorded , and even the present two hour stipulation falls short of what we were capable of half a century ago . the data gathering and storage methods have certainly advanced since then , but at their core flight recorders employ flash memory just like you amprsquoll find in your phone or tablet . flight mh is thought to have flown on for several hours after disappearing from radar screens on march th , a fact that starkly underlines the inadequacy of having voice recording equipment that accounts for only the last two . dave warren , the inventor of the original black box , took his inspiration from the first personal audio recorders , imagining how helpful it would be to accident investigators if a passenger on board happened to be carrying one . he then extended that thought to the cockpit . applying the same reasoning to present day technology would have you expecting multiple webcam feeds in the cockpit and potentially along the aisles , all covering the full duration of the flight rather than an arbitrary period before disaster . sheer institutional inertia is holding progress backcompanies like l communications , supplier of the widely used fairchild fdrs , anticipate that cockpit video recording is only a few years away , but the question has to be asked about why it amprsquos not being used already . one of the reasons is described as sheer institutional inertia by professor krishna kavi of the university of north texas . he recalls how in , in the wake of an infamous egyptair crash , the faa attempted to mandate cockpit cameras but was thwarted by pilot unions fearful of excessive oversight . another compelling answer may simply be cost . gary kelly , ceo of budget american carrier southwest airlines , argues that after we were all low fare carriers . in an opinion piece published this week , kelly paints a picture of razor thin profit margins at the start of the last decade that forced airlines to shave every expenditure down to a minimum . this goes some way to explaining why plane operators may be reluctant to make fresh investments in upgrading their cvr equipment . it amprsquos easier to sell people on the benefits of a more sophisticated in flight entertainment system than it is to convince them that the plane they amprsquore flying on would make other flights safer should it ever crash . how about using a black cloud instead ? the most direct solution to an uneager industry is government intervention . it wasn amprsquot long after the malaysian flight amprsquos disappearance that north carolina congressman david price reintroduced a bill to make ejectable black boxes a compulsory part of airplane equipment . unlike the heavy boxes that presently sink to the ocean floor along with the rest of the plane , price amprsquos recorders would eject upon impact and float on the water amprsquos surface ampmdash and the technology s already proven , having been used by the us navy for years . more ambitious alternatives also exist , such as professor kavi amprsquos glass box proposal . embracing the modern trend for putting everything in the digital cloud , kavi suggests that flight data could be transmitted in real time to locations on the ground or overhead satellites . this way , all the crucial information about pilot inputs , altitude , environmental conditions , and system operations would be immediately available when required . while some small bursts of data are already transmitted by planes , sending out comprehensive fdr information sets appears unfeasible given the enormous number of planes in the air at any one time . kavi is conscious of that limitation , but believes it can be negotiated by being selective with which data to transmit ampmdash such as when parameter readings are drastically out of the expected range . a canadian company by the name of flyht aerospace solutions aims to provide a service along these lines with its automated flight information system , but the installation cost of , per plane is likely a big reason for why it hasn amprsquot seen wide adoption . as mary schiavo , former inspector general of the us department of transportation , tells cnn , airlines will simply not add additional safety measures unless mandated by the federal government . in the absence of a perfect solution that satisfies both safety concerns and economic demands , it amprsquoll be up to regulators and legislators to determine where to strike the right balance . the present search for flight mh shows , however , that we can amprsquot afford to keep using last century amprsquos black box technology . airline passengers would all feel and be much safer when the technical capabilities of their smartphones no longer outstrip those of the equipment intended to ensure their safety . 