 for a long time , the hopes and dreams of many virtual reality fans could be summed up with two words oculus rift . helped by the rise of cheap smartphone displays , oculus co founder palmer luckey took a technology that most people considered a retro curiosity and convinced them that it could change the world . the rift let you skydive without a parachute . it helped artists show the world through another person s eyes . it simulated beheading . it put you in fictional settings that ranged from kaiju fighting robots to jerry seinfeld s apartment . virtual reality isalways almost hereby adi robertson photography by james barehamfor a long time , the hopes and dreams of many virtual reality fans could be summed up with two words oculus rift . helped by the rise of cheap smartphone displays , oculus co founder palmer luckey took a technology that most people considered a retro curiosity and convinced them that it could change the world . the rift let you skydive without a parachute . it helped artists show the world through another person s eyes . it simulated beheading . it put you in fictional settings that ranged from kaiju fighting robots to jerry seinfeld s apartment . and then , slowly , the rift got company from competition like the htc vive and playstation vr , as well as totally new vr categories like google cardboard and oculus own mobile gear vr headset . consumer virtual reality went from a gaming peripheral to an all purpose entertainment device , and then to the next great evolution in computing . while oculus rift was no longer a synonym for virtual reality , oculus remained a central player , especially after facebook purchased it for an estimated billion . there was just one problem nobody knew what the rift would look like , or when it would come out . luckey and the rest of oculus leadership were adamant about not making promises they couldn t keep , or delivering an undercooked product two things that doomed consumer virtual reality decades ago . but after nearly four years , the finished oculus rift has shipped to its very first group of customers , and it s time to see whether the headset that started it all is still pushing the cutting edge of virtual reality . oculus rarely brags about its industrial design , but one of the best things it s done is make something so stereotypically geeky look relatively natural . the consumer rift is full of clever and thoughtful touches , starting with the delightfully soft rubberized carrying case it ships in , which makes the whole thing feel like a cyberpunk hacker s console . the all black headset is downright understated by gaming hardware standards , with a front of smooth rubber , sides coated in coarse cloth , and lenses surrounded by a web of lycra . it s tethered to a pc by a single wire , which runs out your left temple and along one of the adjustable side straps . william gibson s best known foray into virtual reality might be neuromancer , but the rift feels more like something from his design obsessed novel pattern recognition it s the kind of minimalist product that its brand allergic , coolhunting protagonist cayce pollard might approve of . the screen s clarity depends on precisely how it s angled toward your eyesgetting the rift to fit right can prove elusive at first . while there s a small focus knob at the bottom , a lot of the screen s clarity depends on precisely how it s angled toward your eyes , and it s easy to give yourself a headache by strapping it as tightly as possible to keep the best fit . but once you get used to wearing it , the headset feels lighter and more comfortable than most of its competition , sealing against your face with a firm but pliable ring of foam . since i have yet to break a sweat in the rift , i can t say how easy it is to clean , but the ring is removable and replaceable although there s no spare included . i also don t have to deal with wearing glasses , but my verge colleagues who do have had a positive response they could either fit the headset over moderately sized frames or , depending on their prescription , get the screen in focus without them . along with a cylindrical black tracking camera on a slender inch stand , the rift comes with ampnbsptwo accessories an xbox one gamepad and a small , simple device called the oculus remote . unlike sony and htc , oculus isn t launching the rift with a full controller of its own , since its oculus touch hardware will arrive in the second half of this year . for now , the chunky and colorful xbox gamepad seems slightly out of place alongside the sleek rift design . the oval shaped black remote , by contrast , fits right in , although its construction doesn t feel as solid as the rest of the system . the rift is something i d be happy to have in my living room , and compared to the developer focused oculus devices of years past , it s a breeze to set up . the meter headset tether ends with one usb and one hdmi port , and the tracking camera is plugged in with its own usb cable there s no external power cable or controller box for either piece . you ll just download oculus windows app and run through a short , though descriptive , setup checklist before getting into vr . granted , getting to this point requires having a powerful gaming desktop , which can produce plenty of glitches on its own . and since most pcs have only one hdmi port , you ll need to use a different connection for your monitor , an extra and not totally intuitive step for many people . for the most part , though , it s as easy as i can imagine installing a totally new kind of computer hardware to be . screenshots from top to bottom eve valkyrie , chronos , darknet none of this matters if the view from inside the rift is no good and fortunately , it holds up . the headset contains a pair of lenses , a gyroscope and accelerometer , a pair of decent quality removable earphones , and two x screens . the image they produce is bright and relatively clear although it still has a bit of the graininess that almost all vr headsets struggle with , and the overall resolution is about the same as the single screened gear vr . any bright lights in the center of the virtual world sometimes reflect what looks like a lens flare around the edges of your vision , but it s minimally distracting . the rift s field of view doesn t seem better than previous versions , but it s wide enough to give you a decent amount of peripheral vision . there s almost no visible latency as long as you stay within sight of the camera , it mirrors your head movement precisely , even when you turn completely around . the rift s single tracking camera doesn t give you as much space to move around in as the room scale htc vive or a two camera oculus touch setup , but it supports a few steps in any direction i measured a functional square of space around six and a half feet wide and four and a half deep . the biggest problem is that it s impossible to tell where that space ends until you step outside it , causing a sickening jerk as the world stops responding to your motion . right now , it s not particularly noticeable , because almost none of the rift launch titles ask you to move . a few make sense standing up , like the diorama like tower defense game defense grid , but the vast majority seem intended to play in a stationary chair , looking straight forward with occasional turns of the head . the result is a lot of games where vr feels like an addition , not a transformation . most of the first person experiences could translate to flat screens without much trouble , and some like space exploration game adrift are already coming to both vr and flatscreen platforms like pc and playstation . the plethora of third person action games like lucky s tale might need to be redesigned slightly for players who can t lean over the environments , but they re still close adaptations of established formats . the titles that feel most clearly designed for virtual reality were early experiments that came to gear vr before the consumer rift . that includes keep talking and nobody explodes , which takes advantage of a headset s isolating effects , and darknet , whose sprawling puzzle maps would look painfully cramped on a smaller screen . the result is a lot of games where vr feels like an addition , not a transformationin some cases , vr still fills genuine gaps in a familiar experience . ccp s eve valkyrie could certainly have been developed as a standard space fighting game , a genre whose controls usually confound me . but somehow , being able to see the cockpit all around me makes it easier to understand how my ship should move , and using the rift s head tracking to fire missiles feels much better than pointing a joystick . racing or flying simulations aren t things that could only be done in vr , but it s arguably the best place for them . conversely , vr friendly design occasionally hampers a game . chronos , a beautiful fantasy game that s become one of my favorite rift launch titles , uses the same combat mechanics as dark souls . unlike dark souls , the camera moves between fixed angles for each area instead of directly following the player . this gives you a perfect view of its beautiful environments , and it cuts the risk of motion sickness to almost zero . but it also means that large enemies can block your view of the protagonist , and the camera will disorientingly pop to a completely different location if you move too far during a battle . the ultimate goal for vr gaming , though , is to get to a point where we re talking about experiences instead of the technology that enables them . and the rift s launch is the first time i ve played anything that could rival a decently made non vr computer game for polish and scope . having high quality hardware to play with has helped make this possible nothing is fun if you can t see the images clearly and get sick after half an hour , two common problems with the very first rift development kits . so has the fact that developers now stand some chance of making money off their work . whatever the exact confluence of factors , chronos and eve valkyrie are more than just good picks if you happen to have a vr headset . if you like flying or fighting in video games , they ll make you want a vr headset so you can play them maybe not badly enough to spend , but it s a start . beyond that , it may take some time to make the rift s virtual world more coherent and interesting . the main headset menu exists in a stark modernist room with a rumpled and totally incongruous carpet in the middle , a weird bit of skeuomorphism that s just substantial enough to feel like it ought to be personalizable . instead , there are only flat icons for a store , a library , and a list of friends that can join you in eve valkyrie or other multiplayer titles . if you re not interested in playing games , you can experience a few interactive short films on the rift , like oculus lost or penrose s the rose and i . virtual reality studio jaunt has an app , and oculus has its own photo and video tools , which play both vr and non vr files from your pc or sources like twitch and facebook . but the rift doesn t seem to have imported the gear vr s various non gaming social experiences , its vr versions of netflix and hulu , or its large collection of degree video apps . a feature that would have allowed xbox one owners to stream non vr console games to the headset , promised last year , also won t be live at launch . whatever else you can do , there s no doubt that games like eve valkyrie and chronos provide the headset s most immersive moments . when we talk about immersion in vr , we re often talking about two separate effects . the first is a sense of realism , of connecting your physical body perfectly to your virtual presence . the second is the sort of immersion that a really engrossing role playing game like fallout can induce the knowledge that you could lose a whole weekend to it without even noticing . think of it as i m really there versus i m never leaving . the rift feels as close to being a brain in a jar as humanly possiblethe oculus rift can produce less of this first type than the htc vive right now , and it probably will until the touch controllers ship . but that might actually mean that it offers more of the second . where our vive development kit s weight and motion controls tire me out enough to want periodic breaks , i can easily spend two or three hours at a time in the rift i could probably go almost indefinitely if i didn t have to check email and jot down review notes . vr game developers have yet to produce the kind of plus hour time sinks that are standard in pc and console gaming , but it s been almost as hard to tear myself away from chronos as it was to turn off the playstation during my bloodborne addiction . this allays one of my biggest fears about virtual reality that headsets will remain a platform for minute novelty experiences instead of ambitious longform games and fiction . on a purely physical level , however , i m more ambivalent . motion controlled virtual reality experiences games and apps that ask me to mime things like shooting or painting with my hands have gotten me physically engaged with computing in a way i ve never been , and they leave me feeling better as a result . i love the feeling of getting real exercise in a virtual sword fighting game , or of walking around a real room to see the artwork i ve created . sitting down with the rift , meanwhile , feels as close to being a brain in a jar as humanly possible . james bareham playing non vr video games is already a sedentary activity , and i find myself moving even less in the rift , since i can t get distracted by my phone or lean over to grab a drink of water . as oculus writes on a warning screen that appears every time you boot up the rift in using this headset , you will lose the ability to see and hear what s actually around you . in third person experiences , you can t even see that you have a body . i come out of stand up vr games energized , even when my arms ache and i m sweating . i leave long seated rift sessions with the same fatigue i get from spending a night hunched over my gaming pc , with the occasional side of nausea and eye strain . i m in no position to advise anyone on the potential medical risks of vr , but i haven t had any serious issues with the rift so far . very long virtual reality excursions think days , not hours have anecdotally weakened people s eyesight for short periods , and my own eyes would hurt a little after a couple of hours , like a more extreme version of staring at a computer screen late into the night . my other problems have been similarly mundane . vr s constant head tilts exacerbate a neck and shoulder pain that i developed a few months ago , and games that involve a lot of fast walking with a controller still make me sick . at one point i got out of a morning session dizzy and lightheaded i wondered if i had finally experienced some kind of reaction to leaving reality until i realized that i was just hungry after pushing my meals back for more rift time . just a few more months has been the mantra of virtual realitytalking about any physical downsides to vr plays into all sorts of unpleasant dystopian tropes . you ve got shades of the matrix , where people s bodies atrophy while they re living in a machine constructed dreamworld of the zombie like vr junkies in shadowrun and of every other movie , book , and video game about people ruining their real world lives to enjoy a virtual one . and there is something a little eerie about putting on a headset in a room with other people , then coming out hours later with red grooves worn into your cheeks and realizing that you re all alone . but it s not fundamentally different from any other intense gaming session , except that vr s nearly mystical reputation primes us to blame or praise it for every unusual feeling we experience around a headset . if anything , the vive and oculus touch have shown us how much motion controlled vr could improve the status quo . just a few more months has been the mantra of virtual reality since people started getting excited about the oculus rift , and saying it after the headset is released feels like either a huge cop out or a sign that the vr we want may never actually arrive . but it s impossible to think of all the unreleased oculus touch experiences i ve tried like three dimensional painting tool quill , old west shooting gallery dead ampamp buried , and a vr version of rock band and not feel like the rift s best days are still ahead of it . for the first time , though , there s something to do while you wait . the high cost of buying and running high end vr headsets makes them inaccessible to many people , and the rift in particular is relentlessly focused on gaming . within these limitations , though , the rift makes a good case for seated vr , and it lays a solid foundation for what s to come . the headset you can buy today is not oculus most ambitious vision for virtual reality ampnbspbut it s a vision that oculus has successfully delivered on . good stuffgreat looking industrial designa few really good seated vr gamespromising future game catalog with touch controllersbad stuffexpensive , especially with gaming pc cost figured innot much to do outside gaminglack of motion controls at launch is a big weaknessverge score design by james barehamproduct by frank biedited by ross miller lt ! try typekit . load async true catch e gt lt ! var scene document . getelementbyid scene var parallax new parallax scene , invertx true , inverty true , limitx false , limity false , originx . , originy . gt