 if you were building a system to catalog and study the human face , it would be hard to do better than facebook . just years after its creation , the network is not just the largest photo storage service but the largest single collection of images that human beings have ever had access to . the total number of photos is hard to gauge , but it passed billion pictures in , and by now is likely closing in on trillion , spread across . billion users worldwide . that much data is a powerful thing , and facebook has made good use of it . since , the company has been using those photos to fuel a powerful facial recognition engine . when you upload a photo of someone , facebook will almost always know who that person is , encouraging you to tag them and let them know . thanks to the mountains of data , it s become one of the most advanced facial recognition systems available , far beyond the fbi s face scanning system . it s also a crucial product for facebook itself , integrated into the messenger app earlier this year . nearly trillion photos , spread across . billion users worldwidenow , a new lawsuit has called that system into question , claiming facebook s biometric faceprints violate user privacy . facebook disputes the claim , although it has avoided rolling out facial recognition in europe and canada , presumably over similar concerns . if the latest complaints are upheld , it could mean a profound shift in how facebook treats user photos , potentially even pushing the feature out of the us entirely . the case centers around the illinois biometric information privacy act , which deals with fingerprints , voiceprints , and scans of facial geometry . according to the law , anyone collecting those identifiers has to notify users in advance , say why they re being collected , and how long they re being retained . it also puts strict limits on how those identifiers can be shared and how long they can be stored . notably , photographs are explicitly ruled out as a biometric , but the plaintiffs argue the relevant biometric is the facial geometry scans created from those photographs . if facebook were a simple photo service , it wouldn t have to worry about biometrics at all but the plaintiffs argue that as long as the company is using those photos to create and apply faceprints , the illinois law applies . the key point isn t the collection of data , but using that data to create a profile specific to a person s body . alvaro bedoya , who has been following the case for the center on privacy and technology at georgetown law , described it this way if you run a bar , the law doesn t prevent you from picking up my used pint glass , but it prevents you from pulling my dna off it . the biggest question facing the court is whether facebook s photo tagging system crosses that line . the system is more complex than simply producing a scan from a photograph , relying heavily on known friends of the person uploading the photo . if a face doesn t belong to one of your friends , it won t be suggested as a tag . at the same time , the machine learning that powers the feature means matches are fuzzier than conventional biometrics , working off broad similarities rather than hard certainties . still , the net result is the same , reaching percent accuracy in a recent test . if you run a bar , the law doesn t prevent you from picking up my used pint glass , but it prevents you from pulling my dna off it . then there s the question of whether facebook has users consent to build that profile . there s nothing about facial recognition or biometric collection in facebook s terms of service . the company s data policy which users are also required to approve does refer to the system , saying tag suggestions are created by comparing your friend s pictures to information we ve put together from your profile pictures and the other photos in which you ve been tagged . users are also able to opt out of the system at any time , as described in the help center . somewhat confusingly , the option is nested in settings under the question who sees tag suggestions when photos that look like you are uploaded ? as long as the option is set to no one , facebook won t build a facial recognition profile for that user . neither the help center nor the settings page mention facial recognition or biometrics by name . they refer to the system simply as tag suggestions . even if the court agrees facebook s system violates the illinois law , it may not matter . last week , in a motion to dismiss the suit , facebook argued that the company was bound only by the state laws of california , as agreed to in the terms of service . if the court agrees , it would mean that plaintiffs have forfeited their rights under illinois law simply by signing up with the service . that would be a serious blow to state sovereignty effectively meaning illinois can t pass laws concerning its own citizens data privacy but courts have upheld similar clauses in the past . if the case survives the motion , facebook will have plenty more chances to dismiss the case before it reaches a final verdict . we will defend ourselves vigorously . but even if the case is dismissed , the issues are unlikely to disappear entirely . as biometric data like fingerprints and iris scans become more pervasive , more states are considering privacy laws like the one passed in illinois . texas already has a similar criminal statute although testing it would require a state attorney general to bring the company up on charges . alaska and washington have brought similar bills to the legislature , although neither one made it into law . if any of those laws do affect facebook , it won t be alone . google released a similar system in photos earlier this year , and facial recognition is quickly becoming a must have feature for photo storage systems , raising the stakes even higher . in theory , the problems could be solved by simply disclosing the recognition systems more aggressively , but it s unlikely either company would want to submit to the law s retention rules or any other policies that might be handed down in the future . either way , facebook isn t giving up the illinois case without a fight . this lawsuit is without merit , a spokesperson said in a statement , and we will defend ourselves vigorously . 