 audiences associate the word horror with scary movies or terrifying novels . but over the past half decade , live theater and haunted house exhibits have merged , bringing new life to the genre with interactive , real world experiences that let audiences step through the screen and into their own personal tales of terror . in the future of fear , we re talking to the creators of some of the most striking , immersive horror experiences to see how they re taking the genre in directions it s never gone before . over the past month i ve been indoctrinated into a cult , had my wife kidnapped by vampires , and been choked to the ground by a mad king while searching for a mystical land called conscientia . and i did it all within a four mile radius in los angeles . for a city that s rightly considered more of a home to film and television , los angeles has been making strides over the past five years , establishing itself as a fertile playground for artists interested in exploring the worlds of immersive horror and interactive theater . fueled by southern california s active haunted house scene , they re pushing storytelling in daring new directions and are on the brink of bringing immersive entertainment mainstream . imagery from screenshot productions the rope . it s a tradition that actually dates back to the s in la , long before punchdrunk s sleep no more began its iconic new york run . that s when john krizanc s play tamara took up shop at hollywood s american legion hall for a multi year residency . starring anjelica huston , tamara was a groundbreaker , inviting audiences to move freely through a recreated italian villa while the characters walked , talked , and interacted around them . despite that head start , however , the immersive theater scene in los angeles stalled out , and it wasn t until jon braver s interactive horror play delusion opened in and the extreme haunted house blackout came to town a year later that the community began to develop newfound momentum . the scene was fairly anemic , says noah nelson , creator of ampnbspno proscenium , a newsletter and podcast devoted to chronicling immersive theater productions across the country . there were a couple of companies here and there . there were people experimenting with the form , some of whom have walked away , but it s not cheap to put these things on . in local upstarts like the speakeasy society began experimenting with small , personal shows staged in private homes , but for most audiences their first taste of immersive theater came from an entirely different avenue haunted houses . the new wave are full immersive experiences , not jump scare paradessouthern california s scare scene has been anchored for years by attractions like knott s scary farm and universal studio s halloween horror nights , but shows like delusion and blackout incorporated real actors and a sense of narrative they were interactive experiences , not just a parade past a series of expertly timed jump scares . i attended blackout the very first year that it was here in los angeles , says russell eaton , one half of ampnbspmy haunt life , a podcast that tracks southern california haunts and immersive theater . i m a film and tv editor by trade , and it was such a unique form of storytelling . it was non linear , it was a live event , and yet it didn t tell a traditional story . you had to gain a lot from it through your own interpretation . you had to participate . eaton wasn t alone in his fascination , as both fans and other creatives saw the introduction of live theater elements as the logical evolution of the horror scene . the line is getting so blurred , because haunts are becoming more interactive , says eaton s co host , mike fontaine . you have things like the tension experience . you have things like blackout , and delusion , where you become a part of the story . you can actually interact , and that s the biggest thing that has been happening , year after year . one of the people that saw that early blackout show was nicholas sherwin , jr . , who felt so impacted by the experience that he ended up working for the company behind the productions as a stage manager and production manager . in a trend of pay it forward inspiration that seems to repeat throughout the la community , sherwin eventually started his own immersive theater company , screenshot productions , which has been garnering attention for its unique shows that combine existential themes that expand well beyond sherwin s roots in immersive horror . this medium is a great conduit for imparting emotional knowledge to other people , sherwin tells me from the art gallery that serves as the stage of screenshot s latest production , the rope . the company s previous shows have encouraged audience members to re experience their own birth parturition and death bardo thodol , but the rope uses a quest based gaming dynamic to help players explore an immersive , tolkien esque fantasy world while trying to reach a magical land . it s a unique experience with a breathtaking visual pay off at the end that left me utterly breathless , and an example of how richly varied the work in los angeles has become . that s been enabled by a number of environmental factors . just from a pure talent side , the number of actors and would be creators that move to los angeles , only to find themselves without work from traditional hollywood sources , are legion . what this form calls for is for a kind of acting that is neither theater nor film , but somewhere in the middle , explains nelson , because you need the intimacy with the camera that a film actor has , but you also need the physical presence that a stage actor has . but these are also productions that take place inside actual physical spaces that must be transformed and explored , and la s notorious sprawl provides a unique canvas of opportunity . legions of unemployed actors and urban sprawl become a benefit in the first year , it was just like , oh this is going to be a panacea ! says nelson . this is going to be better than new york , because there s so much space . things are cheaper than the san francisco bay area , they re cheaper than new york , and there s all these actors ! and while that s been true , los angeles is still a city with a mindset built around film production , and the expectations both of landlords looking to lease properties and the city s permitting offices are not accustomed to theater shows that want to take over a space for months to put on an immersive horror or theater piece . it s part of the reason why the scene , burgeoning though it is , has up until recently remained so seasonal centered around the halloween haunted houses that have helped give it life . the strain is felt even by relative newcomers , like creator justin fix s creep la . only in its second year , creep has already set itself apart by merging the more traditional , walk through vibe of a haunted house with theatrical scene work and interactions , and while fix acknowledges that things work well at the moment this business can be a really lucrative business , he admits to truly expand to the kind of year round installations that new york audiences enjoy with shows like sleep no more and third rail projects then she fell is a different challenge . we would love to keep on pursuing this and really get some money behind us , so we can really be a company and a group of artists based on stability , he says , with shows in the fall and spring that would allow his troupe to expand beyond just horror . but it s a way of thinking that the city of los angeles still hasn t quite come around to . for what we re trying to do now , these short term , nine week , week runs , the city of los angeles calls them ghost tours . it s a mischaracterization that reveals just how behind the curve the city s thinking can be , and would be outright hilarious if it weren t standing in the way of more ambitious productions . my trip to creep la was totally normal and nothing strange happened . that situation is slowly starting to change , however , as the mainstream visibility for immersive horror and theater shows becomes increasingly high . darren lynn bousman s the tension experience was a game changer this year , not just because of its ambition and multi platform narrative , but because the combination of a brand name horror filmmaker working so effortlessly in immersive theater was able to bring a new level of attention to the medium and the la scene itself . and when tension closes on november th , bousman and his team will shoot a movie on its sets something that will undoubtedly bring even more attention before the immersive theater show returns next year with a new theme . it s a virtuous cycle a creator like bousman being inspired by a show like then she fell , and then making his own show that will go on to inspire others . how many people are going to be creating things after going through the tension experience ? asks fontaine . countless haunts in la have been inspired by going through blackout their first and second year . all of these things it s just one big circle . could be a race to la s first year round immersive showand tension isn t the only show with big ambitions on the horizon . sherwin tells me that screenshot productions is planning a new , large scale show called how should we then live for , that will ideally be a year round production . and when i spoke with delusion creator jon braver earlier this month , he said that his intent was to move into a permanent , fixed location for his shows moving forward as well something that would provide even more stability and opportunity to expand . it s an inflection point waiting to hit , right alongside the emergence of a broader cultural awareness of immersive experiences that includes everything from virtual reality and augmented reality , to immersive theme parks like the upcoming avatar and star wars lands . it s worth noting that walt disney imagineering , which engineers the company s various theme park attractions , is also located in southern california . and each of these art forms informs the other , creating an ecosystem of immersive entertainment where agency , presence , game mechanics , and storytelling meld to impact audiences in ways that passive mediums like film and television never can . when this stuff is working right , it s a matter of co creation , explains nelson . it s the performer and the participant creating a moment . even though it s a make believe moment , it still happened . it s an actual memory . and for the time being , when we re still far short of the westworld esque future where a bot can successfully replicate the sense of interacting with a human in real time , the best way to create those magic memories may just simply be in immersive theater . the performer is not an algorithm . you don t know what they re going to do , he says . that s the magic of theater . the rope runs through november th . creep la runs through october st . read the rest of our adventures in the world of immersive horror in ampnbspthe future of fear . 