 for divers swimming hundreds of feet beneath the ocean s surface , communication is a notorious challenge . crews have developed an extensive language of hand signals to express their needs , but they re hampered by one obvious caveat the signals rely on people looking at each other . a flat hand making a cutting motion at a throat to indicate i m running out of air is no good if your dive partner is distracted by a shoal of fish . such challenges help explain why suffocation is the leading cause of diving fatalities , alongside being trapped in underwater caves or wrecks and equipment defects . but improving underwater communication is hard . electromagnetic waves , used in surface communication networks almost exclusively , fade out over long ranges in salt water , meaning that sound waves need to be used for data transmission instead . hydrophones , essentially microphones designed to be used underwater , were developed in the early th century by noted physicist ernest rutherford to communicate with submarines , and both the us and russian navy have hydrophones installed in seabeds , connected by cable to land stations . but sound waves have very limited bandwidth , which means low data transfer rates compared to terrestrial communication . ultrasonic , subaquatic networksall of which means that recreational divers don t have much in the way of foolproof communication . now , a swedish startup called aqwary hopes to change that . the company has developed a new approach to underwater communication allowing divers to create ultrasonic , subaquatic networks that passively share information like their location and air supply status . it allows you to be more alert about what s happening around you , explains anders brodin , the company s founder and managing director , in an interview with the verge . he came up with the concept while diving with his kids and worrying about the state of their air supply . i realized that there has to be a technical solution that could help me do this , he says . the result is the smart console , a palm sized unit with a . inch oled display that connects to your air tank with a thick rubber tube . it s basically a small computer designed to withstand meters feet of depth , brodin says . it s integrated with your air supply , so you see how much gas you have left in your tank , and it also has all kinds of sensors . those include a magnetometer , accelerometer , external temperature sensor , depth meter , and air pressure to measure the amount of breathing gas left in the tank , internal pressure , and internal temperature sensors . but the most notable feature of the smart console is that it also communicates with any other unit nearby through four ultrasonic hydrophones . on its screen , you see the name , position , depth , temperature , and air supply status of up to other divers within feet . if any run low on air , an alert is sent over the network and to a boat on the surface . if they get trapped underwater , they can broadcast a distress signal manually . a mockup of the smart console . aqwary each diver s signals are sent over ultrasound . if you re old enough to remember the old fashioned modems you used on your telephone line , it s pretty much the same basic technology , brodin says . those sound waves are modulated , sent through water , and then demodulated by another unit . this type of underwater communication has a theoretical range of around . miles , but the smart console has a shorter range of just feet . the reason is battery life we have designed it so you can get hours of usage out of the unit , says brodin . save your dive data to the cloudbut battery life isn t the only concern when you re blaring out high pitched noises across the sea floor . many marine creatures , dolphins included , use ultrasound to communicate and locate prey , and there are fears that noise pollution associated with human activity underwater is disrupting marine life . brodin says they ve seen no evidence of any adverse effects on animals from the smart console when we did the first trials in early , we spent time trying to annoy fishes at the reefs with it , and they didn t react at all . you could almost poke it at them and they wouldn t react . underneath the rather utilitarian waterproof exterior , the smart console has gb of memory , a mhz processor , and built in wi fi to save your dive data to the cloud . it s also equipped with an app store , where divers can download digital compasses , more advanced dive computers , and dictionaries of fish and dive sites . unfortunately , it s not open to third party developers because the device is classified as personal protective equipment , brodin says . that means we have to be careful that we don t get code in there that would somehow risk people s lives . they asked us if we could play movies or show netflix on it . the apps available were chosen by beta testers , and one of the biggest requests from users was something to do during decompression . when you dive deep , you have to stop on the way up for to minutes to avoid decompression sickness , commonly known as the bends . right now one of the developers is working on a version of snake , brodin says . they asked us if we could play movies or show netflix on it , but unfortunately we don t have the bandwidth . nor can you tweet from the bottom of the sea just yet the devices can t connect to the wider web from below the waves . but that may change , brodin says . that s actually in the makings for something we will launch in a year from now . the company will ship its first orders in july , with the unit running around usd . ultimately , brodin hopes that the smart console makes diving safer . having full access to your buddies data will support your decisions during the dive to make sure that you keep within limits , he says . with studies showing that diving is to times more dangerous than driving a car , perhaps the smart console will make the sea a safer place to be for those who want to experience its beauty first hand . 