 microsoft is no longer just a software giant , it s now a hardware giant . nearly eight months after its original announcement , microsoft has completed its deal to purchase nokia s devices and services unit today . microsoft will pay . billion for nokia s phone making business , plus another . billion to license its portfolio of patents . that s a total of around . billion around . billion , a lot less than the . billion microsoft paid for skype back in . nokia expects the total transaction price will be slightly higher , and the company plans to provide full details next week during its financial results . the deal sees microsoft take control of more than percent of all windows phones with nokia s lumia lineup , and the company will also acquire the low end asha brand , android based nokia x handsets , and feature phones . the redmond based software maker will now morph into a hardware maker responsible for shipping more than million handsets a year with an additional , employees moving across from nokia , less than the , originally planned . welcome to microsoft mobilemicrosoft is planning to use the microsoft mobile moniker for the nokia phone business , running it as a separate subsidiary where the vast majority of employees making the switch won t be making the physical move to redmond . it s a significant acquisition for microsoft and it s clear the company wants to keep the incoming nokia business slightly separate before it can tackle the complex task of fully integrating its new phone making skills into the firm . to highlight that complexity , microsoft cfo amy hood admitted on the company s q earnings call yesterday that deal closure is about four months later than the deal economics that we outlined in september . microsoft was clearly aiming for january , and even publicly committed to completing by march , but regulatory approvals and other issues pushed the deal back . as a result , the original deal had microsoft acquiring nokia s korean manufacturing facility and an indian handset plant , but neither will be fully acquired . an ongoing tax dispute means nokia will continue to operate its indian manufacturing plant on a contract to microsoft . the manufacturing alterations are just a piece of a giant puzzle that microsoft will now have to piece together . microsoft is taking control of the nokia . com domain and social media accounts for up to a year to ease the transition , alongside the huge phone making business . nokia will still exist , but it now plans to focus on three core technologies nsn its network infrastructure here its maps and location based services and advanced technologies a licensing and development arm . microsoft will pay nokia for a four year license of the here services , but overall nokia will be a much smaller company . the asha and lumia trademarks will transfer to microsoft , but the nokia mark will remain property of the finnish company , and may only be used on feature phones under a year license agreement . nokia , as it exists today , is now barred from using the nokia brand on any mobile devices at all until december st , . any future windows phones built by microsoft will now be microsoft branded . what does microsoft do with millions of phones not running windows ? nokia sold nearly million handsets last year , a mixture of feature phones and smartphones . while the lumia lineup of windows phones only accounted for million of that million , microsoft now has to plan and manage how it handles the millions of other devices that nokia produces that do not run windows phone . that s a mixture of asha handsets , feature phones , and nokia s new android based x range . it s a big worldwide business that places nokia in second place behind samsung in the top mobile phone manufacturers . microsoft is now the world s second largest phone manufacturer by sales . a tricky balance between making windows phone software and hardwarenokia s android handsets are the most intriguing part of the deal , as they shed some light on how microsoft might approach the messy and complex nature of shipping devices that don t run the company s windows software . the nokia x introduces a new forked version of android that s akin to what amazon does with its kindle fire line , but it also includes a windows phone like ui and an android store that s separate to google play . microsoft has the chance to control another app store , but also a solid opportunity to push its own cloud based services . onedrive , outlook , and skype are all preinstalled on nokia x handsets , and bing is the default search engine . microsoft ceo satya nadella is taking a cloud first , mobile first approach , and the nokia x or office on ipad are good examples of how microsoft can leverage platforms outside of windows to push and sell services . the feature phone product family coming to microsoft will start to have more of the microsoft services shipped on those phones right out of the gate . admits microsoft s tom gibbons , the corporate vice president who is responsible for the nokia integration . perhaps the biggest challenge microsoft faces with its nokia deal is the risk to windows phone . microsoft is now in a rather unique position dominating windows phone hardware , while also producing the software that runs on rival devices from phone manufacturers like samsung and htc . microsoft is desperately trying to convince other phone makers to use windows phone , and the company recently made the software license free to encourage adoption . windows phone . , the latest software update , includes some changes designed to allow phone makers to easily reuse android designs with on screen software buttons and better chipset support . the big risk in all of this is that microsoft will have to balance out the priorities of shipping its own hardware to compete with its own licensees , while still creating a successful platform . microsoft could be the rare exception that manages this well , but apple failed with the original mac and the newton , palm failed with palm os , and nokia itself struggled with symbian . google s experiment with making its own android phones resulted in the search giant selling motorola to lenovo for . billion , less than two years after paying . billion to acquire it . surface or lumia ? microsoft has to decideregardless of how microsoft handles the tricky balance of making the phones and licensing the software , there s a number of questions that still remain largely unanswered . former microsoft ceo steve ballmer outlined a devices and services plan for the company which included the big surface bet . while microsoft has experimented with hardware for years , it has never competed directly with pc makers until it unveiled its surface tablets . former nokia ceo stephen elop returns to microsoft and will take control of all hardware projects , including lumia , surface , and xbox . nokia has released one lumia tablet running windows rt , so microsoft is also tasked with figuring out its tablet strategy once again . does the company opt for nokia s lumia tablet design or surface ? it s a question microsoft has not yet answered . likewise , it s not clear what exact branding will be used on the company s windows phones going forwards . nokia and microsoft have confirmed the close , but microsoft has not yet provided any details on the full plan for how it s going to handle the integration of nokia yet . stephen elop plans to answer questions on monday , but for now he says nokia s phone business has to not only evolve to fit into microsoft in general , but into an evolving microsoft . skype s integration into microsoft was , and still is , a rather a slow process that has kept it largely separate from the software maker . hopefully the collaboration means improved windows phone software and hardware in the future , something that nokia and microsoft had been working on together as separate companies until now . whatever the deal brings , a big part of microsoft s mobile first strategy is focused on nokia s assets . microsoft can t afford to be slow with its latest acquisition and risk windows phone s growth and sales numbers . nokia might be over as a phone manufacturer , but microsoft mobile lives on and windows phone s future relies on it . 