 consumer advocate and former green party presidential candidate ralph nader will forever be linked to the legacy of the ill fated early s chevrolet corvair , a quirky rear engine compact car that handled like a wily runaway skateboard . the car and its potential liabilities such as a steering column that could drive a stake through a driver s torso in a collision and its propensity for its wheels to lock and spin on corners were focal points in nader s book unsafe at any speed . the book made nader famous as a staunch advocate for corporate responsibility when it was exposed that gm hired private detectives to trail him , forcing the president of gm to publicly apologize . the car s suspension setup was fairly common at the time , and the corvair served as a broader symbol for lack of safety oversight in the car industry . gm redesigned the corvair in with a new independent suspension that mitigated criticism of its rear suspension woes . nader s assertions led to the national traffic and motor vehicle safety act and the eventual regulation of safety devices like seat belts . a cherry red corvair is a main attraction at the american museum of tort law that nader opened in his hometown of winsted , connecticut this fall , devoted to the legal battles waged on the behalf of victims of wrongful acts . the more people know about the law of wrongful injury , the more they ll use their rights if they are wronged and generate accountability to the perpetrators , compensation for their own losses work losses and pain and suffering and generate deterrents , nader says in a phone interview . it s a very powerful contribution by an individual in the court of law . there s nothing like it in the world . there is no exploding ford pintothe museum is heavy on information about historic cases of personal injury that set precedents in tort law , but skims on illustrative special effects . there is no exploding ford pinto . instead , visitors can read about the case grimshaw v . ford motor company . ford secretly performed crash tests on the pinto a compact car whose development was spearheaded by famed auto executive lee iacocca but when engineers couldn t find a quick fix to the gas tank s propensity to explode , they let the defect slide . there are also exhibits about dangerous toys , toxic tobacco , and mcdonald s scalding coffee cups on view . so far , nader says the corvair is a standout artifact for museum visitors , particularly among those who weren t alive in . they re used to air bags , seat belts . they are used to padded dash panels , roll over protection , head restraints . they begin by saying how did all these safety features come about and that becomes a lesson in consumer advocacy and safety regulation and the importance of being able to sue the manufacturers and get incriminating information out to the press and the legislators . it s that cycle that s very important . it helps that time has boosted the profile of the distinctive corvair ampnbspits values have risen in collector car auctions in recent years . in those days you could split your skull in a mile per hour collision on a sharp dashboard . nader s vocal battles against the automotive industry are among his most enduring and he remains passionate about safety . the motor vehicle was around for years before unsafe at any speed came out , he says . and there were really no standards for brakes , quality , crash protection , environmental efficiency , or pollution control . that s a huge part of this century that a few people at the head of these automotive companies could decide what quality air we re going to have , who is going to live and who s going to die , and what the severity of the accident would be . in those days you could split your skull in a mile per hour collision on a sharp dashboard . nader s ode to tort law seems timely as us legislators grapple with the legalization of driverless cars , deceptive software , and car company recall overload . looking back , unsafe at any speed was an understatement , he says . even at age , nader hasn t lost his zeal for speaking out against corporations that have intentionally deceived customers . he tweets , blogs , and has published several articles about the gm ignition recall and the lack of criminal punishment of executives . he closely follows how regulation applies to current challenges of the auto industry , and he s been tracking volkswagen s wide scale cheating on diesel emissions tests . associated press i think it s a pattern . remember vw got in trouble in the s , general motors years ago had to pay a million fine for manipulating software affecting their cadillac model , and ford has gotten in trouble as well . we re seeing here an emerging universe of software penetration and manipulation , not to mention possible hacking , taking control of the vehicle away from the driver , without the driver s knowledge . that includes being able to turn off engines and make brakes inoperable . he thinks that the impact on volkswagen s business could be more damaging than the million penalty gm had to pay for knowingly selling vehicles with faulty ignition switches . if the maximum fine was imposed on vw on all million vehicles and then the recall costs and then the criminal fines and the civil fines , it would be tens of billions of dollars . even a company the size of vw has to take notice of that . nader says he favors technology that advances safety , but he is wary of development that increases risk for deceptive software and hacking . the lesson today is that democracy has to control technology , because technology is out of control . it doesn t have an ethical or legal framework or standards by which it can be curtailed when it goes off the deep end and endangers people and the environment . i think eventually the internal combustion gasoline engine is on the way out . an environmental advocate who doesn t own a car , nader thinks gasoline will fall by the wayside as a fuel source . i think eventually the internal combustion gasoline engine is on the way out . whether hydrogen will replace it or some combination of hybrid and electric car , or whatever . i think that s the future . it s quite clear it s an irreversible trend . it may take longer than some people want . but other advances , such as autonomous driving , cause nader to be skeptical . first , is it being ballyhooed just for public relations purposes by google and others as a dimension of their innovation and modernity ? or is it a real an alternative ? he says . i don t think we re going to see a driverless car for a long time to come . there are far too many imponderable variables on the highway , unanticipated intrusion , and not to mention insurance and regulation and the feeling that you re not in control of the cars . besbswynader sees the museum as a bridge between the past and the new challenges facing corporations . he is interested in the new guard of the auto industry particularly companies in silicon valley . i don t think it s going to be up to the auto companies anymore because there s too many other competitors coming in from sources you d never dream of . you d never think that a software company like google was interested in getting into the car business , but that s what s going to happen . 