 over the past few years tv manufacturers have been incorporating a parade of new technologies with one goal in mind getting customers into their local best buys to pick up a new television . d , k , curved screens the list goes on , but ultimately these relatively iterative upgrades have failed to capture the public imagination . here at ces , dolby is lining up tv and media partners in its own bid to get consumers excited again a product it amprsquos calling dolby vision . it s a set of technologies that cover everything from the mastering process to displays themselves , and the company has been quietly showing off demos in recent months . colors pop , incredible detail is visible from the darkest blacks to the hottest highlights , and a dramatic increase in brightness makes for a viewing experience that amprsquos so close to reality it seems like a revelation . in an industry that feels like it amprsquos stalling , dolby vision has the potential to steer the conversation away from the resolution arms race and towards the kind of visceral , emotional reaction consumers haven amprsquot felt since high definition tvs came to market some years ago . television has been held back by outdated standardsaccording to pat griffis , dolby amprsquos executive director of technology strategy , television imagery has been held back by standards that lost their relevance long ago , and the easiest way to understand that is to look at brightness . currently video is created and displayed using a reference peak brightness level ampmdash and it amprsquos much too small . the unit of measurement is colloquially amplrm known as a nit , and crt displays back in the day had an average peak brightness of nits that amprsquos still the same reference level used today . modern day televisions take that signal and stretch it to match their own peak brightness usually between ampndash nits , but that has its limits . if you take the image much brighter , it starts to fall apart . simulated images provided by dolby laboratories . the problem is that the human eye is used to seeing a much wider range in real life . the sun at noon is about . billion nits , for example , while starlight comes in at a mere . nits the highlights of sun reflecting off a car can be hundreds of times brighter than the vehicle amprsquos hood . the human eye can see it all , but when using contemporary technology that same range of brightness can amprsquot be accurately reproduced . you can have rich details in the blacks or the highlights , but not both . so dolby basically threw current reference standards away . our scientists and engineers said , amplsquookay , what if we don amprsquot have the shackles of technology that amprsquos not going to be here in the future , amprsquo griffis says , and we could design for the real target ampmdash which is the human eye ? to start the process , the company took a theatrical digital cinema projector and focused the entire image down onto a inch lcd panel , turning it into a jury rigged display made up of , nit pixels . subjects were shown a series of pictures with highlights like the sun , and then given the option to toggle between varying levels of brightness . dolby found that users wanted those highlights to be many hundreds of times brighter than what normal tvs can offer the more like real life , the better . dolby built a liquid cooled experimental displaywith that knowledge in hand , dolby then built a p , liquid cooled experimental display with a backlight made up of , rgb leds in comparison , its standard reference monitor uses a mere , . with a peak brightness of , nits , it allowed the company to color grade footage with vastly improved contrast and dynamic range ampmdash and it was the same kind of monitor dolby brought out for journalists in a side by side shootout with its current professional display . while both used the same lcd panel , the difference was staggering . it wasn amprsquot just a higher quality version of the same image it was a new kind of imagery . with the ability to reproduce a wider range of the color gamut , images glowed luxuriously . a worker welding looked like a clipped , diffuse blur of white on the standard display on the dolby vision monitor it was a sharp punch of luminescent detail . a person stood in silhouette , and when the sun peaked out from around their head , i actually squinted . granted , a demo is always a best case scenario when evaluating new technology , but the combination of increased detail , color reproduction , and ultrabright highlights recreated reality in a way i amprsquod simply never seen on a television before . the real magic is in the enhanced signalwhile the experimental display was impressive in terms of sheer led firepower , the real magic of dolby vision is in the signal itself . there amprsquos more information present in a dolby vision signal , and while films and shows will need to be graded specifically for the format , dolby will be providing reference displays and software plugins so companies can start right away . ultrabright displays will provide the best experience for consumers , but future televisions can be equipped to take advantage of the dolby vision signal even if they don amprsquot have the beefy backlight upgrade . dolby actually pitched the technology to manufacturers by showing what their on the shelf products could do when modified to take advantage of the new signal . with all the pieces put together , dolby is essentially proposing an enhanced video delivery ecosystem , but thankfully the new format will gracefully degrade . a base signal is directly compatible with current high definition and k systems , while an enhancement layer provides the additional information that makes the format shine at a percent data overhead . of course , a technology like this depends on devices actually using it , and dolby has signed up sharp , tcl , and vizio . all three companies are showing off consumer prototypes this week , and are expected to have products ready in time for the holiday season . dolby vision equipped televisions will need dolby vision content , however , and while blu ray can theoretically support the format , over the top video services will do the heavy lifting for now . netflix , amazon instant video , vudu , and microsoft amprsquos xbox video are all signed up to offer dolby vision content , and movies from major hollywood studios should be available by year amprsquos end . tvs and content expected by year s enddespite the potential , there are some roadblocks to widespread adoption ahead . while dolby may have streaming partners , there amprsquos the question of reaching that content tipping point ampmdash when consumers feel there amprsquos enough available to justify a new purchase . and while dolby amprsquos p demo looked sharper and cleaner than any k television i amprsquove seen , uhd is where manufacturers are focusing their initial efforts . dolby amprsquos senior director of broadcast imaging roland vlaicu says slow interest in k may be one factor . we believe that without dolby vision , k is struggling a bit , he says , and the arresting nature of dolby vision imagery may help push consumers over the edge . we amprsquoll know more once we see all the prototypes this week , but we amprsquoll have to wait until the products reach market to know how big of an impact dolby amprsquos new initiative is really going to have . but for the moment , it seems the wait for a display upgrade as dramatic as the jump to hd was may finally be over . lt ! j window . load function j . twentytwenty container . twentytwenty gt