 this is an excerpt from from digital gold bitcoin and the inside story of the misfits and millionaires trying to reinvent money by nathaniel popper . these days the technology known as bitcoin is a hot topic among the digerati of silicon valley and barons of wall street . but years before bitcoin was a global phenomenon and the subject of financial speculation , it was a piece of open source software that was struggling to attract more than a handful of users . in the spring of , the bitcoin software had been up and running for a few months since being launched by a shadowy creator named satoshi nakamoto . the software gave out free bitcoins to anyone who downloaded and ran the software , to encourage new participants , but almost no one seemed interested after all , what would someone do with the free bitcoins ? an unlikely saviorsatoshi nakamoto stuck around cryptography forums and an incipient bitcoin message board , responding with excitement to anyone who expressed interest but almost no one was there . it was , at this point , that the technology got its savior from an unlikely place a small dorm room in helsinki . when martti malmi found bitcoin in the spring of , he was in his second year at the helsinki university of technology . lanky , with birdlike features , martti shied away from social contact . he was happiest in his room with his computer , writing code , which he had learned to do at age , or hammering away at enemies in online games , while listening to heavy metal music on headphones . a libertarian leaning lone wolfmartti s reclusive , computer centric life led him to the ideas behind bitcoin , and ultimately to bitcoin itself . the internet had allowed a teenage martti to discover and explore political ideas that were far from the finnish social democratic consensus . he began following the ideas of the libertarian economists , which encouraged people to create their own destiny , aligned with martti s lone wolf approach to life . who needs the state when you have talent and ideas ? during his college years , martti had become fascinated by the rise in scandinavia of the pirate party , which promoted technology over political engagement as the way to move society . napster and other music sharing services hadn t waited for politics to reform copyright law they forced the world to change . as martti pondered these ideas , he began wondering whether money might be the next thing vulnerable to technological disruption . after a brief spasm of random web searches , martti had found his way to the primitive website at ampnbspbitcoin . org . i would like to help with bitcoin . in his first email to satoshi nakamoto , in may , martti had offered his services i would like to help with bitcoin , if there s something i can do , he wrote . before reaching out to satoshi , martti had written about bitcoin on anti state . org , a forum dedicated to the possibility of an anarchist society organized only by the market . using the screen name trickster , martti gave a brief description of the bitcoin idea and asked for thoughts what do you think about this ? i m really excited about the thought of something practical that could truly bring us closer to freedom in our lifetime martti included a link to this post in his first email to satoshi , and satoshi quickly read it and responded . your understanding of bitcoin is spot on , satoshi wrote back . a primer to explain bitcoin to the worldsatoshi quickly gave martti practical suggestions for how he could help the project . the most important was the simplest to leave his computer on with the bitcoin program running . five months after bitcoin was launched , it was still not possible to trust that someone somewhere was running the bitcoin program . as to the more complicated programming needs , satoshi told martti that there was not much that s easy right now . but , satoshi added , the bitcoin website did need introductory material for beginners and martti seemed like the right person for the job . my writing is not that great i am a much better coder , satoshi wrote , encouraging martti to try his hand . two days later , martti proved satoshi right by sending a lengthy but accessible document addressing seven basic questions , ready to be posted on the bitcoin website . martti provided straightforward , if occasionally stilted , answers to questions like , is bitcoin safe ? and why should i use bitcoin ? satoshi liked the document so much that martti was quickly given full credentials for the bitcoin website , allowing him to make any improvements he wanted . within a few weeks of his initial exchanges with satoshi , martti had totally revamped the bitcoin website . the onslaught of new users was slow to arrive , however . a few dozen people downloaded the bitcoin program in june , to add to the few hundred who had downloaded it since its original release . most had tried it once and then turned it off . but martti kept at it . after releasing the new website , martti turned to the software s actual underlying code . he did not know c , the programming language that satoshi had written bitcoin in , so martti began teaching himself . working day and nightmartti had time for all of this because he failed to land a summer programming job a failure that gave bitcoin a much needed boost over the next months . martti got a part time job through a temp agency , but he would spend many of his days and nights at the university computer lab and find himself emerging at dawn . he and satoshi communicated regularly and fell into an easy rapport . while satoshi never discussed anything personal in these emails , he would banter with martti about little things . in one email , satoshi pointed to a recent exchange on the bitcoin email list in which a user referred to bitcoin as a cryptocurrency , a neologism inspired by the cryptographic functions that made it run . maybe it s a word we should use when describing bitcoin . do you like it ? satoshi asked . they also batted potential improvements to the software ampnbspback and forth . martti proposed making bitcoin launch automatically when someone turned on a computer , an easy way to get more nodes on the network . new strategies for expanding the network of minerssatoshi loved it now that i think about it , you ve put your finger on the most important missing feature right now that would make an order of magnitude difference in the number of nodes . despite martti s relative lack of programming experience , satoshi gave him full permission to make changes to the core bitcoin software on the server where it was stored something that , to this point , only satoshi could do . starting in august , the log of changes to the software showed that martti was now the main actor . when the next version of bitcoin , . , was released , satoshi gave credit for most of the improvements to martti . at about the same time , martti set up an online forum where the small but growing group of people attracted to the technology could communicate . martti was given credit for improvements to bitcoin itselfthe bitcoin forum went online in the fall of and soon attracted a few regulars . one of them , who called himself newlibertystandard , talked about the need for a website where people could buy and sell bitcoins for real money . martti had been talking with satoshi about something similar , but he was eager to help newlibertystandard . in the very first recorded transaction of bitcoin for united states dollars , martti sent newlibertystandard , bitcoins to use for seeding the new exchange . in return , martti got . by paypal . it would still be almost a year before bitcoin would attract even a moderate following , but martti malmi had already proven that bitcoins could be worth real money , and he would help it prove that it could do much more than that . the cryptocurrency has now spawned hundreds of startups , raked in hundreds of millions in venture funding , and made its way from an outsider idea to the boardrooms of nearly every major bank and stock exchange in the world . martti has continued to be interested in disruptive finance he now works for ampnbspmoni , a stealth startup building a bridge between the old and new worlds of financial services . and those bitcoins for which martti received . ? they would be worth roughly , , today . this is an excerpt from from digital gold bitcoin and the inside story of the misfits and millionaires trying to reinvent money by nathaniel popper copyright by nathaniel popper . reprinted courtesy of harper , an imprint of harpercollins publishers . it has been edited for clarity and context . 