 on december th , , bill hadley read the comments . it was a simple article in the freeport journal standard , detailing hadley s run for a newly vacant seat on the county board . but the commenters were less polite . hadley is a sandusky waiting to be exposed , a commenter called fuboy had written . check out the view he has of empire elementary school from his front door . it was a rude but not unusual comment , in line with the ad hominem hostility often found in comments sections . but for hadley , this comment crossed the line , and he set out to find the person behind it . his quest to unmask fuboy set off a four year legal saga that would send shock waves through freeport s legal and political community . hadley is a sandusky waiting to be exposed . at the time , hadley was returning to county politics after three years in private practice . a lifelong republican , he had served on the stephenson county board from to . when a board member resigned in after getting caught living outside the county , hadley decided to make a play for the now open seat . he was particularly critical of a recent bond that had borrowed . million to finance an industrial park called mill race crossing . just watching some of the county board meetings made my blood pressure rise , he told the journal standard in the article that inspired fuboy s comment . we re pushing the debt off way down the road to our children and grandchildren . this is not being fiscally responsible . no one seems to have taken fuboy s allegation seriously , but locals were eager to find out who was behind it . a small town in northwestern illinois , freeport has a lively political tradition , and many saw the comment as a sign that local political divisions were coming to a head . one anonymous blog , which had been exceptionally critical of the mill race deal , suspected the deal s biggest proponent , county board chairman john blum . the blog titled the blumdoggle is largely devoted to attacking blum himself . in a post titled , john blum , the woman beater , the site argued the comment was an extension of blum s ongoing feud with hadley . john blum , using an effective whisper campaign against hadley , worked hard to have his yes man , pete willging , elected over hadley four years ago , the blumdoggle wrote . clearly , the person or persons that are working to libel bill hadley are john blum supporters . another suspect was then freeport mayor george gaulrapp , who had worked closely with blum but commenters at blumdoggle were skeptical . if it were gaulrapp or blum , the paper would give them the name and number of the person making the comment , one wrote . i am out to find who said this about me . hadley , however , took matters into his own hands . after the new year , hadley filed a defamation complaint against subscriber doe a k a fuboy , demanding a minimum of , in damages . here s the whole thing . i m not out to destroy someone , he said in an interview with a local paper . i am out to find who said this about me . notably , the complaint specifies that fuboy is an adult resident of stephenson county , illinois . who else would know hadley lived across from the local school ? but that still left , possible suspects . winnowing down that list would be a massive undertaking . the journal standard had a record of its commenters ip addresses , but the paper wouldn t give out the information without a court order . getting that order took several months , but in march of , fuboy s ip address was handed over . hadley saw it belonged to comcast s network , which meant another motion demanding the name and billing address associated with the account , one that ended up being appealed to the illinois supreme court . in each case , the argument was the same there was reason to believe the sandusky comment constituted defamation , and the commenter s identity was necessary to bring him or her to trial . hadley s quest was a more complicated version of a process that s used to unmask anonymous bloggers all the time . if a service provider like comcast can be legally compelled to give up a user s registration information , then formerly anonymous websites can be brought to court under real names , a process that s played out at various levels across the world . most recently , microsoft drew criticism for revealing the name of a dissident blogger in thailand after being ordered to do so by local courts . in hadley s case , fuboy was a commenter on a third party site , adding another step to the process . before going to the service provider , he had to get a court order from the host site itself . that extra step and the accompanying time and legal expense is usually enough to deter plaintiffs , but they re increasingly willing to take the leap . similar defamation suits have looked to unmask reddit users and twitter accounts , including one suit in which the actor james woods sued an anonymous twitter account for claiming he was addicted to cocaine . none of those lawsuits have ended in clear wins , but they routinely result in settlements or lengthy , expensive trials . after , in legal fees , the illinois supreme court ruled for hadleybut despite the trend , most comments sections operate under an assumption of soft anonymity . olivera medenica , a lawyer specializing in defamation cases , says part of the reason is the uncertain nature of defamation law . it is the type of case where it is difficult to predict how a court will rule because it requires such a judgment call from the bench , medenica says . even if the court rules in your favor , deep pocketed companies like reddit , twitter , or even the journal standard are exempted from damages by safe harbor statutes . in most cases , all plaintiffs get is the person who made the comment in the first place . but that s what hadley wanted , and this summer , he got it . after , in legal fees , the illinois supreme court ruled comcast had to give up its subscriber s info and the name was finally made public . it was frank cook , a state attorney for stephenson county who had served on the county board with hadley during his first six year term . but while hadley knew cook , he seemed bewildered that this vague acquaintance could have had such strong feelings about him . i know him on the street to say hello to him , he told a local paper after the ruling came down . reached by the verge , hadley s lawyer declined to make him available for comment . the following day , cook resigned his position , citing the ongoing case , but he has maintained his innocence in public statements . the trial had to change venue , moving miles southeast to ogle county . after cook was unmasked , it became clear that avoiding conflicts of interest in stevenson county would be impossible . the first hearing in the new venue is scheduled for the first of december . according to medenica , hadley has a strong case , but there are real doubts about whether the law will side with him . hadley is a sandusky is an assertion of fact and an obviously damaging one , but quantifying any reputational damage may be harder than it sounds . hadley will need to demonstrate damages attributable to that statement not an easy task , medenica says . in the meantime , the article is still available on journalstandard . com , but the comment is now missing . the comment section is closed . 