 when the news summarizing startup summly shut down last march , it was easy to imagine the company had simply been swallowed by the yahoo machine . like so many founders before him , nick d amprsquoaloisio had sold his company to yahoo only to see it shuttered soon after . its core technology was absorbed into yahoo amprsquos news app less than a month later , used to summarize the day amprsquos events . that was the last we heard from d amprsquoaloisio , who sold summly to yahoo for a reported million at the age of ampmdash until today . on stage at yahoo amprsquos keynote , d amprsquoaloisio revealed the project that has occupied him throughout his final year of secondary school . yahoo news digest is a sleek , highly visual app that presents you with or so algorithmically generated news stories from yahoo amprsquos network , twice a day once in the morning , and once in the evening , in a rhythm that mimics the way people once read morning and afternoon newspapers . we don t think this is a new paradigm , d aloisio says , in an interview with the verge . we just think we ve done it right for mobile . yahoo selects stories for the digest using a combination of algorithms and human editors , and sends you a push notification when your digest is ready . the result is one of the best looking , and most quietly provocative , newsreading apps we have seen in some time . one of the most quietly provocative newsreading apps we ve seenin one respect , yahoo news digest represents the continuation of an effort to rethink news consumption that d amprsquoaloisio began when he started summly ampnbspat the age of . but the app is also a radical departure from yahoo amprsquos usual style . for starters , it eschews personalization in favor of strict curation ampmdash everyone in the united states will receive the same digest , regardless of their location . we amprsquore not saying these are things you amprsquore going to be interested in , d amprsquoaloisio says . we amprsquore saying , these are the things you need to know about . and at a higher level , news digest offers a direct rebuke to the fundamental design principle of the web . era ampmdash the endless scrolling feed . the forthcoming decline of news streams is an idea that has lately gotten some traction amongst tech thinkers . writing in the atlantic last month , alexis madrigal lamented that the activity streams popularized by facebook and twitter have become the organizing metaphor for the web . it is easier to read ulysses than it is to read the internet , madrigal wrote . because at least ulysses has an end , an edge . ulysses can be finished . the internet is never finished . d amprsquoaloisio had reached a similar conclusion earlier this year , after he had become a product manager at yahoo working in london . unusually for someone his age , d amprsquoaloisio is quick to say that print newspapers had the right idea giving their readers a sense of completion when they finish paging through one . people have this information overload , he says . they amprsquore checking too many sources . they amprsquore a bit tired of having to go through streams and streams of information , never having a sense of completion . green means go you re doneyahoo news digest aims to bring back the satisfaction that comes with finishing something . the app presents stories in brief , digestible chunks of text , punctuated by photos , maps , tweets , and other visual elements . swiping to the right will take you through the day amprsquos stories , and when you amprsquore done a whimsical animation transforms the mostly black and white background into a lime green shade . the green means go you amprsquore done . news junkies can read more stories if they like , by scrolling past the green done box at the bottom of the digest feed to find additional stories curated by yahoo amprsquos algorithms . but most people probably won amprsquot go beyond the digest ampmdash and d amprsquoaloisio is counting on it . news digest differs sharply from apps like flipboard , circa , and prismatic , which sift through a seemingly infinite number of links and try to help you find ones you would not have seen otherwise . but developers tend to overstate the value of their algorithms ampmdash how hard is it , really , to find an interesting link on the internet that your reader hasn amprsquot yet seen ? over time , newsreading apps can come to feel exhausting , or even depressing ampmdash vast caches of content you will never get around to reading , and couldn amprsquot finish even if you tried . and yahoo has embraced those endless streams as much as anyone else . the company redesigned its heavily trafficked home page last year to include an endless feed , and its flagship news app called simply yahoo received a similar update . that app will continue to be developed independently it amprsquos aimed at a different market , yahoo says . if madrigal is right , and streams are on their way out , news digest amprsquos design could have implications that resonate throughout yahoo amprsquos product lineup . which isn amprsquot to say the app doesn amprsquot have room for improvement . news digest places a visual emphasis on atoms , which is what yahoo calls story elements like photos , wikipedia entries , and relevant tweets . each atom gets an icon , and all the atoms appear underneath every story in which they feature . it amprsquos designed to give you an at a glance look at how visually rich a given story will be , but in practice it doesn amprsquot much matter the idea is that you amprsquore going to swipe through every story anyway . the atom icons feel beside the point . there s something about this app that is really calming to me . for now , the app is iphone only , though yahoo will consider bringing it to android ampmdash and to tablets ampmdashdepending on the response . at launch , the app will be available only in the united states . yahoo news digest is currently free of advertising , but the company has outlined ways to monetize it in the future . in the meantime , yahoo news digest is the boldest and most visually impressive app the company has released since yahoo weather last year . if it succeeds , it could lead other developers away from streams and to experiences with definitive endings . there amprsquos something about this app that is really calming to me , d amprsquoaloisio says . a feed that scrolls forever can be engrossing . but there amprsquos a lot to be said for an app that helps you get on with your life . 