 as we start learning more about microsoft s hololens augmented reality headset , it s becoming clearer than ever how little we know about rival headset magic leap . since the company was pushed into the public eye by a ampnbsp million funding round , magic leap has shown its product to only a handful of viewers , and most people know it through brief videos of holographic games and applications . the only thing to do with magic leap right now , really , is dig into its past specifically , its strange evolution from a general entertainment studio to a tech startup building as far as anyone knows augmented reality glasses based on fiber optic technology . sean hollister has ampnbspchronicled this process , including a long partnership with digital effects studio weta workshop and several patents covering sophisticated projection and tracking systems . magic leap s patent claims and illustrations which have been covered extensively have given us a better idea of how the company thinks its product might be used , but they shouldn t be confused for real plans . recently , however , a reader pointed me toward something new ampnbspa long slideshow from a far younger magic leap , outlining its ambitious plans for remaking the worlds of computing and entertainment . aside from the handful of eyewitness accounts , it s never been clear how much of magic leap s hype is warranted . this presentation adds more evidence that whatever the company s actual achievements , it s always aimed incredibly almost science fictionally high . paging dj magic mixmuch of the document , which was appended to a patent filing , covers things we already know . it goes into detail about magic leap s trademark sensoryware augmented reality platform , as well as previously seen games like monster battle . we get pictures of ampnbspthe strange totem controllers shaped like rings and charm bracelets , and use cases drawn from ampnbspshort films and graphic design . but we get these couched in what seems like a larger product pitch for someone outside the patent office . marked as a confidential draft , the presentation makes ampnbsphuge promises around augmented reality , describing a platform that could deliver games , concerts , social experiences , and productivity tools to any demographic . in fact , it lists quite a number of demographics , from comic con attendee creative cara to music fan dj magic mix . there s a heavy focus on gaming here , with separate categories for average , mmo , extreme , and awkwardly girl gamers , as well as a gamified worker and a market of anti gamers apparently women who enjoy examining nutritional supplements at grocery stores , although frankly your guess is as good as mine here . the document actually lends a little context to the patent drawings we saw last year , crediting the inspirations behind them and expanding on their purpose . the image below , for example , is a more detailed version of a patent line drawing , telling us that civil engineer average andrew is opening up a virtual room to read an email from his colleague . you may also recognize average andrew as the guy watching augmented reality football in ampnbsplast year s illustrations . and ampnbspthat freaky gargoyle bursting out of a cereal box ? according to a seven step grocery shopping scenario , it s inviting magic leap wearing children to start a game of ampnbspmonster battle . we also hear about its tentative plans for games like the robot shooting demo that magic leap ampnbsprevealed in march , ampnbspa project it said was fairly old by then . the presentation suggests that it could expand into a massively multiplayer franchise like halo , becoming the first game to blend digital and physical objects something the demo video , which shows players using a physical prop gun to shoot holographic enemies , certainly does . a much weirder detail is the ad for a game called book of spells , a name i haven t previously seen associated with magic leap . book of spells was supposed to ampnbspuse a pair of quasi steampunk magic leap glasses and a wand shaped controller to let players conjure creatures from a physical book . why is that weird ? because around the same time , sony used a nearly identical premise and the exact same name ampnbspin a game for its wonderbook augmented reality peripheral . magic leap pitched a way cooler version of sony s wonderbookit s not clear how old this presentation is , although there seems to be a copyright on magic leap s ampnbspbook of spells images , a year after magic leap started its overall shift toward augmented reality . wonderbook book of spells , a licensed harry potter property , was announced by sony s london production studio in mid . there s no obvious connection between it and magic leap s game the premise is fairly obvious , sony used a move motion controller and flat screen instead of glasses , and the timelines seemingly overlap too closely to be one project . but it s a weird coincidence at the very least . and unlike the patent illustrations , this doesn t look like a case of magic leap using other products as case studies . in fact , it says the game has huge magic leap tentpole franchise potential . then again , the tone of the presentation suggests that pretty much every idea has huge tentpole franchise potential . magic leap has gotten , if anything , more close lipped over the past year . president and ceo rony abovitz ampnbsphas promised that the company is gearing up to build millions of things , but it s perpetually pushing back announcements on any hardware and software development kits . these images aren t precisely a peek behind its veil of secrecy many were explicitly just concepts , any ideas it s kept have probably evolved significantly , and much of the hardware design still doesn t seem technologically feasible . but they re weird enough that looking them over can still delight and amuse . i ll just close with this picture of an augmented reality email plant . what is an email plant ? i ll let magic leap explain . let email be a tree . branch is a person , leaves are messages . old messages are brown and eventually fall to the ground . twigs , sub branches are determined by connectivity of ccs or something . user can easily prune branches from annoying people , or put those branches on the back of the tree . honestly , that sounds pretty great . 