 ces has become more of a car show than a tech show in the last few years , and this year just piled on the proof . in fact , ces was full of vehicles of all shapes and sizes , and many of them were electric . sure , some were pure fantasy , but others were completely practical the ecoreco m air was collapsable , fun to ride , and came with decent mileage inboard showed up with an electric skateboard that doubles as a regular one and chevrolet gave us a ride in the bolt perhaps the first affordable electric car with proper range . but sometimes you just want to throw practicality in the gutter . sometimes you just want to have fun , and this year that meant driving the electric equivalent of a three wheeled motorcycle around las vegas . arcimoto is a company that s based in eugene , oregon , where they ve been making such three wheeled electric vehicles for years . each iteration brings improvements better battery life , better range , and lower weight . the company s newest model , known simply as the srk , exemplifies that progress . the eighth iteration is pounds lighter than the company s last generation vehicle , it has a top speed of miles per hour , and it will be the first one to go into mass production . by simplifying the machine like using handlebars instead of a steering wheel they ve dropped the target price for the srk from nearly , to , . the srk looks wild , but you could use it every dayarcimoto founder mark frohnmayer would argue that , at that price , the srk is practical , especially considering people only drive an average of about miles per day . and he might be right , because as fun as the srk was to drive around las vegas , it also felt like a vehicle you could use pretty regularly . let s start with the srk s ride , which is incredibly smooth . there s not much to the vehicle save for the wheels , the seats , and the roll cage , but the suspension keeps most of the bumps at bay . i expected to be rattled around a bit , especially considering how light the srk is , but it was a joy to ride . that experience is enhanced by the srk s low center of gravity , which makes it even more fun to pilot around . the ride is extremely smooth ampnbspbut it can get a bit chilly the srk s ride is also smooth because the seats are very comfortable . but the interior is a bit spartan right now , with little more beyond a touchscreen display that shows basic information like speed and range . there s also a set of clamps that act as a phone dock in the center of the handlebars . arcimoto says customers use this mostly for google maps directions , but it s hard to imagine people resisting the temptation to check twitter or snapchat since it s right there . you wouldn t want to drive the srk in cold weather , either i was pretty chilly while driving it around , especially thanks to a cold snap while we were in vegas . arcimoto says these things will change by the time the srk enters production , though . the base model will have more basics like vents and heating for defrosting and some temperature control , and a full hvac system will be available as an upgrade option . the company will also sell an enclosure if you don t want your ride to leave you exposed . but in the right climate , the srk would be a lot of fun to have , especially because of how exhilarating it can be to drive the thing . frohnmayer let me get my feet wet with the arcimoto in the parking lot behind the legendary vegas eatery , the peppermill . bobbing and weaving around the dozen or so light poles reminded me of being on a jet ski you really have to stay on the throttle to make tight turns , which makes it more of a thrill to ride . on the open road , that agility was amplified . the srk feels more maneuverable the faster you go . as i crossed , , and miles per hour , the motorcycle handlebars were giving me almost too much control . slight twitches left or right banked me toward the passing lane to my left or the guard rail to my right . that was doubly terrifying because of how exposed you are , even though you re strapped in by a four point harness . after a few minutes at speed i finally got the hang of the experience , and my desire to own an srk eclipsed my fears . the base model will have a range of miles , which as electric vehicles go is on the border of being practical . arcimoto plans to offer an extended range model that will give riders miles on one full charge , which makes it look a lot more like something you could drive every day . arcimoto says the base model s battery system will last at least six years . a regenerative brake on the handlebars lets you feed energy back into the system which shows up on the dashboard and the trike supports both level and level charging , so you can fill the battery back up at home or on the road . but the reason i d really want an srk is that it s just a pure joy to drive . the production version will do mph in about seven seconds , which isn t going to win you many drag races , but it should be plenty enough to make your heart skip a beat when you crank the throttle . in fact , the throttle was limited on the version that arcimoto brought to ces it could only do in about seconds and it was still a thrill to gun it every time a red light turned green . arcimoto is still months away from production , so the company brought the only two existing prototypes of the srk to ces . frohnmayer and his small team have been touring them around the country , giving rides to the press and the public , and using the feedback to make small design changes on the fly . this seemed like a very smart idea for a small company to embrace until i found myself stranded on the side of the i freeway , that is . our experience with the srk actually took place over a few days , because the first day we took it out there was a problem with the hydraulic system . arcimoto had recently changed a small lug on the hydraulic brake pedal , and it was keeping the pedal on my vehicle from fully depressing . that the brake was slightly engaged wasn t the problem rather , the pedal was choking the whole hydraulic system . it s all fun and games until you re stuck on the side of the freewaythis kept my srk from eclipsing miles per hour , something we first realized once we were on i . more terrifying , though , was that the problem was draining the battery . we had set out with both prototypes at percent , good enough for well over miles according to arcimoto . by the time we pulled to the side of the freeway , my srk was down to percent battery . we were luckily able to limp back to the hotel on the remaining charge . i was upset that the fun was cut short , but frohnmayer was already on the phone with the company s technicians back in oregon , and he assured me a fix would be swift . he was right . two days later we met back at the peppermill , and we took both srks around las vegas for well over an hour with no issues at all . it s somewhat of a tradition at the verge to drive weird , crazy , three wheeled vehicles at ces . two years ago , it was toyota s itty bitty electric i road concept . last year , it was the weird gas powered prototype from elio . i proudly accepted the torch when i hopped on the arcimoto srk and took it on the streets and highways of las vegas , and with all due respect to my colleagues , my ride was the most fun . 