 jan khan has less than hours before the police come to destroy his home , but he doesn t seem too worried . it s a drizzly thursday afternoon , and he s playing a pickup game of cricket with a group of other afghans at a makeshift camp in calais a northern french port city that has become an important transit point for illegal immigrants looking to cross the english channel and reach the uk . many came to europe hoping to find refuge from the war and violence that has ravaged their home countries . instead , they ve been left homeless and without legal protections , looking to england as a last hope for asylum . khan is , but he looks much older , with weathered skin and a crooked nose that he claims was broken by the french police . he says he fled afghanistan seven years ago , as war fueled violence began creeping into the village where he lived with his wife and three young children . he thought migrating to europe would bring better fortunes , and hoped to one day rescue his family from the chaos back home . but those dreams have slowly dissipated . khan has spent the last several years shuffling from one informal camp to another , across various countries in europe , sleeping under makeshift tents and surviving on food from local aid groups . he hasn t spoken to his family in over a year . after nearly a decade of wandering and failing to attain legal status , he s found himself trapped in a state of purgatory , caught between the danger that still grows back home , and a europe that has fallen far short of his expectations . everyday i m dead here . how can i explain to you ? , khan asked me last thursday . i lost my life . everyday i m dead here . just a day earlier , he and about other migrants afghans , syrians , sudanese , eritreans were forced to leave three nearby camps under orders from the regional government . about french police stormed the sites and destroyed their tents , prompting some to make a last rush to sneak onto england bound ferries . local authorities cited deplorable hygiene as the primary reason for the operation , saying they disbanded the camps to control an outbreak of scabies a contagious but treatable skin infection caused by a parasite though humanitarian groups criticized it as nothing more than a show of force . the police offered to bus the migrants to regional shelters where they could shower , but many refused , fearing they d be taken to a site far away from the port . instead , they set up a small camp here , at an outdoor food distribution center run by a local charity called salam . the site is located near the ferries that regularly traverse the english channel , and directly across from a row of middle class apartment buildings . it s a short walk from the camps that were destroyed last week , continuing what has become a disturbing trend in calais . in , french and english authorities disbanded a major migrant camp known as the jungle , but more have sprung up in its place , full of refugees , young and old , seeking passage to england . police vans were still stationed outside salam on thursday , but things were calm inside . hundreds of people all men had gathered , some sleeping under piles of dirty blankets , others milling about , smoking cigarettes . a cluster of plastic sheet tents had been erected on the far end of the site , next to a small row of faucets where people were bathing or washing clothes . a group of afghans were singing traditional songs under one tent , while young sudanese men batted around an old soccer ball . the wall of a large warehouse at the edge of the dock appeared to serve as the only toilet on site . a migrant prays at a makeshift camp in calais , france . the geographic divides were clear the african contingent was huddled in one corner , syrians , iraqis , and afghans in another but there were no obvious signs of tension or hostility . the police crackdown , it seems , forged even stronger ties among the various groups . yesterday we were talking about how we must live together , says assad , a year old sudanese man who fled his country in . we stay together because we know if we separate , police can come and do something to us . some migrants had been here for months or years , after failed attempts to cross the channel , while others had only arrived last week . yet the stories they recounted were largely the same . their lives had been torn apart by war and violence back home , leaving them with no choice but to flee . a teenager from darfur showed me the four bullet wounds he collected on his leg the night his father was killed by a militia . a year old eritrean fled the army because of the horrific tasks he was ordered to carry out . he says returning would mean death , though attempting to cross the channel carries its own risks . earlier last month , a sudanese migrant was killed after trying to sneak into england by hiding under a car . many migrants see hope in englandofficial figures show that nearly , people applied for asylum in europe last year almost , more than the previous year with the majority , coming from war torn syria . most choose their destination based on connections or social networks they may have there , experts say , as well as perceived economic opportunities . they re also typically men breadwinners who are expected to go out and find better fortunes for their families . female migrants , by contrast , tend to travel with children , and therefore pose greater risks for smugglers crossing into europe . those at calais seemed hopeful that the uk would show them greater leniency , but that s not always the case , says franck d vell , senior researcher at oxford university s centre on migration policy and society . although england s asylum acceptance rate is higher than france s percent to percent , it s still far below scandinavian countries , and the application process remains difficult to navigate . there is always a certain amount of people who perceive england as the motherland of democracy , rule of law , free law where you can express your opinion freely , d vell says . so for people who come from a refugee situation this is obviously very important , because finally they want to be in a free and democratic country . a group of migrants bat around a soccer ball along the port of calais . but the economic crisis has made it harder for migrants to find work in europe , and right wing politicians are looking to tighten up their borders . last week s expulsion in calais comes after right leaning , anti immigrant political parties made major gains in european parliamentary elections , a result that the french media described as an earthquake . far right parties made significant gains in austria , denmark , and the uk , and performed especially well in france , where the front national party claimed victory with percent of the vote . on thursday afternoon , workers from salam and m decins du monde , another humanitarian organization , convened a large meeting in the center of the campsite , gathering representatives from each nationality . the friday deadline for their final expulsion was drawing near , and they needed a plan of action . the deliberations were long and at times arduous , with translators zig zagging across at least four different languages , but the decision was resolute they wanted to stay at the docks , and they wouldn t leave until they were guaranteed better living conditions . we live like animals here . it was a moment of remarkable optimism , peppered with rounds of applause and cheers , though their future remains unclear . the campground at salam is intact today , a week after the deadline , but authorities in calais have made clear their intent to disband all migrant settlements along the port . the migrants i spoke with seemed nonchalant about the possible expulsion , and remained intent on crossing over to england , even if it entails more hardship . they acknowledged some uncertainty about what may await them on the other side of the water , though they all seemed guided by the same hope that things would be better than they are at the port of calais , let alone the war zones they ve left behind . we live like animals here , khan said , before quickly correcting himself . animals live better than us , because animals have someone to look after them . 