 on a rainy morning this week in san francisco , newly appointed mozilla ceo brendan eich sat down for coffee with one of the people calling for his resignation . hampton catlin , a ampnbspprominent developer of apps for the nascent firefox os , announced he was abandoning the platform due to eich amprsquos handling of the disclosure that in he ampnbspdonated , to the fight against same sex marriage . california amprsquos proposition , which passed with percent of the vote in , made same sex marriage illegal in california until the law was overturned by the supreme court . over the course of an hour , catlin explained the suffering that prop . caused for him and his partner , a brit who couldn amprsquot immigrate until marriage became legal . catlin asked eich for an apology . he didn amprsquot get one . instead , eich ampnbspresigned as ceo and stepped down from the board of the mozilla foundation . mozilla prides itself on being held to a different standard and , this past week , we didn amprsquot live up to it , the company amprsquos executive chairwoman , mitchell baker , said in ampnbspa blog post today . we know why people are hurt and angry , and they are right it amprsquos because we haven amprsquot stayed true to ourselves . suddenly eich , who formerly served as mozilla amprsquos chief technical officer and previously invented the programming language javascript , was out of a company he co founded in . it may be challenging for a ceo , but everyone in our community can have different beliefs about all sorts of things that may be in conflict , eich ampnbsptold cnet earlier in the week . but the challenge proved greater than his leadership . we haven t stayed true to ourselves . in nearly two decades working on mozilla amprsquos mission , eich became known as a brilliant technician and a crusader for the open web . but after becoming mozilla amprsquos ceo days ago , eich became known primarily for his opposition to same sex marriage . in an era when jeff bezos ampnbspdonates millions of dollars in support of marriage equality in washington and mark zuckerberg ampnbspmarches in the san francisco pride parade , eich stood out both for his opposition and his refusal to discuss his beliefs . his appointment sparked an ampnbspextraordinarily public debate between him and the broader mozilla community over when a ceo can claim a right to his own unpopular beliefs ampmdash and what should happen when those beliefs clash with the written values of his company . but eich found little public support for his argument that he could uphold mozilla amprsquos commitment to equality at work while funding discrimination at home . negative reactions from ampnbspemployees , ampnbspdevelopers , and even ampnbspokcupid began to roil mozilla at a time when the shift to mobile devices has left its core product and revenue source , the desktop firefox web browser , looking increasingly like a relic . the eich controversy was distracting mozilla from its efforts to compete in the new world , and ultimately may have even hindered the open web itself . it amprsquos clear that brendan cannot lead mozilla in this setting , baker ampnbsptold recode . the ability to lead ampmdash particularly for the ceo ampmdash is fundamental to the role and that is not possible here . road to resignationthe road to eich amprsquos departure is filled with unlikely twists . for starters , mozilla already fought this battle once , in . that amprsquos when eich amprsquos donation first became public , leading to ampnbspa firestorm on twitter . he responded with ampnbspa blog post in which he took exception to being labeled a bigot , and asserted what would become a refrain when the issue resurfaced last month that mozillians should focus on their shared mission , and not require participants to first pass an ideological purity test . otherwise , he wrote , these communities will tend to splinter , and that is likely to be a net loss for everyone . the controversy quickly died down , perhaps because eich was then merely mozilla amprsquos chief technical officer and not , as now , its public face . but the tension lingered . meanwhile , eich amprsquos views were rapidly growing out of step with his fellow americans . in , opposing gay marriage was a view shared by a majority of americans . eich amprsquos opposition to gay marriage was shared , in , by barack obama . but by , views had shifted ampnbspmore than half the country now supports same sex marriage ampmdash obama included . few who went to the polls in would have guessed that donating to prop . would later be seen as an offense that disqualified a person from running a company . but those calling for eich amprsquos resignation said his financial support would affect mozilla amprsquos ability to attract and retain talent . it may also have had a negative effect on fundraising at the ampnbspmozilla foundation , which operates separately from the company that makes firefox and relies on private donations to further its advocacy of the open web . did eich even want this job ? perhaps the biggest surprise in all this is that mozilla , an organization that employs a host of lgbt people and vocally supports same sex marriage , came to be led by someone who donated money to stop it from happening . as mozilla amprsquos co founder and cto , eich was hardly a dark horse candidate for the job . but his appointment came only at the end of a protracted search that saw the board first interview and reject other candidates . in ampnbspan interview with venturebeat , eich all but said he wished he hadn amprsquot taken the job . i was asked to put my hat in , and at first i didn amprsquot want to , he told the publication . but now i amprsquom it . the week before eich was announced as ceo , ampnbsphalf the board quit . mozilla says that two board members had long planned to leave and that the third , venture capitalist and former mozilla ceo john lilly , left for reasons unrelated to the prop . donation . but the departures have contributed to the impression that company is in turmoil . eich amprsquos departure today , which came without any news of who might step into the ceo role , will only add to that impression . under a threatmozilla declined to make eich available for an interview . but he ampnbsptold cnet that if his resignation were forced , it would bode ill for mozilla and the web . mozilla is under a threat here . we don amprsquot know how big , he said . if mozilla cannot continue to operate according to its principles of inclusiveness , where you can work on the mission no matter what your background or other beliefs , i think we amprsquoll probably fail . eich suggested that mozillians in indonesia largely oppose same sex marriage , and might abandon the project if they felt that their views would not be accepted in the organization . but voices in mozilla amprsquos home country proved louder , and more persuasive . a sad victory . catlin , for his part , called eich amprsquos departure a sad victory . he can still keep his personal beliefs , but i wanted him to recognize that we faced real issues with immigration and say that he never intended to cause people problems , catlin ampnbspwrote on his blog . it amprsquos heartbreaking to us that he was unwilling to say even that . still , at the end of his post catlin said he would return to developing apps for firefox os ampmdash precisely the sort of response that those calling for eich amprsquos ouster had hoped for . in coming months , mozilla amprsquos next ceo will have to address pressing questions about its declining share of the desktop browser market , its languishing mobile apps , and the wildly uncertain future of its mobile operating system . those problems would have proved tricky to navigate whether eich was ceo or not . in the meantime , the question of whether a ceo can leave his beliefs at the door when he walks into work seems to have been answered firmly in the negative . when a ceo amprsquos values clash with the values of the company he leads , expect the company to win . . video wrap margin top px ! important watch now seconds on the verge 