 qualcomm is the mobile industry s equivalent of a god omnipotent and omnipresent , yet invisible to the naked eye . the company that was founded on the premise of building quality communications can now be found inside every major smartphone in the us . even the fiercely independent apple , which designs its own mobile processors , has no choice but to use qualcomm s lte modems . the same is true of samsung , whose exynos chip is replaced by a qualcomm snapdragon for the us and other markets . but qualcomm s influence spreads much wider and deeper still . a week ago , verizon introduced the motorola droid turbo as its flagship phone for the holidays . stacked to the gills with the highest of specs , this new android phone derives its name from moto s turbo charger , which turns a minute charge into as much as eight hours of battery life . the same accessory is bundled with the nexus , another moto product , and htc has a competing rapid charger . samsung also touts a to in tagline for the galaxy note s ability to recharge half its power in half an hour . all that branding and marketing is just putting different stickers on the same thing qualcomm s quick charge . . i love how every manufacturer talks up qualcomm s quickcharge like they invented it themselves . rich brome rbrome october , the other turbo aspect of the droid turbo s spec sheet is the . ghz snapdragon system on chip that powers it . like every other non iphone flagship device released in the last two years , it uses qualcomm s latest processor . the lg g and g , the sony xperia z , z , and z , the nexus and , the htc one of both and , and every samsung galaxy variant to reach the united states are all built around a multi core qualcomm heart . outside the android realm , windows phone is exclusively reliant on snapdragon processors , to the point where microsoft directs potential phone manufacturers to the qualcomm reference design as a guide on how to build their handsets . snapdragon is also the default choice for blackberry , whose latest passport device uses a . ghz snapdragon . we think of google and apple as the primary drivers of mobile innovation , but qualcomm is just as instrumental in setting the pace of change . htc s sensor hub that enables motion launch gestures and the dot view case for the one smartphone wouldn t be possible without the snapdragon sensor engine . the current benchmark for smartphone battery life is set by sony s xperia z and z compact handsets , both running a snapdragon . calum macdougall , sony s head of xperia marketing , admits that principally it is the processor that s responsible for this improved power efficiency and endurance . motorola managed to update the moto x to android . ahead of some nexus devices last year , and qualcomm was once again credited with contributing to that alacrity . in an interview with the verge this summer , moto s software chief and former android engineer steve horowitz explained that great partnerships like that with the snapdragon processor maker are the secret to motorola s rapid software upgrades . at one time there were other players in this space , but qualcomm s innovation is what put them at the top of the industry . it s impossible to find a smartphone manufacturer that doesn t speak of qualcomm in glowing terms . htc calls its chip supplier an extremely important partner , while lg echoes motorola s language in saying that it has a great partnership with qualcomm and both companies respect one another tremendously . lg goes on to add that at one time there were other players in this space , but qualcomm s innovation is what put them at the top of the industry . the central innovation responsible for qualcomm s present dominance are those lte modems that even apple can t get away from . the snapdragon system on chip integrates the modem and applications processor into a single chip and is thus dramatically more efficient both in terms of space and power requirements than the competition and makes the processor choice for most phone makers a foregone conclusion . these days , it s a matter of picking between the various strata of snapdragon models rather than the various processor vendors . nvidia continues to fight on with its tegra series of chips , and the new k inside the nexus and the shield tablet is an undeniable performance beast , but the company has essentially withdrawn from the smartphone market . the tegra on s htc one x was the last sincere effort to push qualcomm s snapdragon off its perch as the premier mobile processor , though even then it was obvious how important that integrated lte connectivity would be as the phone was released with a qualcomm chip in the us . everybody loves qualcomm , everybody fears qualcommin spite of the high regard that qualcomm enjoys among smartphone manufacturers , there s evident unease about the paucity of choice that it presents as the sole provider of competitive processors . huawei has developed its own quad core processor , samsung is maintaining the long running exynos series , and lg just announced the octa core nuclun processor . lg is quick to point out that our nuclun ap gives us a bit more flexibility but it was never intended to replace snapdragon . at this point , it s almost inconceivable that anything will . qualcomm s earned itself a seemingly unassailable lead that won t be conceded until someone s able to build a better or more efficient lte solution . intel keeps trying and mediatek is enjoying success as a popular alternative for entry level smartphones like those in google s android one initiative , but the lion s share of the smartphone market is powered by snapdragon technology . what should scare any potential qualcomm competitor even more is the fact that the company s also making inroads into smartwatches and other connected devices . the lg g watch r is powered by a snapdragon that handily outperforms and outlasts the moto s dated texas instruments processor . even the gear s , which is samsung s effort to diversify away from google s dominant android software , can t avoid using a snapdragon chip for its processing and connectivity . by the end of this year , qualcomm expects more than a billion devices to have shipped with its g or g technology on board . the company routinely posts annual earnings in the tens of billions of dollars and its most recent financial quarter was closed with an exceedingly healthy . billion net profit . in years of operation , qualcomm has spent more than billion on r ampdto reach the top of the mobile world , qualcomm has done an awful lot right and very little wrong . it picked the right side in the wimax vs . lte war for the next generation of mobile internet technology , and it has integrated new features into its silicon that have been helpful to its partners and beneficial to end users . for a company now occupying a godlike position of preeminence , qualcomm s ascent has been prosaically gradual and simple . there ll never be a shortage of competition in the white hot mobile market , but mobile innovation today whether manifested in the droid turbo , htc sensor hub , or lumia refocus is built atop a foundation of qualcomm chips . 