 theranos is more likely than conventional labs to return blood work with unusual numbers , according to the first ampnbspcomparison study between the silicon valley start up and two well known commercial labs . the results suggest that doctors who use blood tests from theranos may decide to treat patients for conditions they don t have or fail to treat patients who need their help . theranos results were compared to those from labcorp and quest diagnostics , in the report from mount sinai , which was published in the journal of clinical investigations . for multiple tests , theranos results were more likely to fall outside the range that s considered normal for a healthy adult compared with results from the other companies . theranos results didn t match those from the other labsin addition , theranos results from certain tests often didn t match up to those from quest diagnostics and labcorp . for instance , the results on cholesterol tests which doctors use to check up on heart health were systematically lower than results returned by the other two labs , says eric schadt , a biologist at icahn school of medicine at mount sinai and a co author of the study . so a doctor who uses theranos tests might choose not to treat a patient for high cholesterol or recommend an inadequate treatment plan . theranos , a blood testing startup that s been valued at billion , is known for its fingerprick blood tests , which it says can generate results for hundreds of tests using only tiny samples of blood . until recently , the startup was thought of as a huge success story , both because of its technology and its charismatic ceo , elizabeth holmes . but reports from the wall street journal published last year cast doubts about the accuracy of theranos technology . then , in january , federal officials announced that theranos newark , california , laboratory posed immediate jeopardy to patient safety . because of this , theranos biggest partner , the drugstore chain walgreens , shut down one of theranos clinics now , the drugstore giant is reportedly trying terminate its agreement with the startup . but it s worth remembering that the controversy surrounding the company didn t start last october . from the start , theranos dodged opportunities to validate its findings in peer reviewed journals even after claiming that it would do so last october . today s comparison study was conducted without theranos s cooperation . researchers attempted to contact theranos through linkedin after receiving results from all three companies for each participant , but were unsuccessful , schadt says . so the researchers say they aren t sure theranos inventions were used to return results for blood samples drawn from patient s fingers it s possible that commercial machines were used instead . theranos told the verge that all of the tests were run on theranos technology . so today s report represents the public s first look at theranos real life performance . the scientists used linkedin to contact theranosin response to the study , theranos wrote a letter to the journal of clinical investigation saying the company was disappointed that a flawed study was published . theranos told the verge that the study s authors misrepresented some of theranos results and that the methodology they employed was wrong . the authors have responded to these allegations in a document they shared with the verge . in it , they state that they had limited resources , but that they stand by their work . we think our study results are of interest , and we hope will motivate others in the scientific community to conduct additional research to validate our findings and address any limitations of our approach , they write . this is indeed the scientific approach . theranos also denies that the researchers attempted to contact the company before the study s publication . the authors are making false claims to the media to inappropriately bolster their credibility and that of their study , the letter states . in a phone call , theranos spokesperson brooke buchanan said theranos staff searched for emails and voicemails from the researchers , but could find nothing . they didn t know the researchers used linkedin until today . it s unfortunate that they chose to use that , rather than just call us directly , she said . the authors are making false claims . to compare theranos tests to those conducted by commercial labs , all blood samples were taken on a single day , within a few hours , from participants . the first blood samples were taken from participants arms at an outpatient clinic . then , researchers drove participants to two different theranos walgreens wellness centers in phoenix , arizona , before taking venous samples from them again . once the experiment was complete , the team wrote to theranos ceo elizabeth holmes on linkedin . they also used linkedin to contact sunny balwani , theranos president and patrick o neill , theranos chief creative officer , to ask about the procedures the company used . these failed attempts were made on december th , schadt says . two screenshots of the messages can be viewed ampnbsphere and ampnbsphere they show that the messages were never read . the researchers found that there was a significant degree of variability between quest and labcorp as well not just between those two and theranos . but theranos returned abnormal results more often than quest diagnostics or labcorp . these problems are likely fixable , schadt says . as it stands , theranos results may mean doctors will make bad decisions , says eleftherios diamandis , head of clinical biochemistry at the university of toronto . results that vary as much as these could mean doctors will treat a patient who doesn t need care or miss a health condition that needs treatment . the finding suggests that theranos fingerprick collection isn t as good as a standard vein draw . what would i do if i were a patient ? he says . i will leave the choice to the patients but for me , the choice is obvious . in its letter to the journal , theranos says that taking a blood sample from a person s arm before doing a fingerprick may make the fingerprick tests less reliable . the company also reprimands the researchers on their methodology the study doesn t say if more than one draw was conducted on each finger , for instance . these fundamental problems problems with the conduct of the study reflect the lack of understanding of the study investigators concerning basic sample collection procedures . . . the company states . in addition , theranos lab director daniel young told the verge that theranos didn t report abnormal results as often as the researchers claim in the study . not at all clear why theranos would ever list us as a potential competitor . theranos also claims that a conflict of interest wasn t disclosed in the study . two of the study s authors , schadt and joel dudley , have ties to a bioinformatics company called numedii that works in drug discovery , the company states in its letter to the journal , and that qualifies it as potential competitor . we are not currently working on drug discovery , but ampnbspwe have in the past and could again in the future , young told the verge on the phone . numeddii , for its part , told the verge that the two companies have distinct and different business models , so it is not at all clear why theranos would ever list us as a potential competitor . the researchers give a similar response in the document they shared with the verge . schadt says the biggest problem the researchers faced while conducting this study was that they weren t sure which machines theranos used . all the theranos samples were taken from participants fingers , so it seems likely that the tests were conducted using theranos inventions , which is what the company says happened . but a wsj report which suggested last year that theranos has diluted blood samples so they could be analyzed on commercial machines , cast doubt in the researchers minds . if today s study is representative of theranos usual performance , it raises some significant questions about federal lab certification processes and inspections that are already in place , says richard horowitz , an emeritus professor of pathology at ucla . testing disparities do occur , he says . but this study shows that there s a need for more investigation of the factors that contribute to test variability . the us government cited theranos newark lab for putting patients at risk in january . theranos says it has performed nearly six million tests in the past two years . the company could put qualms about its methods to rest if it were to publish its data until then , studies like today s represent the best information available about theranos accuracy . in an email , buchanan told the verge that theranos plans to publish data in the near future . stay tuned ! 