 since its publication yesterday , newsweek s huge bitcoin scoop has proved unsurprisingly explosive both online and offline . a cover story by reporter leah mcgrath goodman strongly stated that a man who went by the name dorian nakamoto was in fact satoshi nakamoto , the secretive creator of bitcoin . but the piece has raised questions about everything from journalistic ethics to whether model trains would make an appropriate apology gift . amid heavy criticism , however , ampnbspnewsweek says it s still ampnbspstanding by the story . ms . goodman s research was conducted under the same high editorial and ethical standards that have guided newsweek for more than years . newsweek stands strongly behind ms . goodman and her article . ms . goodman s reporting was motivated by a search for the truth surrounding a major business story , absent any other agenda . the facts as reported point toward mr . nakamoto s role in the founding of bitcoin . newsweek s response follows a sharp refutation from nakamoto , who ampnbsptold the ap that his original words were misinterpreted and that he had not , in fact , even heard of bitcoin until he was contacted for the article . after ampnbspchasing nakamoto through los angeles , reporters are still attempting to make contact with him . the bitcoin community , meanwhile , is trying to get in touch for a different reason they want to create some kind of happy ending for a reclusive man who has been driven into the public eye . as of this writing , about bitcoins over , at the current rate have been ampnbspsent to an address run by a member of the bitcoin subreddit , who will attempt to deliver them to nakamoto at the end of the month . if this person is satoshi , then the funds are a small thanks and won t make much of a difference , they write . however , if this person is not satoshi , then these funds will serve as a sorry for what happened to you , help with medical bills his family is facing , any legal bills they may incur , or anything else . separately , a group is debating the merits of ampnbspsending dorian nakamoto model trains , listed as one of his hobbies in the newsweek article . these suggestions have been toned down significantly since yesterday , when popular posts suggested hiring bodyguards or helping with a relocation effort . goodman s story opened with an apparent admission by nakamoto i am no longer involved in that and i cannot discuss it . . . it s been turned over to other people . they are in charge of it now . i no longer have any connection . beyond that , though , it relied on parallels between the two men , bolstered by interviews with his family , former coworkers , and current bitcoin lead developer gavin andresen . dorian nakamoto s political beliefs , alleged computer engineering prowess , periods of unemployment and ill health , and linguistic quirks were all employed in service of the story . in other words , there was plenty for skeptics to pick apart ampmdash and that s exactly what happened . the bitcoin subreddit immediately began its own investigation , pulling in things like ampnbsppoorly written amazon reviews to contrast with known nakamoto writings . dorian nakamoto s door , where reporters leave cards amp gyms pitch memberships . more on bloombergwest pm et pic . twitter . com gphddj tza ampmdash jon erlichman jonerlichman march , the bigger issue , though , was how far goodman had gone to expose dorian nakamoto s identity . among other things , the story ran with a photograph of nakamoto s house in temple city , complete with a readable shot of his license plate and house number . the address wasn t given , but a single well constructed google search could reveal it . amid harsh criticism , the photograph disappeared , only to reappear not long after . the same removal and reinstatement ampnbspseemingly happened with a paragraph of the essay . goodman was alternately praised for her research and castigated for making a man with a quiet , low profile life vulnerable to paparazzi and potential theft satoshi nakamoto is thought to possess million in bitcoin . that stuff other investigative tech reporters are doing ? quoting court records and press releases , riffing on tweets ? not reporting . ampmdash jason pontin jason pontin march , the reddit community , with its strong stance against revealing identifying information , quickly ampnbspclaimed the moral high ground . but moderators also worked unsuccessfully to stop redditors from doxxing goodman herself in revenge , deleting threatening comments . great , i already see the next headlines bitcoin users send death threats to newsweek author , ampnbspsaid one member of r bitcoin . you re doing bitcoin a terrible service by starting a counter witch hunt . the occasional , inevitable misogynist tweet or comment didn t help the cause either , although these were in the vast minority . elsewhere online , people were debating the ethics of just ampnbspreading the article . with its return to print , newsweek had instituted a new paywall that prevented some from accessing the story , leading them to turn to recaps on other sites or mirrored copies on reddit . was this stealing an article from newsweek ? did newsweek have an obligation to make its controversial story as widely accessible as possible ? these questions were at least headed off in its followup statement , ampnbspwhich was exempted from the paywall . despite newsweek s statement , it s becoming widely suspected that dorian nakamoto was simply an innocent bystander . an account associated with the real satoshi nakamoto has ampnbspdenied any connection , though it s entirely possible it s now operated by someone else or is a deliberate attempt by dorian nakamoto to shake suspicion he ll deny everything , his brother said before the story ran . either way , the tide has turned against the magazine . all i can think of is , i m so glad i m not the editor of newsweek , ampnbspsaid tina brown ampmdash who , up until about six months ago , actually was newsweek s editor . update goodman has also ampnbspspoken to forbes , further explaining the details of her short conversation with dorian nakamoto . update the los angeles county sheriff s department is now corroborating the conversation between goodman and nakamoto described in newsweek . in a statement posted to ampnbspforbes , captain mike parker from the sheriff s headquarters said he spoke with both deputies , who described the quotes as accurate . the ampnbspassociated press also interviewed parker , who noted that the quote from the deputy about nakamoto s involvement with bitcoin came only after goodman explained why she was there . 