 for years , google has been building a lobbying machine that outpaces its silicon valley peers , turning the internet giant into a major washington presence . in , the company ampnbspsurpassed at ampampt , verizon , and comcast in lobbying spending dollars , and it s been particularly adept at building relationships with the white house . as of march , google averaged ampnbspabout one meeting a week with the obama administration , and google staff frequently move into jobs with the white house , or vice versa . but the figures on meetings and revolving doors don t always show how google maneuvers those relationships when facing a fight . more than , pages of emails the nonprofit group ampnbspcampaign for accountability recently launched ampnbspa project to compile documents about the company s lobbying practices , obtained through the freedom of information act . the group says the repository of documents will be a resource for monitoring how google interacts with the government . the first installment , which the group obtained through an independent researcher and shared with the verge , features ampnbspmore than , pages of emails between the white house office of science and technology policy and google employees . in the email exchanges , google employees coordinate their messaging with the white house , occasionally steering around divisions within the administration . nothing in the documents suggests improper behavior they are a window into google s high level work on policy matters , and provide a case study on how deep the company s lobbying efforts go . provides a case study of a google persuasion campaignin december , google saw a threat , as thousands of representatives met at the world conference on international telecommunications to consider a proposed revision of the international telecommunication regulations , which govern how communication services are used around the world . after years , the conference was set to determine whether to bring more of the internet under the purview of the regulations . the us government had a seat at the table , as did google , which sent private industry delegates to the conference to advise the us . google cast opposition to the revision as ampnbspa fight for internet freedom , and certainly others in the tech industry took that line , although ampnbspcritics argued google was more interested in preventing increased costs for using global network infrastructure . the emails obtained by the campaign for accountability help sketch the anatomy of a google persuasion campaign , as the company detected and dealt with perceived problems before , during , and after a crisis . we re not making any judgements or drawing any conclusions about specific policies that google has pursued , says anne weismann , the campaign for accountability s executive director . it s not clear how the campaign is funded , and the group declined to discuss donors , including any who may conflict with google . our only bias is that google is not transparent enough , weismann says . our only bias is that google is not transparent enough . discussions with the white house started weeks ahead of the conference , the emails show , and the white house alerted google to an issue early on . r . david edelman , senior advisor for internet policy , reached out to the company after documents related to wcit began to leak . since google is mentioned by name several times here , i thought you should see if you haven t already , edelman wrote to google senior policy counsel johanna shelton , sending her ampnbspa forbes article . as the conference started , google contacted the office of science and technology policy with concerns that the state department would agree to an unfavorable deal . ross lajeunesse , a delegate to the conference and then google s global head of free expression and international relations , wrote an email to the white house s edelman expressing worry that the united states would sign on rather than face the optics of being one of the few countries not to . google was concerned a deal would be reachedlajeunesse wrote that his read was that the state department was interested in reaching a deal . at the end of the note , he wrote , please keep my fingerprints off this , but given our mutual interest in this working out well for the internet innovation . . . edelman replied that he had faith in the delegation ambassador appointed to negotiate the talks , but agreed that the proposal then under consideration was unacceptable to the office of science and technology policy . after google sensed that potential hurdle , it went to great lengths to convince the state department that it was making the wrong move . at one point , eric likely referring to then executive chairman eric schmidt , although his last name isn t mentioned made a call to hillary clinton s office . i understand that eric personally called secretary clinton s office , which was an impressive show of force , edelman wrote to lajeunesse in an email . i d be curious to know his reaction to the conversation . it s unclear who eric spoke to clinton herself , or a member of the staff . schmidt is now a supporter of clinton s presidential campaign . ultimately , countries out of the participating signed on , with the united states one of those against . it was a complicated , mixed result the final decision reached may have been more about signaling what binding resolutions could be made , rather than actually passing such resolutions . lajeunesse , in an email to edelman , bluntly said we lost , although edelman responded , the world lost . this treaty now has no legitimacy . i understand that eric personally called secretary clinton s office , which was an impressive show of force . it s difficult to say what role google , which declined to comment , may have had in the us decision to not sign . but the company and the office of science and technology policy discussed working for the same cause , even against others in government with misgivings . after the vote , edelman suggested a post wcit huddle with lajeunesse , and again alluded to internal disagreements . i d like to hear your thoughts on what worked , what didn t , and where to go from here , edelman wrote . and let me just say what s been said a thousand times thank you for you and your team s tireless efforts even amidst adversity within our own ranks on behalf of the us and the free internet . exchanges between lajeunesse and edelman also discussed how to talk about wcit publicly . i m working with dc team for a strategy of how to characterize wcit victory , loss or a less manichean spin and what that , in turn , means moving forward , lajeunesse wrote . the emails show lajeunesse and edelman set up a private meeting , as edelman wrote that a white house delegate gathering could resolve questions over how to discuss the issue . ultimately , whatever discussions were had about how to discuss the vote , google continued ringing alarm bells . in a statement ampnbsplater sent to reporters , a google spokesperson said the vote showed that governments want to increase regulation and censorship of the internet . 