 they won t have neon signs , drive thru windows , or hour wedding chapels attached to them . but las vegas marijuana dispensaries will be massively profitable tourist attractions that could deepen the entire nation s relationship with weed . at least that s the hope of the applicants who entered the heated competition for vegas first medical marijuana dispensary and grow room licenses in time for tuesday s deadline . nevada voters legalized medical marijuana way back in , but the state only recently enacted regulations to allow people to open pot businesses legally . unincorporated clark county not to be confused with clark county , which contains the city of las vegas proper includes the flashy . mile gambling corridor known as the las vegas strip . it s home to mega casinos like the bellagio and caesars palace and became the first jurisdiction to draft its licensing requirements . those requirements look a lot like the ones that control its lucrative gambling industry they favor high rollers and are geared towards reaping massive profits . throw legal marijuana into the mix , and you ve got a potential stateside amsterdamalthough only medical marijuana is legal in nevada now , a petition has been filed to legalize weed for recreational use , and it s expected to pass by . as it is , vegas is known as a place where out of towners can come and get crazy for a weekend , because whatever happens in vegas stays in vegas . throw legal marijuana into the mix , and you ve got a potential stateside amsterdam . as a result , vegas has turned into a serious land grab for would be marijuana entrepreneurs . anybody who ever had any ambition to do something in the cannabis industry , whether they re from co , ca , they re all looking at las vegas , says leslie bocskor , founding chairman of the nevada cannabis industry association , and a consultant and investment advisor to the cannabis industry at large . those wanting to get involved in nevada s weed industry will have to take part in a bifurcated process first apply for a permit with the county , then apply for the state s approval . the state has not opened up its application process yet . and unlike most states in the country with legal medical marijuana , nevada s cannabis market will be for profit . that is , dispensaries won t have to operate as collectives or cooperatives the way they do in california , for example . nevada will also allow what s known as full reciprocity people with medical marijuana cards from other states will be able buy cannabis in nevada without having to get a new prescription or card . they ll simply sign an affidavit when they enter their first dispensary . and they ll have to stick to that dispensary , exclusively , for one month before trying another one . people who aren t comfortable getting on an airplane with their medicine . . . can get it when they arrive in nevada . nevada officials are hoping this will make the state even more friendly to tourists , and those in the cannabis industry agree . people who aren t comfortable getting on airplanes with their medicine now know they can get their medicine when they arrive in nevada , says kris krane , a phoenix , az based consultant for the marijuana industry who also runs an incubator for startup cannabis companies . colorado and washington have fully legalized weed for recreational as well as medicinal use , so in theory it would seem like those states would be bigger markets for cannabis . but those with knowledge of the marijuana industry believe that nevada , and vegas in particular , represents an even greater opportunity . according to a recent survey by love home swap , a home and rental trading site , the las vegas strip attracted million tourists last year , making it the most visited tourist attraction in the world over both the eiffel tower and times square . if even as small as percent of tourists have or obtain when they arrive a medical marijuana card and buy weed in vegas , the numbers will be huge . we re looking at anywhere from a million to . billion yearly market in vegas , says derek peterson , ceo of the irvine , ca based hydroponics company , terra tech , who applied for licenses . derek peterson , ceo of terra tech terra tech the competition is fierce there are only dispensary licenses being allocated for unincorporated clark county , with a similarly limited number for growing operations , processing outfits where marijuana could be turned into edibles , and testing labs . and the application requirements are enough to scare away all but the richest and best connected players prospective cannabis business owners have to prove they have , in liquid assets , on top of , in application and registration fees . they also have to submit to extensive background checks , not unlike those required for unlimited gaming licenses that are required to operate casinos in the state . anybody wishing to legally sell weed near the strip better be squeaky clean and majorly bankrolled there s a saying in nevada that it s harder to get an unlimited gaming license than it is to become a secret service agent guarding the president , says bocskor . likewise , anybody wishing to legally sell weed near the strip better be squeaky clean and majorly bankrolled . the similarities between the county s gambling regulations and its weed market regulations are by design . we have had a great experience with licensing gaming institutions , and we ve brought that concept to bear here , says richard tick segerblom , state senator for nevada s district , which encompasses the strip . but don t expect to see the steve wynns of the world big league casino operators opening up pot clubs . segerblom says the nevada gaming commission and state gaming control board have made it clear they would not look kindly on that , given that pot is still federally illegal . they re very protective of our gambling industry , and they don t want to do anything that will run afoul of the feds , segerblom says . applicants will also be graded on how much income tax they ve paid to the state of nevada , making it necessary for out of state players to partner up with well heeled local businesspeople to get an edge . derek peterson is an example of somebody who wasn t scared away by the rules . a recognizable name in the nation s burgeoning marijuana industry , the former morgan stanley investment banker operates a cooperative cannabis dispensary in oakland , ca , called blum , and is also the ceo of terra tech , which is a public company selling hydroponic grow equipment . peterson set up a separate llc solely for the purpose of applying for licenses in unincorporated clark county , hoping to run two dispensaries and two grow operations . he hired a lobbyist and an established las vegas law firm with experience applying for gaming licenses to put together his page application . his business plan includes a shuttle service to transport people from casinos to his dispensaries . peterson will find out if he got the licenses he applied for in june , but then must also apply for a permit at the state level . will they do what strip clubs do , where they pay taxi drivers to bring their guys there ? in general , so called sin city is acting conservatively with its first steps into marijuana capitalism . no big flashy signs are permitted , no dispensaries are allowed on the strip itself though near the strip is fine , and businesses can only operate during daylight hours . nevada isn t what people think on the outside we have a tolerance for many things , but we move sort of slowly into those things , says joe brezny , executive director of the nevada cannabis industry association . how will these places advertise ? will they do what strip clubs do , where they pay taxi drivers to bring their guys there ? or are you going to give the hotel concierge an incentive to recommend your club ? says lisa mayo deriso of mayo amp associates , a las vegas consulting firm working with several cannabis business applicants . it s still an unanswered question . steve d angelo , executive director of harborside health centers steve d angelo steve d angelo , a longtime marijuana activist and executive director of the harborside health center medical marijuana dispensaries in oakland and san jose , ca , says he believes the cannabis industry in vegas should take pains to differentiate itself from the casinos , or risk a culture clash . in a white paper he wrote , entitled opportunity or peril the economic potential of cannabis tourism in las vegas , d angelo advocated for self contained cannabis themed resorts , complete with cannabis film festivals and museums , hotel rooms with hemp sheets and in room vaporizers , and cafes serving salads with organic hemp seed dressing . the alternative , he writes , is a scenario where patients ingest cannabis in their hotel rooms , casino bathrooms , public walkways , shows , and nightclubs . wafting smoke and seeping aromas will confront and disturb families and children along with much of the existing adult clientele , he writes ominously . in other words , casinos and cannabis , at least in d angelo s opinion , don t mix . that said , d angelo is also throwing his hat in the ring in nevada just not in unincorporated clark county . he says he objects to the county s stipulation that all its weed must be grown indoors , rather than in more environmentally friendly greenhouses . d angelo was cagey about exactly where he d be applying for a cannabis business license , but says he was excited about the potential of downtown las vegas , which zappos ceo tony hsieh has been trying to reengineer into a playground for artists and tech startups . downtown las vegas is in a different jurisdiction from the strip . it belongs to the city of las vegas , as opposed to the strip , the airport , and the university of nevada , las vegas , which belong to unincorporated clark county . the city of las vegas is expected to begin its licensing process soon . meanwhile , the rest of the country continues to find vegas vision compelling enough based on past history . the place is less a city than a state of mind one where you re free to live out your fantasies , including the naughty ones . people who love cannabis will come to las vegas , says d angelo . we need to create an all encompassing , immersive cannabis experience , not just be vending little bags of pot . 