 as it likes to do , apple recently released a product before the world was ready . the new inch macbook has but a single port unless you count the headphone jack and it s a completely new connector that almost no one has ever used before , breaking direct compatibility with millions of standard usb devices . but that connector , known as usb type c or just usb c , is likely to become one of the most ubiquitous advances in the recent history of computing and consumer electronics . it s the compact , reversible port that does everything , and this week s computex taipei shows the first signs of it spreading to the wider world . how s the usb c rollout going ? we think it s going great , says jeff ravencraft , president and coo of the usb implementers forum , who calls early type c devices like the nokia n tablet , the latest macbook , and the new google chromebook pixel above and beyond our wildest dreams for the first products to hit the market . manufacturers like asus have got on board with usb c this computex , too , and it s hard to walk the show floor without coming across hubs , adapters , and cables that support the new standard . this is the fastest transition we ve seen in years or more , says ravencraft , so knock on wood everything s going extremely well and we re really excited . much of the initial attention around usb c centered around its reversibility apple s lightning cables have shown how it s hard to go back to struggling with asymmetrical usb jacks , and usb c is the first standard solution to address the issue . but the connector s potential functionality is just as important as its convenience . built on the usb . spec and much smaller than a standard usb a connector , usb c can provide enough power to charge a laptop , enough bandwidth to carry a display signal , and fast enough data speeds for almost any normal user . intel gave usb c a big vote of confidence todaywith the aid of a more sensible and functional hub than apple s ludicrous . macbook adapter , you could charge your laptop and connect your monitor and peripherals with one single , easy to use cable , making for a seamless transition from cord free mobile use to productive desk work . just as the original usb connector eventually killed parallel , serial , ps , firewire , and other ports , usb c could spell the end for proprietary laptop chargers and dedicated ports like hdmi and thunderbolt . and earlier today intel helped deliver the first blow , announcing that thunderbolt would adopt the usb c connector after previous iterations used mini displayport . thunderbolt stands on usb . s shoulders to deliver speeds of up to gbps , letting you run two k displays at hz through just one port . it s a big vote of confidence for usb c from intel , and could encourage more pc makers to adopt the standard thunderbolt has never quite shaken off its association with apple , as many others prefer to use hdmi over mini displayport . on the path to no wires , you can go to one wire first , intel svp kirk skaugen told reporters today . skaugen had just given a keynote address in which he detailed a completely wireless future powered by intel technologies or intel backed consortiums wireless displays , wireless charging , wireless docking , and wireless data . a lot will need to happen for all of that to become a reality , but usb c and thunderbolt are almost ready for regular people . i think there s the potential for confusion . almost . although usb c seems an inevitable success at this point , it does have a couple of issues to iron out , perhaps the most pressing of which is the complexity of its offering . there will be usb . devices with usb c connectors , like the nokia n usb . devices that use regular usb a connectors usb . gen devices only capable of gbps transfer speeds over usb c , like the new chromebook pixel and macbook and usb . gen devices that give you gbps . usb c could be the only cable you ever need , but at this point it may be hard to know exactly what performance you re going to get when you plug something in . i think there s the potential for confusion , says ravencraft , whose forum publishes language and usage guidelines for both usb . and usb c . you do not get performance with the cable , you do not get power delivery with just the cable . the cable is a conduit for those things , right ? so to have power delivery , the device has to have a power delivery controller , the host or the hub has to have a power delivery controller , and then you have to have the right cable . the usb implementers forum offers training programs to help employees at retailers like best buy and staples give accurate information to consumers , and is particularly aiming to crack down on bad actor manufacturers that try to deliberately mislead . intel s thunderbolt announcement muddies things further . although thunderbolt is built atop usb . and uses the usb c port , intel tells us that devices like the new macbook , asus transformer book , or chromebook pixel won t work at all with upcoming thunderbolt products , even through the slower usb standard . customers will have to make sure that everything they re connecting has the lightning bolt logo next to their usb c ports . ravencraft was speaking to the verge before intel s announcement today , and the usb implementers forum did not respond to a request for subsequent comment . soon enough you won t want to buy a computer without usb cthese may prove to be niche concerns in the long run . but usb c has one more big hurdle before achieving true ubiquity usb a . apart from the . mm headphone jack , it s difficult to think of a hardware feature that s dominated the world as comprehensively as the standard usb port , which first came to widespread prominence around the release of windows and has survived ever since . our position is that type c is an addition to our other offerings , says ravencraft . the standard a connector , there are in excess of billion of those devices in the install base . so i don t see them going away any time soon . usb a handles the usb . spec just fine , so some companies may see no need to use usb c on products where physical dimensions are less of a concern . i think there probably are devices that don t need the small form factor , that have plenty of z height , and they might just as well go with the standard a , ravencraft notes . it s really going to depend on the oem and what they want to do . we re not deprecating the standard a or telling people to migrate it s really going to be up to the market . and really , that s reason enough to be optimistic . our one reversible plug existence might seem overdue , but like its forerunner in the s , usb c is that rare thing in the technology industry a sensible standard that everyone might just agree on in the end . usb c might not replace your familiar , chunky , maddeningly hard to connect usb a cables entirely , but soon enough you won t want to buy a computer without it . verge video this is the usb connector of the future