 artist m . c . escher died in , leaving behind iconic optical illusions that are now generations old . painter joy garnett was born in , and her career is in full swing . but when nanoscience researcher robert hovden copied works from both for a recent project , he could use garnett s with impunity . escher s estate , meanwhile , thinks he s breaking the law . unless he told you , though , you d never know he s ripping off someone else s work . they think that s maybe where the art is . but probably not . when art exceeds perception looks like an exhibit of blank gray discs . those silicon discs , however , hold a series of miniscule etchings sketches made by a process called nanoscale lithography , in which charged ions blast away silicon atoms like an invisible chisel . the technique can be used for beautiful effects , like sandcastles printed on a single grain of sand . in this case , the images individual details are roughly a tenth of a micron wide , and each picture is so small that it s impossible to see even with a high powered optical microscope you d have to turn to more recent inventions like the scanning tunneling microscope . at cornell university s jill stuart gallery , where the installation will hang until december , people will stare , and they usually find small imperfections in the disk , says hovden . they think maybe that s where the art is . but probably not . intellectual property creates an incentive for artists and inventors by letting them profit from their work , but hovden s pieces demonstrate the levels of surreality it can reach . the escher estate , in fact , was deeply unamused by his idea . all of escher s work is protected by international copyright laws and unauthorised use is thus punishable by law . the size of the unauthorised reproduction is irrelevant , said mark veldhuijsen , who manages licensing , in an email to the verge . what actually does amaze me , is the fact that you write that it is an artist who produces these small works . an artist should realise whether something is original , or just ordinary thievery . if hovden had etched his source materials at scale , you probably could call it blatant plagiarism of some of the best known works of the mid th century escher s tessellations , for example , along with henry matisse s le platane and rene magritte s the treachery of images . or you could call it appropriation art a legally and ethically gray category that s created landmark copyright feuds over , say , whether a collage artist who paints over the subject s eyes and mouth in a photo creates a new work the case was settled , so we ll never be quite sure . as it is , though , when art exceeds perception is a test of our increasingly stringent copyright laws . i think maybe the better title of this project would be reductio ad absurdum , says hovden . technically , what he s made is a traditional sort of reproduction . each piece is not digitized or encrypted like information on your hard drive , he insists . this is a real replica in normal interpretable space , and it s been hung on the wall for public display . and since the standard copyright term lasts years after the creator s death , those reproductions won t be legal for decades . but no human eye will ever see any of them , and just figuring out where they are on the disc would be like finding a parked car in the state of new york . and if virtually no one can tell what it is , who would hold him accountable for copying ? can something really be a copy if you ll never be able to see it ? hovden says he thinks of his work as a commentary on artistic integrity in general , not just regulation . the law doesn t necessarily have to represent the moral question , he says . some people believe that the person that created the work , that that work belongs to them indefinitely . there s also the more subtle question of plagiarism , or at the more extreme end , forgery . nanoscale drawings call into question what it really means to steal a work is it enough for the piece to , theoretically , be visible ? if visitors could somehow bring specialized equipment and extract the image , would that count ? is simply evoking a brand like escher s its own kind of violation ? garnett s painting laylah k is protected by a creative commons license , which allows hovden to use it freely . potentially , his other three works could be granted legal immunity under fair use rules . it s acceptable to copy part of a work if you re commenting on it , parodying it , or presenting research on it , among other things . but the limits on fair use are only determined through lawsuits , and the us copyright office warns that they will not always be clear or easily defined . courts will judge each case by weighing four factors , including how much of the original work is used and whether it will hurt the market for it . when you do projects in the domain of fair use , you can t really feel secure in your actions in knowing that they re legal , says hovden . it s all about the context of an image , and how people use it one court said google image search was infringing on other sites by copying image thumbnails from them , another said it legally transformed the photos by shrinking the originals and using them as a search tool . in theory , these works should eventually fall into the public domain , where they can be copied and remixed at will . but copyright terms have been extended multiple times they ve gone from a maximum of around years to , at present , the creator s life plus years , and there s no reason to think it won t be extended again . the supreme court has even ruled that congress can take works out of the public domain and re copyright them . whatever the legal status , though , there s little chance that escher , magritte , or matisse s estates will lose money because of when art exceeds perception . not only will visitors never see the tiny drawings , they ll never even see a likeness of them with the exception of laylah k , no magnified images exist . the art director also wanted to see the pictures , says hovden . but i felt strongly that the point of this wasn t to show a picture that you could see of these works . it would be just like taking another person s work and printing it out on your printer and hanging on the wall . and the etchings are so delicate that even imaging them could damage the art . if hovden had scuttled his exhibition , what would we have lost ? outside their intellectual property implications , the tiny pictures are also clever references to their source material . escher s tessellations mirror the array of atoms on the silicon disc , and the treachery of images a picture of a pipe paired with the statement this is not a pipe has been updated for a new century the first evokes the idea of a pipe , the second evokes the idea of the idea of a pipe . whether or not they re masterpieces , it s easier to see them as adding to culture than stealing it which is , of course , the point . correction , november th , am et the image details in hovden s pieces , not the images themselves , are less than a micron wide . 