 kai bond still can t believe he got his own button . the year old entrepreneur lifts up the new remote that comes standard with every samsung smart tv and flips through the channels , settling on a daytime soap . this isn t the kind of stuff we had in mind when we built the system , but let s see what happens . he presses his button to activate samsung extra and biographical data for the actors on screen pops up in the right hand corner . the technology bond and his team built pulls in all that data and creates a smart feed which displays conversations happening on social media alongside the action on your tv . people are always looking at their phone during the game , reading tweets and checking stats , bond says . it s a broken experience . he founded a startup around the idea in the summer of , a smart tv app called pixie , and that fall was accepted into the first class of companies in samsung s shiny new global innovation center , or gic . less than one year later pixie was acquired by samsung , which is baking its software into the operating system of every smart tv it makes . he is still a little in awe of how quickly things have changed . the real big difference for us is that we get distribution , says bond with a broad smile . when i was working on pixie we had thousands of users . the scale we re working on now , you re talking about tens of millions . it s part of a big bet by the south korean company to move outside its comfort zone and allow american entrepreneurs deep inside its hardware . the definition of future technology does not stop at hardware . samsung is a company with over billion in revenue , mostly driven out of selling hardware and components , says won jin lee , an executive vice president within the visual display division who worked closely with bond on turning pixie into samsung extra . but the definition of future technology does not stop at hardware . we are now living in a world where , in order to deliver the right consumer experience , we need a combination of the right hardware , the right services , and the right content . with gic , samsung is hoping to absorb some of the hacker agility found in silicon valley and new york . this year will be the crucial test for its ability to forge successful integrations between those worlds . three startups it brought into the fold ampnbspsmartthings , ampnbsplooppay , and pixie will play critical roles across samsung s most important consumer categories appliances , smartphones , and televisions . samsung factory dimas ardian getty images id samsung is not a company afraid to make big bets . in , chairman kh lee gathered his top executives into a small hotel room in germany and delivered a call to arms . the company founded by his father to create electronic appliances was now firmly established as a manufacturer in korea . but around the world it was at best a mid tier brand , its tv set relegated to the bottom shelves below sony and panasonic . lee laid out a vision to transform samsung into a high end manufacturer and global brand . change everything but your wife and children , ampnbsphe declared . over the last two decades samsung has achieved that mission . it now sells more tv sets than anyone , and its most expensive units are at the forefront of the industry . by , it had established itself as the world s largest manufacturer of smartphones and ampnbspbiggest technology company by revenue . it makes everything from washing machines to microchips to virtual reality headsets . hacker , meet manufacturer but when it comes to creating software , samsung s skill set doesn t always match up . i recently visited gic s new york headquarters to meet up with david eun , who founded and leads the division . eun lays out the two worlds he s trying to bridge . at one extreme is hyper precise manufacturing at massive scale with years of r ampd and billions invested before the first chip or tablet rolls off the assembly line . the second is the move fast and break things mentality of small software startups . take that kind of culture , where you can t be a micron off . everything has to be planned , he explains . then go to software and it s like , hey , we re just six dudes . we re going to launch early and gather the data . a third of this is just wrong , i don t know which third . we ll find out . gic s manhattan outpost is a far cry from the industrial megacities and factory floors that define samsung s hardware business . nestled on two floors at th and broadway , it s decked out with designer furniture , a well stocked pantry , and conference rooms with names like afrika bambaataa and grandmaster flash . the atmosphere is decidedly dressed down and startup friendly . many surfaces double as whiteboards , covered in flow charts and product ideas . lunchtime at the gic office in new yorkeun wears a collared shirt and blue jeans with a braided belt , a shiny gear fit curving around his wrist . it sometimes is super challenging . because there are different cultures . but what we try to say is , that s also our advantage . i probably wouldn t have been able to attract a kai bond , who had this vision for a tv experience , if i wasn t close to the ceo of consumer electronics . the guy who literally can make things happen on every one of those tvs . samsung sells two tvs every second before he arrived at samsung , eun worked his way through the ranks in media and technology . he started at nbc and time warner , eventually moving over to aol after the mega merger that capped the dot com boot . from aol , he went to google , where he helped shepherd through integrations with startups like youtube , earning a reputation as a savvy deal maker to the hollywood set . when he joined samsung in , most assumed that he would focus on acquiring programming for samsung screens . but eun had a much bigger vision in mind . gic has a number of important functions it created the accelerators in new york and silicon valley that house entrepreneurs working on projects samsung thinks might play into its upcoming software . eun also leads venture capital investments and acquisitions in startups around the country . and the division is aiming to expand beyond america in the future , exploring putting down roots in other technology hubs around the globe . we re trying to create break out software services to complement hardware , says eun . he points to the wall , which is covered in flat screen panels . others are embedded in the ceiling , waiting to descend at the push of a button . because we sell a lot of these . we sell two of those every second . david eunwhile pixie and looppay are examples of american startups whose software is now deeply integrated into samsung hardware , things don t always work out . gic was the unit behind the acquisition of boxee , one of the pioneers in delivering over the top television services . the company was working on a top secret feature called samsung px , a smart tv system with a dedicated tablet that would take the place of a traditional remote control . originally slated to unveil at ces , the product was delayed , and then killed off , with many boxee staffers including ceo avner ronen departing from samsung . eun wouldn t comment directly on what happened with boxee . according to sources with knowledge of the situation , trying to dictate what kind of hardware samsung should create was a bridge too far for the startup . samsung was behind the project , but not the idea of a dedicated tablet remote , which boxee insisted on . samsung preferred the idea of customers simply using the tablets and phones it already sold , and didn t want to antagonize partners in the cable industry who felt their set top boxes would be cut out of the loop with consumers . according to one source , a last minute push from samsung executives in korea to have boxee adopt tizen in place of android as its basic operating system was the straw that broke the camel s back . if we had stayed within gic , things might have gone differently . part of the problem may have been that , while boxee was acquired by gic , it did not stay in that group , and was instead integrated directly into the mothership , joining up with samsung s tv division . according to sources there at the time , cultural friction and lack of communication soon developed . for a successful integration , it really helps to have a champion like david . if we had stayed within gic , things might have gone differently , says a former boxee employee who recently departed from samsung . to combat this sort of problem , eun has established a team of nearly dedicated gic staffers in korea whose sole job is to liaise between startups and samsung . we need some sort of a bridge that connects the two worlds together , because these are very different worlds . we need to have some sort of mediation function in between , and gic has been playing that role quite well , says won jin lee , the display division evp who worked with bond to integrate pixie into smart tv sets . when they come into samsung , they can get a much softer landing . gic is also working to wall off startups in important ways . ampnbspsmartthings , which is committed to building an ecosystem for connected devices , functions as an independent subsidiary . we wanted to acquire it , but keep it open , says eun . the idea of crafting an open source platform was completely alien to samsung , but they let smartthings run with it . one of the metrics would be , are there a lot of developers ? are there device handlers being created ? that would be a metric of how open it was . says eun . it s more than doubled since last year . at the same time , samsung is working to integrate all its own devices , bolstering the hardware ecosystem those developers can create against . the perch team working at gic officesone of the startups operating out of gic s new york office is ampnbspperch , a security and monitoring service for smart homes founded by two former members of the local technology incubator betaworks . andrew cohen and neil wehrle are in their s , married with kids , and while still hungry to create new companies , are more risk averse than the young hackers who flock to programs like ycombinator or techstars . for them , gic is the perfect medium between the security of a salaried job with benefits and the freedom of creating a company from scratch . this isn t our first time to the rodeo , says cohen . there is always this magical moment where a startup is resourced like you wish , and that is usually a couple years in . often it s just post acquisition that you get to build the features you ve been thinking about for years . with this model , you can have that much earlier on . perch imagines a world where you get a motion alert when your children get home from school and go right into the tv room . you can watch and respond in real time , talking with your kids through voice chat , and deactivating the tv until they finish their homework . we don t have a hardware offering because of course samsung has already made a beautiful one , and so that allows us to focus on the software and consumer experience . that comfortable relationship highlights one of the things that makes gic very different from other startup accelerators . while gic talks openly about the idea of letting outsiders invest in its startups and even spinning them out if they show good traction , so far just three of its companies have been acquired , and all were by samsung . we want first dibs on acquisitions . administration , operations , finances , especially raising capital . those take a lot of time . what we ve said is , let s essentially take all the thumbtacks out of the carpet so you can just run , says eun . and we ll provide you with offices and health insurance and financing . in return , we want first dibs on acquisitions . samsung does kill off projects that don t produce a great product or consumer traction . of the more than companies that have been in the program so far , eun estimates gic has shut down about a third . for cohen , the opportunity is worth that risk . the simple reason why we ended up here instead of taking a more traditional venture capital route is scale . the opportunity to develop for hundreds of millions of connected devices across a footprint as broad as samsung s is pretty irresistible . wehrle , the ux designer , puts it a little differently . a lot of places , you re sort of touching the edges of the internet , here we are going a couple levels into it . you get to touch the hardware at a very deep level . david eun and kai bondbefore he created pixie , bond worked at microsoft on mobile product development . this was way back in the early s , and some of the best hardware for brew and j me apps was on samsung phones . he traveled , along with a translator and ethnographer , to south korea . i remember going into this tiny room , with a projector , and no windows . it was very cramped and very hot . just as the meeting was about to begin , a samsung executive lit up a cigarette . seeing this , his compatriots followed suit . the room was quickly thick with smoke . it was culture shock , he recalls with a laugh . samsung is willing to invest financially in its startups from an early stage , and to offer them distribution on its hardware so they can test the market . of course , sharing details around the inner workings and release schedule of its hardware is very sensitive . emily becher , a serial entrepreneur and former colleague of eun s , was brought in to run the accelerators . she is a constant presence in the new york office , sitting with the teams to eat a pizza lunch or walking them through brainstorming sessions . emily becher chats with gic startups i ask her what she thinks the key is to combining the world of american software entrepreneurs with a korean manufacturing titan . you ll be surprised that this is my first answer , but being really thoughtful about structure . we have a team in korea that lives and breathes in the operating units every day , who ve come up through the mobile group , who ve come up and are trusted and respected . this allows teams to navigate the often complex and rigid rules that govern samsung s corporate culture . it isn t just me flying over to korea , hi , i m here . tell me everything you know . that s disrespectful . there is an element to samsung s culture , however , that fits perfectly with the startup ethos . the chairman is saying all the time , this is perpetual crisis , former mobile marketing chief dj lee ampnbsptold bloomberg . we are in danger . we are in jeopardy . while it is still an enormously popular and profitable company , samsung has seen its profit growth and stock price decline in recent quarters . samsung s dominance in smartphones is slipping just as samsung overtook sony in the s , chinese companies like xiaomi are now coming for the korean giant . apple has turned itself into not just a technology company , but a fashion brand , and its devices command a luxury premium . samsung , meanwhile , runs on android , where it has to compete with hundreds of manufacturers who can thrive on much thinner margins . for the first time in several years , apple not only earned more profit selling phones than samsung , but also ampnbspmoved more units . samsung meanwhile sold fewer phones than it did during the same period in , as competition across the middle and lower tiers of android devices ate into its dominance . all that leads back to gic and the need for game changing integrations of hardware and software . samsung knows it has to continue moving upmarket , away from cheaper devices . in the battle with the iphone , samsung s biggest new weapon will be the technology it acquired from looppay , which will allow its phones to work with the ordinary credit card readers already widely used by merchants across the us . samsung ampnbspannounced today that the feature will debut in korea this month and the us at the end of september . during my month tenure here , i have never seen any other company that has more willingness to change the way it operates as a business , says lee . having a team of people like we do at gic , we can skip through a lot of the corporate bureaucracy . samsung is far from a startup , but we are about to get a big taste of how its devices feel when small teams of american entrepreneurs are working on core software . i don t think it s perfect today , but certainly gic is playing a big role , and we are bridging those two worlds together . photos by sean o kane